presidential succession in the united states is governed by the 25 th amendment to the constitution , which provides that the vice president "shall become president" should the incumbent chief executive die , resign , or be removed from office .

the new president then nominates a successor vice president , subject to confirmation by a majority vote of both houses of congress .

in the event there is neither a president nor a vice president , the presidential succession act provides that the speaker of the house of representatives , the president pro tempore of the senate , and duly - confirmed cabinet officers , in order of the seniority of their departments , would be eligible to act as president .

these provisions apply at all times when a duly - sworn president or vice president holds office , but additional factors enter the equation during presidential election years .

the three - to - four month period of the presidential general election campaign , from the national party conventions through election day , and the 10-week transition period , from election day to the january 20 inauguration , present a different range of succession issues concerning presidential and vice presidential nominees during the campaign and the president - and vice president - elect during the transition .

this situation is further complicated in elections when an incumbent president who is retiring or who has failed to win reelection prepares to leave office , while the incoming president - elect prepares for inauguration .

it should be noted , however , that the period preceding the inauguration of presidents who have been elected to a second consecutive term does not generally fall under the definition of a presidential transition .

for instance , the period between president barack h. obama's election to a second term on november 6 , 2012 , and his inauguration on january 20 , 2013 , was not a transition period as defined in this report .

for the purposes of this report , "presidential election campaign" refers to the period between the national party nominating conventions , traditionally held in july or august of the election year , and election day , the tuesday after the first monday in november , which falls on november 8 in 2016 .

in modern times , the transition period is considered to start immediately after the general election , and extends through january 20 of the following year .

the first part of the transition period extends from election day through the meeting of the electoral college , which , for the 2016 election , takes place on december 19 .

during this period , with few exceptions , the winning candidates are known on the basis of the popular vote tally and the projected electoral vote results .

they are "heirs apparent," the de facto president - and vice president - elect .

the transition's second phase begins when the electors cast their votes and the electoral vote is announced .

at this point , the balance of scholarly opinion holds that the candidates who received a majority of electoral votes actually become the president - and vice president elect .

this report examines succession procedures that apply to major party nominees for president and vice president during the presidential election campaign and the first phase of the transition period , and for president - elect and vice president - elect during the second phase of the transition period .

presidential transitions in the past half - century have generally been characterized by high levels of activity and frequent improvisation as the president - elect's team works to finalize personnel and policy arrangements for the incoming administration within a period of just over 10 weeks .

the process takes on further significance and complexity when , as noted previously , a new president replaces a retiring or defeated incumbent , or when political party control of the executive branch also changes .

succession and disability procedures concerning the president - elect and vice president - elect provide a potential complicating factor during the election period and the transition .

they are based on a combination of political party rules , federal law , and constitutional provisions , different elements of which apply at different times during the whole period between the national conventions and inauguration of the incoming chief executive .

depending on circumstances , congress could be called on to make succession - related decisions of national importance in questions of the death , disability , or resignation of a president - or vice president - elect .

vacancies in a major national party ticket during the presidential election campaign , which extends roughly from the party nominating conventions through election day in november , are covered by the rules of the political parties .

although it might be assumed that the vice presidential candidate would succeed in the event of a vacancy in the presidential nomination , in fact , both major parties provide for replacement by their respective national committees .

procedures established by the democratic and republican parties are detailed below .

presidential transitions are generally considered to begin immediately after election day .

throughout the first phase of transition , which lasts through the meetings of the electoral college , the winning candidates are considered to be the next president and vice president , but their status is informal and presumptive .

it should be noted that there actually is no president - or vice president - elect until after the electoral votes have been cast .

the apparent winners , during this first period , are still the nominees of their parties .

the use of the titles "president - elect" and "vice president - elect" is a time - honored courtesy that anticipates the ultimate status of the candidates who won an apparent majority of electoral votes .

the second period during which succession procedures would be invoked in the event a president - elect or vice president - elect were to die or leave the ticket occurs between the time the electors vote and congress counts the electoral votes .

presidential electors meet in their respective states to cast their votes on the first monday after the second wednesday in december in the year of the presidential election , which falls on december 19 in 2016 .

federal law sets january 6 of the following year as the date on which congress convenes in joint session to count the electoral vote and declare the results .

the succession process during this period would turn on the issue of when the candidates who received an electoral vote majority actually become president - elect and vice president - elect .

the results of the electoral college are publicly known , but are the candidates who won a majority of electoral votes actually "elect" at this point , or do they attain this position only after the electoral college returns have been counted and declared by congress on january 6 ? .

some commentators doubt that there would be a president - and vice president - elect before the results are certified .

they maintain that this contingency would lack clear constitutional or statutory direction .

the balance of scholarly opinion , however , holds that once a majority of electoral votes has been cast , the winning candidates immediately become the president - and vice president - elect , even though the votes have yet to be officially counted or the results declared .

if this is the case , then section 3 of the 20 th amendment would apply as soon as the electoral votes were cast: namely , if the president - elect dies , then the vice president - elect becomes the president - elect .

this point of view receives strong support from the language of the 1932 house committee report accompanying the 20 th amendment , which arguably settles the question .

addressing the issue of when there is a president - elect , the report stated: it will be noted that the committee uses the term "president elect" in its generally accepted sense , as meaning the person who has received the majority of electoral votes , or the person who has been chosen by the house of representatives in the event that the election is thrown into the house .

it is immaterial whether or not the votes have been counted , for the person becomes the president elect as soon as the votes are cast .

the 20 th amendment does not specifically address the question of vacancies created by situations other than death of the president - or vice president - elect , including disability or their resignation , during this period .

section 3 of the amendment , however , authorizes congress to "by law provide for the case wherein neither a president elect nor a vice president elect shall have qualified.... " this contingency is considered in the next section of this report .

during this period , provisions of the 20 th amendment would cover several aspects of succession .

as mentioned previously , section 3 of the 20 th amendment provides for succession in the case of the death of the president - elect , providing that the vice president - elect becomes president - elect .

further , a vice president - elect who succeeds under these circumstances would have the authority , after his or her inauguration , to nominate a replacement vice president under the provisions of section 2 of the 25 th amendment .

moving beyond death of a president - elect , the 20 th amendment does not appear to specifically cover such other circumstances as resignation from the ticket , disability , or disqualification of either the president - or vice president - elect .

in the case of a president - elect , however , if the language of the amendment were interpreted so that the aforementioned circumstances constituted a "failure to qualify," then the vice president - elect would act as president "until a president shall have qualified. .

under this construction , a vice president - elect could arguably act as president until a disabled president - elect regained health , or , if the president - elect had resigned from the ticket , failed to regain health , or subsequently died from the effects of a disability , the vice president might serve as acting president for a full four - year term .

the death , disability , or departure of the vice president - elect is not specifically covered by the 20 th amendment , but in this circumstance , the president would nominate a successor after being inaugurated , again in accordance with section 2 of the 25 th amendment .

finally , the 20 th amendment empowers congress to provide by law for instances in which "neither a president elect nor a vice president elect shall have qualified. .

such legislation would declare "who shall then act as president , or the manner in which one who is to act shall be selected , and such person shall act accordingly until a president or vice president shall have qualified. .

the presidential succession act of 1947 ( the succession act ) as amended ( 61 stat .

380 , 3 u.s.c .

19 ) implements this authority , providing that if , "by reason of death , resignation , removal from office , inability , or failure to qualify [emphasis added] , there is neither a president nor vice president to discharge the powers and duties of the office of president , then the speaker of the house of representatives shall , upon his resignation as speaker and as representative in congress , act as president. .

the act further extends the order of succession to the president pro tempore of the senate and the secretaries of the principal executive departments ( the president's cabinet ) .

it should be noted that persons acting as president under the succession act would continue to do so only until a qualified individual higher in the order of succession is able to act .

in this instance , the higher qualified official then supplants the lower .

succession procedures during the presidential election campaign period and the transition are governed by party rules , federal law , and constitutional requirements .

candidates have been replaced only three times in the nation's history , in 1872 , 1912 , and 1972 ; each of these instances occurred prior to the meetings of the electoral college , and all were successfully addressed by party rules .

it may be assumed that party rules would be adequate to provide for some future incident , although an extremely volatile post - election political climate or the prospect of a faithless elector or electors might introduce complicating factors , as noted previously in this report .

with respect to the transition period itself , the 20 th and 25 th amendments have anticipated most potential contingencies , and could be implemented to address a succession issue during the period between the meetings of the electoral college and inauguration of the president .

in the post - 9 / 11 environment , attention focused largely on the potential for a terrorist incident that might result in the death or disability of a number of persons in the line of presidential succession , particularly during the public inauguration ceremonies .

one option to ensure executive continuity would be for either the speaker of the house or the president pro tempore of the senate to be absent from the ceremony .

others involve the president's cabinet , including ( 1 ) expedited confirmation of one of the incoming cabinet officers ; ( 2 ) retention of one or more cabinet officer from the outgoing administration until the succession has been secured ; and ( 3 ) ensuring that a duly - confirmed cabinet officer is not present at the inauguration or its attendant public ceremonies .

successful implementation of either cabinet option would , as noted earlier , depend on reasonable levels of good will and cooperation between a retiring president and the incoming chief executive , as well as between the political parties in the senate .

with respect to the former , the 2008-2009 transition offers positive examples for the future .

as noted earlier , the independent and joint decisions of both administrations ensured that a senior cabinet officer would be in place , and in a safe place , during the public inauguration of president obama .

these two developments arguably suggest a precedent for consideration of succession issues in future presidential transitions .

