the defense acquisition workforce consists of civilian and uniformed personnel at the department of defense ( dod ) who manage the planning , design , development , testing , contracting production , introduction , acquisition logistics support , and disposal of systems , equipment , facilities , supplies , or services that are intended for use in , or support of , military missions .

the defense acquisition workforce plays a key role to ensure that dod's contract dollars are properly spent on goods and services .

as part of this role , the workforce is responsible for ensuring that acquisition programs — including major weapons and information technology ( it ) systems — remain within their estimated cost and delivery schedules and produce the desired capabilities .

in fy2015 , dod obligated roughly $438 billion on federal contracts , which comprised 62% of contract obligations government - wide .

to fulfill its duties , the workforce must have an adequate number of acquisition professionals with an appropriate mix of technical skills ( such as cost estimating , program management , and systems engineering ) .

there are concerns , however , that the workforce may not be adequately sized or equipped with the skills necessary to support dod's acquisition workload .

according to a 2014 compilation of expert views published by the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs ( permanent subcommittee on investigations ) , two - thirds of contributors felt that improved recruiting , training , and incentives for the acquisition workforce are necessary for comprehensive acquisition reform .

this section analyzes dod's use of the six hiring flexibilities described above for some , but not all , civilian acquisition hires between fy2008 and fy2014 ( table 2 ) .

according to dod , the data in table 2 include external civilian acquisition hires ( i.e. , applicants from outside the federal government ) , but do not include internal civilian acquisition hires ( i.e. , current or former federal employees ) .

internal hires may represent a sizeable portion of total civilian acquisition hires each year .

two of six flexibilities were available throughout the six - year period , while one was discontinued and three were established during that period .

regardless , the flexibilities were identified by dod as the top six used to fill civilian defense acquisition positions between fy2008 and fy2014 .

while the previous section discussed the use of flexibilities over time to fill civilian defense acquisition positions , this section discusses time to hire under the flexibilities .

table 3 presents data from dod on average time to hire between fy2008 and fy2014 for five of the six hiring flexibilities described above — the flexibilities that are still currently available .

time to hire is presented for the years that flexibilities were available during the six - year period .

dod defines time to hire as the number of days from the date of the request for personnel action ( sf - 52 ) to the appointment date .

as shown in table 3 , there are no discernible time to hire trends across all five flexibilities — time to hire fluctuates within and between flexibilities from year to year .

however , some flexibility - specific trends exist in relation to opm's 80-day hiring model .

specifically: delegated examining authority — the only flexibility in table 3 that provides no hiring exemptions and can be used as a baseline for standard competitive hiring — did not meet the 80-day hiring timeline in any year between fy2008 and fy2014 .

the eha met the 80-day timeline in fy2009 ( 65 days ) .

average hiring speed under the eha then slowed between fy2009-fy2013 .

the number of civilian external hires made under the eha also declined each year between fy2009 and fy2013 .

the pathways internship program consistently met the 80-day hiring timeline between fy2012 – fy2014 .

in contrast , the pathways recent graduates program consistently missed the 80-day timeline between fy2013-fy2014 .

as mentioned previously , dod began implementing these programs in 2012 , but only made hires under the internship program in fy2012 .

dhas did not meet the 80-day timeline , but was the only flexibility to be within five days of the timeline for three consecutive years — fy2009 to fy2011 .

as congress continues to consider reforms to the defense acquisition system , the following policy questions regarding hiring flexibilities for the civilian defense acquisition workforce may be of interest: are flexibilities improving the civilian defense acquisition workforce ? .

does dod have the appropriate number and type of flexibilities ? .

what factors may impact effective use of available flexibilities to improve the civilian defense acquisition workforce ? .

the oversight options presented in this section may help congress gauge whether the current number and type of hiring flexibilities are appropriate and are improving the civilian acquisition workforce .

doing so may enable congress to consider ( 1 ) expanding or authorizing new flexibilities , ( 2 ) consolidating or removing flexibilities , ( 3 ) otherwise restructuring flexibilities , and / or ( 4 ) using other tools to achieve workforce reforms .

while this report has focused on enhancing recruitment through hiring flexibilities for the civilian defense acquisition workforce , congress may also want to consider other workforce improvement efforts , such as retaining acquisition personnel that have been hired .

as mentioned previously , a 2016 gao report found that high attrition rates contributed to shortfalls in certain acquisition career fields .

while hiring flexibilities aim to enhance the recruitment of qualified individuals , they are not necessarily structured to retain them .

the subsections below describe two efforts undertaken by congress and dod in recent years to increase the retention of acquisition personnel: pay flexibilities and acqdemo .

pay flexibilities aim to increase retention by providing additional or higher compensation that is not typically available to federal employees .

dod officials asserted that the department is exploring ways to better use opm - issued retention incentives , such as targeting incentives to acquisition career fields experiencing high attrition .

dod officials further noted that use of retention incentives is restricted to employees who are likely to leave federal service and "needs to" be expanded to those likely to leave the current organization .

congress has also authorized pay flexibilities for the defense acquisition workforce .

for instance , the fy2016 ndaa authorized dod to pay certain acquisition personnel up to 150% above the basic pay rate for level i of the executive schedule , which exceeds gs - 15 , step 10 pay rates .

acqdemo is an alternative personnel system that operates outside the gs and waives certain personnel laws and regulations .

acqdemo features , among other things , consolidated pay bands and a contribution - based performance management system .

these structures are intended to provide a stronger link between pay and performance , particularly by basing pay increases on contribution to the agency .

a 2014 rand report found higher retention rates among acqdemo employees compared to those covered by the gs and other alternative personnel systems .

congress and dod have taken steps to expand the scope and use of acqdemo , including ( 1 ) expanding the participation cap to 120,000 employees , ( 2 ) extending operation to december 31 , 2020 , and ( 3 ) streamlining the application process to join the project .

section 1104 of the ndaa for fy2017 ( s. 2943 ) , as passed by the senate , would establish a new personnel system for defense acquisition personnel and support staff .

according to the senate committee on armed services report accompanying s. 2943 , the provision would , among other things , change acqdemo from a temporary , opm / dod - controlled system to a permanent , dod - controlled system .

the provision was not included in the subsequently house - passed version of s. 2943 .

appendix a .

hiring flexibilities available for the civilian defense acquisition workforc .

