u ruguay is a small nation of 3.4 million people located on the atlantic coast of south america .

the country emerged as an independent state in 1828 following a three - year war between brazil and argentina over control of the disputed territory .

uruguay has a long democratic tradition but experienced 12 years of authoritarian rule following a 1973 coup .

during the dictatorship , tens of thousands of uruguayan citizens were forced into political exile , 3,000-4,000 were imprisoned , and several hundred were killed or "disappeared. .

the country restored civilian democratic governance in 1985 and is now considered to be one of the strongest democracies in the world .

uruguay has drawn increased congressional attention in recent years as a result of the country's controversial decisions to legalize cannabis and grant refugee status to six men who had been detained at the u.s .

naval station at guantanamo bay , cuba .

president tabaré vázquez of the center - left broad front ( frente amplio ) coalition was inaugurated to a five - year term on march 1 , 2015 .

this is his second term in office — he previously served as president from 2005 to 2010 — and the third consecutive term in which the broad front holds the presidency and majorities in both houses of the uruguayan general assembly .

the coalition holds 50 seats in the 99-member chamber of representatives and 15 seats in the 30-member senate ; vice president raúl sendic , who presides over the senate , provides the broad front with a 16 th vote in the upper chamber .

vázquez's initial election ended 170 years of political domination by the center - right national and colorado parties .

since taking power in 2005 , the broad front has maintained market - oriented economic policies while gradually expanding social welfare programs , establishing a more progressive tax system , and implementing union - empowering labor reforms .

this policy mix , combined with a boom in international prices for uruguay's agricultural commodity exports , produced several years of strong economic growth and considerable improvements in living standards .

the broad front also has enacted several far - reaching social policy reforms , some of which have been controversial domestically .

the coalition has positioned uruguay on the leading edge of lesbian , gay , bisexual , and transgender ( lgbt ) rights in latin america by allowing lgbt individuals to serve openly in the military , legalizing adoption by same - sex couples , allowing individuals to change official documents to reflect their gender identities , and legalizing same - sex marriage .

additionally , the broad front has legalized abortion in the first trimester of pregnancy and has enacted legislation that legalizes and regulates every aspect of the cannabis market , from production to consumption ( see " security concerns and marijuana legalization ," below ) .

president vázquez and former president josé "pepe" mujica ( 2010-2015 ) often have compared the broad front administrations to those of former president josé batlle y ordóñez ( 1903-1907 , 1911-1915 ) , who strongly influenced uruguay's trajectory in the 20 th century by pushing for labor protections , a comprehensive social welfare system , women's rights , and a strict separation between church and state .

u.s. - uruguayan relations are strong and have grown closer in recent years .

some analysts predicted that bilateral relations would deteriorate following the broad front's assumption of power , given ideological opposition to working with the united states by some sectors of the coalition .

however , those predictions have not been borne out .

over the past decade , the united states and uruguay have forged closer trade and investment ties and have worked together to promote stability and security in latin america and around the world .

since taking office for a second term , president vázquez has expressed his desire to continue forging closer relations with the united states by strengthening and building upon the various bilateral cooperation mechanisms currently in place .

uruguay historically was referred to as "the switzerland of south america," as scholars highlighted the country's peaceful and democratic tradition , comprehensive social safety net , and relatively high standard of living to differentiate uruguay from its neighbors .

that perceived exceptionalism began to fade by the middle of the 20 th century , as prolonged economic stagnation tore at the country's social fabric , generating increased class conflict and ultimately giving rise to an authoritarian government .

thirty years after the end of the dictatorship and fifteen years after a major economic crisis , uruguay once again stands out in latin america for its strong democratic institutions and comparatively prosperous and egalitarian society .

the center - left broad front coalition has benefitted politically from presiding over more than a decade of strong economic growth and improvements in living standards .

it now faces a much tougher economic and political environment , however , as deteriorating economic conditions and fatigue with broad front governance have eroded popular support for the coalition .

the difficult economic situation likely will limit president vázquez's ability to enact far - reaching policy changes and could lead to increased disenchantment among his coalition's base .

the broad front's chances of winning a fourth consecutive election likely will depend on the pace of uruguay's economic recovery and the extent to which opposition political parties and their supporters are willing to unite for the 2019 elections .

u.s - uruguayan relations likely will remain strong in the coming years , bound together by shared values and common interests .

short - term commercial cooperation may focus on the removal of trade barriers under the tifa ; the conclusion of a bilateral social security agreement to eliminate double taxation and fill gaps in benefit protection for individuals who have worked in both countries ; and uruguay's entry into the visa waiver program , which would allow temporary , visa - free travel by uruguayan and u.s. citizens .

although uruguay's exit from the gsp program in 2017 may generate renewed uruguayan interest in entering into a bilateral or regional free trade agreement with the united states , significant sectors of the broad front are likely to remain opposed to such an accord .

cooperation on international affairs likely will continue as the countries support international peacekeeping efforts and collaborate on the u.n. security council and in other multilateral institutions .

at the same time , uruguay is likely to continue pursuing closer commercial and diplomatic ties with a range of other partners , including fellow members of mercosur , the european union , and china .

