this report provides an overview of fy2017 appropriations actions for accounts traditionally funded in the appropriations bill for the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies ( lhhs ) .

this bill provides discretionary and mandatory appropriations to three federal departments: the department of labor ( dol ) , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , and the department of education ( ed ) .

in addition , the bill provides annual appropriations for more than a dozen related agencies , including the social security administration ( ssa ) .

discretionary funds represent less than one - quarter of the total funds appropriated in the lhhs bill .

nevertheless , the lhhs bill is typically the largest single source of discretionary funds for domestic non - defense federal programs among the various appropriations bills ( the department of defense bill is the largest source of discretionary funds among all federal programs ) .

the bulk of this report is focused on discretionary appropriations because these funds receive the most attention during the appropriations process .

the lhhs bill typically is one of the more controversial of the regular appropriations bills because of the size of its funding total and the scope of its programs , as well as various related policy issues addressed in the bill such as restrictions on the use of federal funds for abortion and for research on human embryos and stem cells .

congressional clients may consult the lhhs experts list in crs report r42638 , appropriations: crs experts , for information on which analysts to contact at the congressional research service ( crs ) with questions on specific agencies and programs funded in the lhhs bill .

this report is divided into several sections .

the opening section provides an explanation of the scope of the lhhs bill ( and hence , the scope of this report ) and an introduction to important terminology and concepts that carry throughout the report .

next is a series of sections describing major congressional actions on fy2017 appropriations and ( for context ) a review of the conclusion of the fy2016 appropriations process .

this is followed by a high - level summary and analysis of proposed and enacted appropriations for fy2017 , compared to fy2016 funding levels .

the body of the report concludes with overview sections for each of the major titles of the bill: dol , hhs , ed , and related agencies .

these sections provide selected highlights from fy2017 proposed and enacted funding levels , compared to fy2016 funding levels .

finally , an appendix provides a summary of budget enforcement activities for fy2017 .

this includes information on the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) and sequestration , as well as efforts toward adopting an fy2017 budget resolution , subcommittee spending allocations , and current - year spending levels .

 table 1 provides a timeline of major legislative actions , and the remainder of this section provides additional detail on these and other steps toward full - year fy2017 lhhs appropriations .

 table 2 displays fy2017 discretionary and mandatory lhhs budget authority provided or proposed , by bill title , along with fy2016 adjusted levels .

the amounts shown in this table reflect total budget authority provided in the bill ( i.e. , all funds appropriated in the bill , regardless of the fiscal year in which the funds become available ) , not total budget authority available for the current fiscal year .

 ( for a comparable table showing current - year budget authority , see table a - 2 in the appendix . ) .

figure 2 displays the fy2017 enacted discretionary and mandatory lhhs funding levels , by bill title .

 ( while the dollars and percentages discussed in this section were calculated based on fy2017 enacted amounts , they are generally also illustrative — within one percentage point — of the share of funds directed to each bill title in fy2016 and under the other fy2017 proposals. ) .

as this figure demonstrates , hhs accounted for the largest share of total fy2017 lhhs appropriations: $780.2 billion , or 83.5% .

this is due to the large amount of mandatory funding included in the hhs appropriation , the majority of which is for medicaid grants to states and payments to health care trust funds .

after hhs , ed and the related agencies represented the next - largest shares of total lhhs funding , accounting for 7.7% and 7.3% respectively .

 ( the majority of the ed appropriations each year are discretionary , while the bulk of funding for the related agencies goes toward mandatory payments and administrative costs of the supplemental security income program at the social security administration. ) .

finally , dol accounted for the smallest share of total lhhs funds , 1.5% .

when looking only at discretionary appropriations , however , the overall composition of lhhs funding is noticeably different .

hhs accounted for a comparatively smaller share of total discretionary appropriations ( 45.1% ) , while ed accounted for a relatively larger share ( 39.4% ) .

together , these two departments represented the majority ( 84.4% ) of discretionary lhhs appropriations .

dol and the related agencies accounted for a roughly even split of the remaining 15.6% of discretionary lhhs funds .

note that all amounts in this section are based on regular lhhs appropriations only .

amounts in this section do not include mandatory funds provided outside of the annual appropriations process ( eg , direct appropriations for unemployment insurance benefits payments ) .

all amounts in this section are rounded to the nearest million or billion ( as labeled ) .

the dollar changes and percentage changes discussed in the text are based on unrounded amounts .

for consistency with source materials , amounts do not reflect sequestration or re - estimates of mandatory spending programs , where applicable .

also per source material conventions , the fy2016 column ( but not any of the columns for fy2017 ) reflects certain transfers , reprogramming , and other adjustments for comparability .

note that all amounts in this section are based on regular lhhs appropriations only ; they do not include funds for hhs agencies provided through other appropriations bills ( eg , funding for the food and drug administration ) or outside of the annual appropriations process ( eg , direct appropriations for medicare or pre - appropriated mandatory funds provided by authorizing laws , such as the patient protection and affordable care act [aca , p.l .

111-148 ] ) .

all amounts in this section are rounded to the nearest million or billion ( as labeled ) .

the dollar changes and percentage changes discussed in the text are based on unrounded amounts .

for consistency with source materials , amounts do not reflect sequestration or re - estimates of mandatory spending programs , where applicable .

also per source material conventions , the fy2016 column ( but not any of the columns for fy2017 ) reflects certain transfers , reprogramming , and other adjustments for comparability .

note that amounts in this section are based on regular lhhs appropriations only .

they do not include mandatory funds provided outside of the annual appropriations process ( eg , direct appropriations for federal direct student loans and pell grants ) .

amounts are rounded to the nearest million or billion ( as labeled ) .

the dollar and percentage changes discussed are based on unrounded amounts .

for consistency with source materials , amounts do not reflect sequestration or re - estimates of mandatory spending programs , where applicable .

also per source material conventions , the fy2016 column ( but not any of the columns for fy2017 ) reflects certain transfers , reprogramming , and other adjustments for comparability .

these source materials also adjust fy2016 department of education funding levels and account structures included in this report to reflect statutory changes in ed programs in fy2017 .

note that all amounts in this section are based on regular lhhs appropriations only ; they do not include funds provided outside of the annual appropriations process ( eg , mandatory appropriations for old - age , survivors , and disability insurance benefit payments by the social security administration ) .

all amounts in this section are rounded to the nearest million or billion ( as labeled ) .

the dollar changes and percentage changes in the text are based on unrounded amounts .

for consistency with source materials , amounts do not reflect sequestration or re - estimates of mandatory spending programs , where applicable .

also per source material conventions , the fy2016 column ( but not any of the columns for fy2017 ) reflects certain transfers , reprogramming , and other adjustments for comparability .

 table 10 displays fy2017 proposed and enacted funding levels for lhhs related agencies , along with fy2016 levels .

in general , discretionary funds constitute about 20% of total appropriations for lhhs related agencies each year .

compared to fy2016 , discretionary appropriations for related agencies were increased by $300 million ( +1.8% ) in the fy2017 omnibus , about the same amount that was proposed by the senate committee bill .

in contrast , the president's request proposed increasing discretionary appropriations by a greater amount ( +6.4% ) , whereas those appropriations would have decreased under the house committee bill ( - 2.5% ) .

the largest share of funding appropriated to related agencies in the lhhs bill consistently goes to the social security administration ( ssa ) .

when taking into account both mandatory and discretionary funding , ssa usually represents roughly 97% of total related agencies appropriations .

the bulk of mandatory funding provided to ssa from the lhhs bill supports the supplemental security income ( ssi ) program , which provides means - tested cash assistance to disabled adults and children and to seniors aged 65 or older .

when looking exclusively at discretionary funding , ssa received at least 84% of discretionary appropriations for lhhs related agencies in fy2017 enacted and earlier proposals .

most of ssa's discretionary funding is used by the agency to administer the social security and ssi programs and to support cms in administering portions of medicare .

after ssa , the next - largest agency in terms of related agencies appropriations is the corporation for national and community service ( cncs ) , which accounted for about 2% of total related agencies appropriations in fy2017 enacted and earlier proposals .

typically , each of the remaining related agencies receives less than $1 billion from the annual lhhs appropriations bill .

for more information , see table 11 .

the following sections highlight fy2017 appropriations issues for selected related agencies .

table 11 tracks funding levels for these related agencies .

the ssa lae account , which provides nearly all of ssa's administrative funding , mainly consists of funds that are used by the agency to administer the social security and ssi programs , and also to support cms in administering portions of medicare .

the account also contains funds that are specifically set aside for program integrity activities , such as continuing disability reviews ( cdrs ) and ssi non - medical redeterminations .

the fy2017 omnibus provided $12.5 billion to the lae account , which was an increase of 2.6% ( $319 million ) over the fy2016 level and the same percentage increase that was proposed in the senate committee bill .

the budget issued by the obama administration would have increased lae funding by $902 million ( +7.4% ) relative to fy2016 levels .

in contrast , the house committee bill would have decreased lae funding relative to the prior year by $264 million ( - 2.2% ) .

the program integrity portion of the lae account for fy2017 includes $273 million in "base" funding that is subject to the discretionary spending caps established by the budget control act ( bca ) of 2011 , and also includes additional funding that is effectively exempt from those caps , known as a "cap adjustment" ( see the appendix ) .

the fy2017 omnibus provided the maximum amount of program integrity funding permitted under the bca for fy2017 ( $1.8 billion ) , which was a 27.6% increase over the amount provided in fy2016 ( $1.4 billion ) .

the budget issued by the obama administration and the senate committee bill would have also provided the maximum amount of program integrity funding for fy2017 , while the house committee bill would have continued the same amount funding that was provided in fy2016 .

the nlrb is an independent board that enforces provisions in the national labor relations act ( nlra ) .

the fy2017 omnibus maintained the fy2016 funding levels for the nlrb of $274 million .

the house committee bill would have decreased funding for the nlrb by $59 million ( - 21.6% ) , while the senate committee bill would have provided the same amount as fy2016 .

the fy2017 omnibus retained a provision from fy2016 that prohibits any funds appropriated to the nlrb in the bill , or any prior appropriations act , from being used to issue a directive or regulation to provide employees a means of voting through any electronic method in an election determining representation for collective bargaining .

the omnibus did not include several new provisions proposed in the house committee bill , which would have prohibited any funds made available by the bill from being used to implement or enforce any rule that amends current regulations related to filing and processing petitions in collective bargaining procedures ( §408 of h.r .

5926 ) ; prohibited any funds made available by the bill from being used to enforce the nlra against any indian tribe ( §409 of h.r .

5926 ) ; prohibited any funds made available by the bill from being used to investigate , issue , enforce , or litigate any administrative action related to changing the interpretation or application of the "joint employer" standard in effect as of january 1 , 2014 ( §410 of h.r .

5926 ) ; and prohibited any funds made available by the bill from being used in any way to change the standard for initial bargaining unit determination that differs from the standard set in a recent court decision ( §411 of h.r .

5926 ) .

the framework for budget enforcement under the congressional budget process has both statutory and procedural elements .

the statutory elements include the discretionary spending limits and mandatory spending sequester derived from the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) and the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 ( bbedca ; p.l .

99-177 ) .

the procedural elements are primarily associated with the budget resolution and limit both total discretionary spending and spending under the jurisdiction of each appropriations subcommittee .

readers should note that budget enforcement requirements for fy2017 have been affected by the bipartisan budget act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-74 ) , which was signed into law on november 2 , 2015 .

among other things , this law increased the statutory discretionary spending limits for fy2016 and fy2017 , and extended the mandatory sequester to fy2025 .

the discussion below reflects these changes .

budget control act and sequestration the bca provides budget process mechanisms to reduce mandatory spending and further reduce discretionary spending over an extended period .

for mandatory spending , reductions are to occur through sequestration in each of fiscal years between fy2013-fy2025 .

for discretionary spending , reductions occurred through sequestration in fy2013 , but are to be achieved through lower discretionary spending limits for each of the fiscal years between fy2014-fy2021 .

the bca does not call for sequestration of discretionary spending in fy2014-fy2021 unless one or both of the statutory discretionary spending limits ( defense and nondefense ) is breached .

the lhhs bill only includes funding in the nondefense category .

fy2017 on february 9 , 2016 , concurrent with the release of the president's budget , president obama issued the required fy2017 sequestration order , calling for nonexempt mandatory spending to be reduced on october 1 , 2016 .

the office of management and budget ( omb ) estimated that the fy2017 sequestration percentages would equal 2% of nonexempt medicare spending and 6.9% of other nonexempt nondefense mandatory spending , for a total reduction of $18 billion in fy2017 .

 ( omb also estimated a 9.1% reduction , totaling $728 million , in nonexempt defense mandatory spending , but this is not applicable to lhhs funds. ) .

the bca does not require sequestration of discretionary spending in fy2017 , unless one or both of the statutory discretionary spending limits is breached .

as amended by the bipartisan budget act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-74 ) , the fy2017 statutory spending limits are $551.068 billion for defense spending and $518.531 billion for nondefense spending , for a combined total of $1.070 trillion .

according to omb , after making allowable adjustments to the statutory discretionary spending limits , fy2017 enacted appropriations did not violate either the defense or the nondefense limit .

cap adjustments , exemptions , and special rules the bca allows for certain adjustments to the discretionary spending limits for fy2012-fy2021 .

for lhhs , the most notable of these is for increases to the nondefense limit ( up to a point ) to accommodate new budget authority for specified program integrity initiatives at hhs and the social security administration ( ssa ) .

the bipartisan budget act of 2015 amended the list of ssa activities that may be covered by this "cap adjustment" to include costs associated with work - related continuing disability reviews , cooperative disability investigations , and fraud prosecutions by u.s .

attorneys .

the bipartisan budget act of 2015 also revised the amount of the allowable ssa adjustment amounts to be more generous in fy2017-fy2019 , but less generous in fy2021 .

separate from these cap adjustments , the 21 st century cures act ( cures act , p.l .

114-255 ) , which was enacted on december 13 , 2016 , included additional budget enforcement procedures related to the discretionary spending limits .

these procedures apply to two accounts within the scope of the lhhs bill: the nih innovation account and the account for the state response to the opioid abuse crisis .

the cures act created these accounts and authorized appropriations from them for specific fiscal years ( fy2017-fy2026 for the nih innovation account and fy2017-fy2018 for the account for the state response to the opioid abuse crisis ) .

the cures act further provided that subsequent discretionary appropriations from these accounts ( up to the amounts authorized for each fiscal year ) are to be subtracted from any cost estimates provided for purposes of budget controls .

effectively , this means that the appropriations from these accounts will not count against any spending limits , such as the statutory discretionary spending limits ; that is , the amounts appropriated from these accounts will be considered to be outside those limits .

in addition , although sequestration largely consists of automatic , across - the - board spending reductions , the law exempts a limited number of programs from sequestration and subjects others to special rules .

the lhhs bill contains several programs that are exempt from sequestration , including medicaid , payments to health care trust funds , supplemental security income , special benefits for disabled coal miners , retirement pay and medical benefits for commissioned public health service officers , foster care and adoption assistance , and certain family support payments .

the lhhs bill also contains several programs that are subject to special rules under sequestration , such as unemployment compensation , certain student loans , health centers , and portions of medicare .

budget resolution and 302 ( b ) suballocations the procedural elements of budget enforcement generally stem from requirements under the congressional budget act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-44 ) that are associated with the adoption of an annual budget resolution .

through this process , the appropriations committee in each chamber receives a procedural limit on the total amount of discretionary budget authority for the upcoming fiscal year , referred to as a 302 ( a ) allocation .

the appropriations committee subsequently divides this allocation among its 12 subcommittees .

these subcommittee - level spending limits are referred to as 302 ( b ) suballocations .

the 302 ( b ) suballocations restrict the amount of budget authority available to each subcommittee for the agencies , projects , and activities under its jurisdiction , effectively acting as a cap on each of the 12 regular appropriations bills .

enforcement of the 302 ( a ) allocation and 302 ( b ) suballocations occurs through points of order .

the house and the senate did not adopt a budget resolution prior to the start of fy2017 .

in its absence , the senate budget committee chair filed budgetary levels in the congressional record that were enforceable in the senate as if they had been included in a budget resolution for fy2017 .

based on these levels , the senate appropriations committee reported their initial 302 ( b ) suballocations on april 18 , 2016 , and subsequently issued several revisions to these suballocations .

in the absence of a budget resolution in the house , the house appropriations committee chose to adopt "interim 302 ( b ) suballocations" for the appropriations bills as those bills are marked up in full committee .

these interim suballocations are not procedurally enforceable .

an interim suballocation for the lhhs subcommittee was adopted by the house appropriations committee on the same day that the bill was ordered reported out of committee , on july 14 , 2016 .

ultimately , a budget resolution for fy2017 ( s.con.res .

3 ) was adopted in the senate on january 12 , 2017 , and in the house on january 13 , 2017 .

following adoption of the budget resolution , the senate appropriations committee reported further revisions to its 302 ( b ) suballocations .

the house appropriations committee did not officially report its fy2017 suballocations .

table a - 1 displays the initial and most recently published ( current ) senate fy2017 lhhs suballocations , the house interim suballocation , and the fy2017 enacted levels , along with comparable fy2016 appropriations .

the table shows that amounts enacted for fy2017 regular lhhs appropriations subject to the discretionary spending limits were $934 million ( - 0.6% ) less than comparable fy2016 levels .

the table also shows lhhs appropriations for which adjustments may be made to the discretionary spending limits under the bca , including funding for certain lhhs program integrity activities and emergency requirements , where applicable .

note that compliance with discretionary spending allocations is evaluated based on budget authority available in the current fiscal year , adjusted for scorekeeping by the congressional budget office .

as such , totals shown in this table may not be comparable to other totals shown in this report .

current - year budget authority totals exclude advance appropriations for future years , but include advance appropriations from prior years that become available in the current year .

advance appropriations are provided to selected lhhs accounts , generally in order to manage specific planning concerns and ensure continuity of operations at the start of a new fiscal year .

current - year budget authority table a - 2 displays the total lhhs current - year budget authority , by title , as enacted or proposed for fy2017 , along with fy2016 levels .

the amounts shown in this table reflect total budget authority available for obligation in the fiscal year , regardless of the year in which it was first appropriated .

 ( for a comparable table showing total budget authority in the bill , rather than current - year budget authority , see table 2 in the body of this report. ) .

as mentioned above , it is current - year budget authority ( adjusted for scorekeeping by cbo ) that is used to determine compliance with discretionary spending allocations .

