commemorative coins are coins that are "produced with the primary intention of creating a special souvenir to be sold ( at a premium above face value ) to observe or memorialize an anniversary , special occasion , or other event. .

produced by the u.s. mint pursuant to an act of congress , these coins celebrate and honor american people , places , events , and institutions .

although they are considered legal tender , they are not minted for general circulation .

instead , they are designed to be collected and to help designated groups raise money to support group activities .

commemorative coin legislation is often proposed by members of congress as part of their representational duties .

the first commemorative coin was authorized in 1892 for the world's columbian exposition in chicago .

issued as a silver half - dollar , the proceeds for the sale of the coin were used "for the purpose of aiding in defraying the cost of completing in a suitable manner the work of preparation for inaugurating the world's columbian exposition. .

beginning in 1892 and continuing to the present day — with a hiatus between 1954 and 1981 — coins have been a part of the commemoration of people , places , events , and institutions .

this report examines the origins , development , and current practices for commemorative coins , including the authorization process ; the design of coins ; and issues for congressional consideration , including the disbursement of surcharges , the number of coins minted per year , differences between the number of authorized coins and coins sold , and requirements for legislative consideration in the house and senate .

after congress has authorized a commemorative coin , the u.s. treasury begins the coin design process .

this process involves consultation with the citizens coinage advisory committee ( ccac ) and a design recommendation by the u.s. commission of fine arts ( cfa ) .

the final decision on a coin's design is made by the secretary of the treasury .

as discussed above under " authorizing commemorative coins ," each authorizing statute sets a surcharge amount per coin and designates one or more recipient organizations to receive the surcharges .

a designated recipient organization is "any organization designated , under any provision of law , as the recipient of any surcharge imposed on the sale of any numismatic item. .

commemorative coin legislation generally includes the name ( s ) of the organization ( s ) that will benefit from the sale of the coin and how the surcharges will be divided , if necessary .

for example , the legislation authorizing a commemorative coin for the u.s .

marshals service specified four groups to receive distribution from the program .

they were the u.s .

marshals museum , inc. , the national center for missing & exploited children , the federal law enforcement officers association foundation , and the national law enforcement officers memorial fund .

additionally , the law might also specify how much money the designated recipient organization should receive .

for th e marshals service commemorative coin , the first $5 million was specified for the u.s .

marshals museum .

after that , additional surcharges were divided equally among the national center for missing & exploited children , the federal law enforcement officers association foundation , and the national law enforcement officers memorial fund .

once a commemorative coin has been authorized , the ccra requires that certain standards be met before surcharge payments can be distributed to designated recipient organizations: 1 .

the recipient organization must raise funds from private sources "in an amount that is equal to or greater than the total amount of the proceeds of such surcharge derived from the sale of such numismatic item. .

2 .

the qualifying funds raised from private sources must be for the purposes specified by the enabling legislation .

3 .

the u.s. mint must recover "all numismatic operation and program costs allocable to the program. .

4 .

the recipient organization must submit an audited financial statement and submit the results of annual audits to demonstrate , to the satisfaction of the secretary of the treasury , that it has qualified for surcharge proceeds and is properly expending them .

guidance provided by the u.s. mint in surcharge recipient organization's compliance procedures for surcharge eligibility & payments includes further details of the requirements placed on designated recipient groups before surcharge payments can be made .

these include requirements for documentation on the amount of money raised from private sources and the period of fund raising .

to document these requirements , designated recipient groups must fill out a "schedule of funds raised from private sources," which is provided in an appendix to the surcharge recipient organization's compliance procedures for surcharge eligibility & payments publication .

following completion of these tasks , and after the mint has recouped any expenses related to minting the commemorative coin , surcharges are then disbursed to the designated recipient organization .

since 1982 , when the commemorative coin program was restarted , the u.s. mint has raised more than $506 million in surcharges for various designated recipient groups .

production costs for each commemorative coin can differ based on design , administrative costs , and metals used .

for example , table 4 shows how the u.s. mint calculated surcharges for a commemorative coin for the 2007 benjamin franklin commemorative coin .

as members of congress contemplate introducing legislation , and the house or the senate potentially considers commemorative coin measures , there are several issues that could be considered .

these can be divided into issues for individual members of congress with respect to individual coins , and issues for congress as an institution .

individual issues include choices member may make about which people , places , events , or institutions might be honored ; which groups might receive surcharge payments ; and whether specific design elements might be required for a proposed coin .

institutional issues might include committee or chamber rules on the consideration of commemorative coins and the limit on the number of commemorative coins minted per year .

commemorative coins have long been a popular way to honor people , places , and events .

historically , commemorative coins were issued to celebrate state anniversaries , expositions , and event anniversaries , or to support the building of memorials .

coins were generally sold to sponsoring organizations , who then resold them to raise funds .

in the modern era , only two coins can be minted per year at the same time ; according to the u.s. commission of fine arts ( cfa ) , the "range of subject matter [has] expanded to include subjects such as women , historical events , and even buildings and landscapes. .

additionally , instead of selling coins to organizations to raise money , the concept of surcharges as a method to direct money to designated groups has been introduced .

as congress considers the authorization of new coins to support designated recipient groups , consideration might be given to coins that could maximize sales and provide groups with the ability to earn as much money as possible for surcharges to support group activities .

on the other hand , if congress's intent for a coin is to recognize a person , place , event , or institution , then smaller sales numbers might not factor into legislative decisionmaking .

some commemorations inherently have broader appeal than others and the sale of commemorative coins often reflects the popularity of a particular person , place , event , or institution to coin collectors and the broader general public .

to potentially maximize the appeal and sale of commemorative coins to support designated recipient organizations , congress might consider whether the people , places , events , or institutions to be commemorated have a broad appeal and whether design elements might be specified that would make the coin more appealing to the general public .

for example , the 1986 statue of liberty commemorative coin ( shown in figure 2 ) sold over 15 million units , while other coins have sold as few as approximately 40,000 .

for a designated recipient organization to earn surcharges , the u.s. mint's production costs must be recouped before payments can be made .

as a result , coins that sell out of statutory allotments are more likely to generate significant surcharges than those that struggle to find a market beyond commemorative coin collectors .

similarly , on at least three occasions , congress has provided specific requirements to the u.s. mint on the design of commemorative coins — that the 2014 national baseball hall of fame coin be curved to represent a baseball ; that the 2018 national breast cancer awareness coin be tinted pink , to reflect the color associated with breast cancer awareness efforts ; and that the 2019 apollo 11 50 th anniversary coin be convex to resemble an astronaut's helmet .

evidence from the coin collecting community suggests that a coin with unique design features may be more attractive for coin collectors and noncollectors alike .

for example , a coin - collecting publication reported that the national baseball hall of fame coin was so popular that the u.s. mint had difficulty meeting demand for orders , especially because it was the "first u.s. coin to utilize this [curved or dish design] production method and with a baseball theme , [it] ended up being a homerun with collectors. .

the goal of commemorative coins is twofold: to commemorate a person , place , event , or institution and to provide surcharges to groups .

as congress considers future commemorative coins , the ability to appeal to broad segments of the population to purchase coins in support of designated recipient groups might be a consideration .

if congress considers what people , places , events , or institutions might be honored and the coins' designs , the commemorative coin program could create innovative designs that raise significant monies for designated recipient groups .

since not all people , places , events , or institutions have the same appeal to the general public , consideration of which might be the best subject of commemorative coins would ensure that the u.s. mint dedicates its resources to coins that are more likely to sell out authorized allotments and provide maximum surcharge payments .

alternatively , congress could recognize important people , places , events , or institutions with a coin without consideration of the potential surcharges .

in this case , historically important people , places , events , or institutions could be recognized by the united states regardless of potential amounts raised for these groups .

appendix a .

historical commemorative coins between 1892 and 1954 , 60 commemorative coins were authorized by congress .

table a - 1 provides a list of these coins organized by the year in which they were struck by the mint .

the table also includes the type of coin , the subject , and the authorization statute .

appendix b .

modern commemorative coins , 1982-1997 between 1982 and 1997 , 47 commemorative coins were authorized by congress .

table b - 1 provides a list of these coins organized by the year in which they were struck by the mint .

the table also includes the coin's subject and authorizing statute .

coin denominations are not provided for modern commemorative coins because authorizing legislation generally provides for more than one denomination per commemorative coin series .

