the pa and the cop decision to give it effect identified numerous tasks to bring the pa into force and help it function effectively according to parties' intentions .

some tasks have already begun .

the "ad hoc working group on the pa" ( apa ) met for the first time in may 2016 in bonn , germany .

the first session of the cop , serving as the meeting of the parties to the pa ( cma 1 ) , was also held in marrakech , morocco , in november 2016 , a few days after the agreement entered into force on november 4 , 2016 .

 ( see question above , " how did the pa enter into force ? " ) .

many parties advocate for quick decisions by the cma on numerous topics identified in the work program decided in november 2016 .

the main elements include: ndcs adaptation communications transparency framework for action and support the global stocktake the mechanism to facilitate implementation and compliance the adaptation fund the public registry / registries for ndcs and adaptation communications periodic assessments of the technology mechanism cooperative approaches under pa article 6 ; and accounting for financial resources provided and mobilized .

 ( see appendix , "schedule for some key tasks under the pa." ) many of those activities will require sensitive negotiations over issues that were controversial in the lead - up to the pa. a complete list of tasks arising from the decision to adopt the pa is available from the unfccc secretariat .

some highlights of the tasks: the cma is to develop guidance on the information to be submitted in ndcs so that they are clear , transparent , and comparable .

the secretariat established a public , interim ndc registry containing ndcs communicated by parties .

the cma is tasked with agreeing on guidance to ensure measurement of pa parties' performance on their ndcs .

elements of this guidance may consider criteria in the pa that ndcs should promote environmental integrity , transparency , accuracy , completeness , comparability , and consistency and avoid double counting .

countries were invited to communicate , by 2020 , their mid - century , long - term low ghg emission development strategies .

the executive committee of the warsaw mechanism was charged with reviewing work in september 2016 to develop recommendations for integrated approaches to avert , minimize , and address displacement of people related to the adverse impacts of climate , and for a repository for information on insurance and risk transfer to help parties develop and implement comprehensive risk management strategies .

associated with "cooperative approaches," the subsidiary body for scientific and technological advice under the unfccc is tasked with developing guidance for market - based systems that the pa recognizes will be used by parties to meet their ndcs .

the bodies will also develop a work program for considering other cooperative approaches , including non - market - based approaches , to ghg emissions reductions .

the adaptation committee under the cop must develop methods to recognize the adaptation efforts of developing countries and for communication of parties' priorities , implementation , support needs , plans , and actions and for recording them in a registry maintained by the secretariat .

the cma will , in the 2020s , negotiate to set a new collective , quantified goal for climate finance by 2025 .

in addition , there will be many requests for submissions of parties' views , development of rules and guidance , and reviews of existing approaches and mechanisms in the period to 2020 .

the topics will include capacity building , technology cooperation , adaptation , and more .

president trump's announcement on june 1 , 2017 , of his intent to withdraw the united states from the pa raises several issues regarding next steps under the pa , including: what procedure might the united states follow to withdraw from the pa ? .

might the united states request that the pa parties allow it an early exit from the agreement , following customary international law , rather than the four - year withdrawal process under pa article 28 ? .

will the united states continue to participate in meetings and decisions of the pa until withdrawal occurs , pursuant to the president's statement that "as of today , the united states will cease all implementation of the non - binding paris accord... .

this includes ending the implementation of the nationally determined contribution and , very importantly , the green climate fund" ? .

when and how may the administration follow up on the president's statement that the united states would begin negotiations to reenter either the pa or an entirely new transaction on terms that are fair to the united states" ? .

may this occur within the procedures of the unfccc and / or the pa or in a different forum ? .

how may other parties alter their strategies and positions on implementing the pa in light of the u.s. announcement ? .

or , how may the balance of influence shift among parties that have often shared or opposed u.s. views in negotiations ? .

