this report is part of a suite of reports that address appropriations for the department of homeland security ( dhs ) for fy2017 .

it specifically discusses appropriations for the components of dhs included in the third title of the homeland security appropriations bill — the national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) , the office of health affairs ( oha ) , and the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) .

collectively , congress has labeled these components in recent years as "protection , preparedness , response , and recovery. .

the report provides an overview of the obama administration's fy2017 request for these components , the appropriations proposed by the appropriations committees in response , and those enacted in the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l .

115-31 ; division f is the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2017 ) , and the supplemental appropriations for disaster relief requirements act , 2017 ( p.l .

115-56 , division b ) .

the report includes information on provisions throughout the bills and reports that directly affect these components .

the suite of crs reports on homeland security appropriations tracks legislative action and congressional issues related to dhs appropriations , with particular attention paid to discretionary funding amounts .

the reports do not provide in - depth analysis of specific issues related to mandatory funding — such as retirement pay — nor do they systematically follow other legislation related to the authorization or amending of dhs programs , activities , or fee revenues .

discussion of appropriations legislation involves a variety of specialized budgetary concepts .

the appendix to crs report r44621 , department of homeland security appropriations: fy2017 , explains several of these concepts , including budget authority , obligations , outlays , discretionary and mandatory spending , offsetting collections , allocations , and adjustments to the discretionary spending caps under the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-25 ) .

a more complete discussion of those terms and the appropriations process in general can be found in crs report r42388 , the congressional appropriations process: an introduction , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] , and the government accountability office's a glossary of terms used in the federal budget process .

generally , the homeland security appropriations bill includes all annual appropriations provided for dhs , allocating resources to every departmental component .

discretionary appropriations provide roughly two - thirds to three - fourths of the annual funding for dhs operations , depending how one accounts for disaster relief spending and funding for overseas contingency operations .

the remainder of the budget is a mix of fee revenues , trust funds , and mandatory spending .

appropriations measures for dhs typically have been organized into five titles .

the first four are thematic groupings of components: departmental management and operations ; security , enforcement , and investigations ; protection , preparedness , response , and recovery ; and research and development , training , and services .

a fifth title contains general provisions , the impact of which may reach across the entire department , impact multiple components , or focus on a single activity .

for fy2017 , a sixth title responded to the trump administration's supplemental appropriations request submitted in march 2017 .

the following pie chart presents a visual representation of the share of annual appropriations requested by the obama administration for the components funded in each of the first four titles , highlighting the components discussed in this report .

the national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) is the component within the department of homeland security responsible for leading national efforts on information sharing , risk mitigation , and protection efforts for the resilience of national infrastructure , and for cybersecurity .

nppd is currently organized into five offices: the office of biometric identity management ( obim ) , the office of cybersecurity and communications ( cs&c ) , the office of cyber and infrastructure analysis ( ocia ) , the office of infrastructure protection ( ip ) , and the federal protective service ( fps ) .

the majority of the net discretionary budget for nppd focuses on cybersecurity and critical infrastructure protection , which are reflected in cs&c and ip .

other responsibilities for nppd include providing biometric identity services to the department , providing all - hazard consequence and interdependency analysis on critical infrastructure , and securing federal facilities .

the obama administration's fy2017 budget proposed moving two elements of nppd to other parts of dhs: obim was to be transferred to u.s. customs and border protection ( funded in title ii ) , and the office of bombing prevention was to be transferred from ip to the new chemical , biological , radiological , nuclear , and explosives ( cbrne ) office funded in title iv .

however , congress did not authorize the transfers , so funding for those offices remains in the nppd appropriations in title iii .

the office of health affairs ( oha ) coordinates or consults on dhs programs that have a public health or medical component .

these include fema operations , homeland security grant programs , and medical care provided at immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) detention facilities .

oha also has operational responsibility for several programs , including the biowatch program , the national biosurveillance integration center ( nbic ) , the department's occupational health and safety programs , and the department's implementation of homeland security presidential directive - 9 ( hspd - 9 ) , "defense of united states agriculture and food. .

in its request for fy2017 , the obama administration proposed reorganizing oha into a new chemical , biological , radiological , nuclear , and explosives ( cbrne ) office , which would also incorporate the domestic nuclear detection office ( dndo ) , as well as a small part of the national protection and programs directorate , and part of the office of policy from title i .

more discussion of the reorganization proposal can be found in crs report r44658 , dhs appropriations fy2017: research and development , training , and services , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

the primary mission of the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) is to reduce the loss of life and property , and protect the nation from all hazards .

it is responsible for leading and supporting the nation's preparedness for manmade and natural disasters through a risk - based and comprehensive emergency management system of preparedness , protection , response , recovery , and mitigation .

fema executes its mission through a number of activities .

it provides incident response , recovery , and mitigation assistance to state and local governments , primarily appropriated through the disaster relief fund ( drf ) and the pre - disaster mitigation fund .

it also supports disaster preparedness through a series of homeland security and emergency management grant programs .

for fy2017 , the obama administration requested $4.12 billion in net discretionary budget authority for fema .

this would have been $546 million ( 11.7% ) less than was provided in fy2016 .

fema's budget includes two large elements that do not count toward the total net discretionary budget authority: funding for major disasters declared by the president under the authority of the stafford act , which is accommodated under an adjustment to the discretionary spending limits ; and the national flood insurance fund , which is considered mandatory spending .

the administration requested $6.7 billion for the cost of major disasters as a part of fema's overall budget .

s. 3001 included $4.68 billion in net discretionary budget authority for fema .

this would have been $560 million ( 13.6% ) more than was requested by the administration , and $14 million ( 0.3% ) more than was provided in fy2016 .

the senate bill also included the requested $6.7 billion for the cost of major disasters .

h.r .

5634 included $4.71 billion in net discretionary budget authority for fema .

this would have been $585 million ( 14.2% ) more than was requested by the administration , and $39 million ( 0.8% ) more than was provided in fy2016 .

the house committee - reported funding level was $26 million ( 0.5% ) more than was proposed in the senate committee - reported bill .

the house bill also included the requested $6.7 billion for the cost of major disasters .

division f of p.l .

115-31 included $4.72 billion in net discretionary budget authority for fema .

this is $602 million ( 14.0% ) above the level requested by the obama administration , and $58 million ( 1.2% ) above the enacted level for fy2016 .

the act also included $6.7 billion for the cost of major disasters .

on september 1 , 2017 , the trump administration requested $7.85 billion in supplemental funding for fy2017 , including $7.4 billion for the fema's drf .

on september 6 , the house passed the relief package requested by the administration as an amendment to h.r .

601 .

on september 7 , the senate passed an amended version , which included the house - passed funding as well as an additional $7.4 billion for disaster relief through hud's community development fund , a short - term increase to the debt limit , and a short - term continuing resolution that would fund government operations into fy2018 .

the house passed the senate - amended version of the bill on september 8 , 2017 , and it became p.l .

115-56 .

the disaster relief fund ( drf ) is the main account used to fund a wide variety of programs , grants , and other forms of emergency and disaster assistance to states , local governments , certain nonprofit entities , and families and individuals affected by disasters .

the drf expends funds in response to current incidents , as well as to meet recovery needs from previous incidents .

as a result , the drf is a no - year account — unused budget authority from the previous fiscal year is carried over to the next fiscal year .

funding currently provided to the drf can be broken out into two categories .

the first is funding for activities not directly tied to major disasters under the stafford act ( including activities such as assistance provided to states for emergencies and fires ) .

this category is sometimes referred to as the drf's "base" funding .

the second ( and significantly larger ) category is for disaster relief costs for major disasters under the stafford act .

this structure reflects the impact of the budget control act ( p.l .

112-25 , hereinafter referred to as the bca ) , which allows these costs incurred by major disasters to be paid through an "allowable adjustment" to the discretionary spending caps , rather than having them count against the discretionary spending allocation for the bill .

for fy2017 , the obama administration requested $7,348 million in discretionary budget authority for the drf .

the requested amount for the base was $639 million , while $6,709 million was requested for the costs of major disasters .

in addition , the administration requested a $24 million transfer from the drf to the dhs office of inspector general ( dhs oig ) for oversight of disaster relief activities .

the requested amount is $26 million less than was provided in fy2016 .

the house - and senate - reported bills included the amount requested by the administration for the drf ( $639 million for the base , and $6,709 million for disaster relief ) including the $24 million transfer to the dhs oig .

division f of p.l .

115-31 included the requested drf funding , but did not transfer any resources to the dhs oig .

on september 1 , 2017 , the trump administration requested $7.85 billion in supplemental funding for fy2017 , including $7.4 billion for the drf .

this amount was requested , and ultimately provided in p.l .

115-56 , with an emergency funding designation , since the allowable adjustment for disaster relief had been exhausted for fy2017 .

prior to the enactment of the bca , funds in the drf often ran too low to meet federal disaster assistance needs before being replenished by annual appropriations .

when the account neared depletion , congress usually provided additional funding through supplemental appropriations .

in some fiscal years , congress passed two or three supplemental appropriations to fund the drf .

since the passage of the bca , an increase in the annual funding level for the drf may have decreased the need for supplemental funding .

as demonstrated in table 2 , annual appropriations for the drf have been significantly larger since fy2011 , the last year appropriations were provided for the drf without benefit of the mechanisms of the bca .

since the fy2012 appropriations cycle , only two supplemental appropriations bills have been enacted with funding for the disaster relief fund .

the first , p.l .

113-2 , provided relief in the wake of hurricane sandy .

when hurricane sandy made landfall , the existing balance of more than $7.5 billion in the drf helped fund the immediate assistance needs in the wake of the storm without an immediate supplemental appropriation .

six weeks later , the obama administration requested supplemental appropriations for a range of response , recovery , and mitigation activities .

the second , p.l .

115-56 , provided supplemental appropriations at the end of fy2017 , and was noted above .

before hurricane harvey made landfall in texas on august 25 , 2017 , the drf had roughly $3.5 billion in total unobligated resources available .

in order to conserve resources needed for time - sensitive disaster assistance , on august 28 , fema implemented "immediate needs funding restrictions," which delay funding for all longer - term projects until additional resources are available .

even with this restriction , according to fema , as of the morning of september 1 , the drf had less than $2 billion in total unobligated resources .

that same day , the trump administration requested supplemental appropriations for response and immediate recovery needs .

arguably , the larger balance provided the obama administration and congress with more time to assess the need for federal assistance and target it rather than requiring immediate legislative action to fund the drf , as was the case at the end of fy2017 .

some may argue a relatively healthy balance is beneficial compared to years prior to the bca when a large disaster or active hurricane season ( or both ) could have quickly depleted the remaining unobligated amount , necessitating a supplemental appropriation for additional funds for disaster relief .

others may question the budgetary practices used to appropriate funds for the drf and argue that large carryovers from previous fiscal years indicate that the account is being funded at too high a level .

they may also be concerned that any excess funds not used for an emergency or disaster could be transferred or rescinded for purposes other than disaster assistance .

the pre - disaster mitigation ( pdm ) grant program , authorized under section 203 of the stafford act , provides funding for mitigation actions at the state and local level without the need for a preceding disaster event .

the program is cost - shared on a 75% federal and 25% state and local basis .

pdm funds can be used for both mitigation projects and planning .

the level of funding requested over the years for pdm has varied in a broad range .

the program had been zeroed out by the obama administration in their base budget request in fy2013 and fy2014 .

in fy2016 , the obama administration - requested level for the pdm program increased substantially to the $200 million level — $100 million was ultimately appropriated .

the fy2017 request from the obama administration continued the trend of fluctuation , with the requested funding level for pdm dropping to just over $54 million .

the senate - reported bill included $100 million for pdm , while the house - reported bill included the requested level .

the house appropriations committee report observed that "fema projects to have more than $50 million in carryover funding available in fy2017 from prior year appropriations. .

in p.l .

115-31 , congress provided $100 million for pdm , equivalent to the funding provided in fy2016 .

both of the house and senate appropriations committees' reports contained language related to fema's mitigation efforts .

in particular , the house committee questioned whether states are giving "appropriate consideration to disaster mitigation projects proposed by counties when developing state mitigation plans that inform the allocation of post - disaster mitigation grants , or when submitting applications for pre - disaster mitigation grants to fema. .

the postdisaster grants referenced are the funds made available under the hazard mitigation grant program ( hmgp ) , section 404 of the stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act , and the pdm grant program .

to address these concerns fema was directed to brief the committee on the guidance it gives to states on the matter , within 90 days of passage .

according to the committee report , the briefing should emphasize whether fema's current guidance encourages appropriate consideration of those local mitigation projects that benefit large population centers .

the house committee report also addressed the "safe room" concept — specially designed protective structures developed in tornado - prone areas , often using both fema hmgp and pdm funds .

the house appropriations committee noted that the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) model codes have helped to improve "safe rooms" for new school buildings and other assembly areas .

however , the committee expressed a concern that even these improvements may not be sufficient given the severity of recent storms .

the house appropriations committee recommended that "fema consider the adoption of uniform national guidelines for safe room design and construction , as well as a requirement that safe rooms be incorporated into the design and construction of federally - funded structures located in areas prone to severe weather hazards. .

the senate appropriations committee report also addressed multiple areas of mitigation policy .

the report called for fema and the mitigation federal leadership group ( mitflg ) to create a strategy which helps guide decision - makers across the federal government … on how to best prioritize federal resources aimed at enhancing disaster resilience ; an actionable and measurable investment strategy supported by predictive financial and risk data ; and how federal programs can be better integrated and coordinated with state and local mitigation efforts .

this direction from the senate committee responded to concerns raised by gao following an investigation into federal efforts to strengthen disaster resilience during hurricane sandy recovery .

the senate report also noted that while planning still is an eligible mitigation expenditure under pdm , the committee wanted to see more emphasis on actual projects .

toward that end the senate appropriations committee report directed fema to develop an annual report that will identify "the end users of these grants , how funding is utilized , and the cost - benefit analysis completed demonstrating the larger impact of these grants. .

the senate report further cited that mitigation funding can be maximized by private - public partnerships , especially in "very high risk areas like the cascadia subduction zone. .

fema was directed to brief the appropriations committee "prior to making pdm grant applications available on how public - private partnerships will be specifically evaluated when considering projects. .

p.l .

115-31 and the explanatory statement that accompanied it did not address these matters .

as the house and senate committee - reported directions are not in conflict , both committees' directions stand .

state and local governments have primary responsibility for most domestic public safety functions , which includes state and local homeland security operations .

homeland security preparedness has become a significant issue for states and localities due to the increase in international and domestic terrorist threats .

when facing difficult fiscal conditions , state and local governments may reduce resources allocated for homeland security preparedness , due to increasing pressure to address tight budgetary constraints and competing priorities .

since state and local governments fund the largest percentage of homeland security expenditures , this may have a significant impact on the national preparedness level .

prior to 9 / 11 , three federal grant programs were available to state and local governments to address homeland security: the state domestic preparedness program administered by the department of justice ; the emergency management performance grant ( empg ) administered by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) ; and the metropolitan medical response system ( mmrs ) administered by the department of health and human services .

since then , several additional homeland security grant programs were added to amplify state and local preparedness , including the state homeland security grant program ( shsgp ) , citizen corps program ( ccp ) , urban area security initiative ( uasi ) , driver's license security grants program ( real id ) , operation stonegarden grant program ( stonegarden ) , regional catastrophic preparedness grant program ( rcpg ) , public transportation security assistance and rail security assistance grant program ( transit security grants ) , port security grants ( port security ) , over - the - road bus security assistance ( over - the - road ) , buffer zone protection program ( bzpp ) , interoperable emergency communications grant program ( iecgp ) , and emergency operations center grant program ( eoc ) .

while some of these programs are no longer funded , some still receive explicit mention in appropriations reports , while others have become allowable uses for funding provided under a larger umbrella grant program , without explicit congressional action .

with the implementation of the new common appropriations structure ( cas ) , these grants are funded in the federal assistance appropriations category .

as has been mentioned previously , a modified cas was adopted in p.l .

115-31 , after the house appropriations committee adopted the cas , but the senate appropriations committee did not .

despite these structural differences in the legislation , it is still possible to compare the funding proposed by the obama administration and recommended by the house and senate appropriations committees with the funding provided in the enacted fy2017 dhs appropriations act .

the obama administration requested $857 million for state and local grant programs for fy2017 .

this is $460 million ( 32.3% ) less than was appropriated in fy2016 ( $1.32 billion: $1.27 billion in title iii , and $50 million for grants to address emergent threats in a general provision ) .

the obama administration proposed a new regional competitive grant program alongside the established grant programs .

however , for the first time since fy2012 , the obama administration did not propose creating a single block grant for preparedness grants .

s. 3001 included $1.32 billion for state and local preparedness grant programs for fy2017 .

h.r .

5634 included $1 million less than s. 3001 .

p.l .

115-31 appropriated $1.31 billion for preparedness grant programs , including a $41 million in a new general provision to reimburse extraordinary law enforcement personnel costs for protection of presidential residences .

it did not include the regional competitive grant program .

table 2 provides a detailed breakdown of preparedness grant funding by program for fy2016 and fy2017 .

lines in italics represent carveouts from the plain text amounts for the umbrella grant programs immediately above them .

the obama administration's fy2017 budget proposed $670 million for firefighter assistance , including $335 million for afg and $335 million for staffing for adequate fire and emergency response ( safer ) grants , a 2.9% reduction from the fy2016 level .

under the proposed budget , the afg and safer grant accounts would be transferred to the preparedness and protection activity under fema's broader federal assistance account .

according to the budget request , federal assistance programs will "assist federal agencies , states , local , tribal , and territorial jurisdictions to mitigate , prepare for and recover from terrorism and natural disasters. .

fire service groups have opposed this transfer , arguing that it could reorient the firefighter assistance program toward responding to terrorism and other major incidents rather than maintaining its current all - hazards focus .

the senate appropriations committee - reported bill would have provided $680 million in firefighter assistance , including $340 million for afg and $340 million for safer , a 1.4% reduction from the fy2016 level .

the committee bill retained a separate budget account for firefighter assistance and did not transfer it to the federal assistance account as proposed in the administration budget request .

the committee report directed dhs to continue the present practice of funding applications according to local priorities and those established by the usfa , and to continue direct funding to fire departments and the peer review process .

the committee stated its expectation that funding for rural fire departments would remain consistent with their previous five - year history , and directed fema to brief the committee if there is a fluctuation .

the house appropriations committee - reported bill would have provided $690 million in firefighter assistance , including $345 million for afg and $345 million for safer .

this matched the fy2016 level and was a 1.5% increase over the senate appropriations committee level .

unlike the senate , the house committee bill transferred the firefighter assistance budget account into a broader federal assistance account in fema .

the committee report directed fema to continue administering the fire grants programs as directed in prior year committee reports , and encouraged fema to ensure that the formulas used for equipment accurately reflect current costs .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 provided $690 million for firefighter assistance in fy2017 , including $345 million for afg and $345 million for safer .

similar to the house bill , the firefighter assistance account was transferred to fema's broader federal assistance account as part of the cas realignment of appropriations .

the other direction from the house and senate committee reports stands unchanged .

while the majority of funding for the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) is mandatory budget authority , the dhs appropriations act provides important direction in the use of those funds , as well as discretionary budget authority for key accounts within the nfip .

funding for the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) is primarily maintained in an authorized account called the national flood insurance fund ( nfif ) .

as provided for in law , all premiums from the sale of nfip insurance are transferred to fema and deposited in the nfif .

congress then authorizes fema to withdraw funds from the nfif , and use those funds for specified purposes needed to operate the nfip .

in addition to premiums , congress has also provided discretionary appropriations to supplement floodplain mapping activities .

table 4 provides the budget authority authorized by congress in fy2016 and fy2017 .

both senate and house appropriations committees recommended the requested levels of funding and conditions for nfip activities .

in addition to the budget authority indicated in table 4 , fluctuating levels of mandatory spending occur annually in the nfip in order to pay claims on affected nfip policies .

congress has authorized fema to borrow no more than $30.425 billion from the u.s. treasury for the purposes of the nfip , principally to pay insurance claims in excess of available premium revenues .

under the terms of the continuing resolution in p.l .

115-56 , the authorization for this borrowing is reduced to $1 billion after december 8 , 2017 .

in the wake of the hurricanes of august and september 2017 , fema notified congress that the nfip had exhausted its borrowing authority on september 20 , 2017 .

the efs program was established in 1985 , and placed at fema .

the rationale at that time was that the charitable groups that make up the national board of the program wanted to emphasize that homelessness was a daily emergency .

in addition , those same organizations had an established working relationship with fema through their disaster response and recovery work .

while previous administrations have suggested moving the efs program to the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , the senate appropriations committee's approval of such a transfer in their committee - reported fy2015 appropriations legislation was the first time the move gained any approval in congress .

the obama administration's budget for fy2017 requested $100 million for the efs program , a reduction of $20 million .

the senate appropriations committee concurred with the administration's funding request while the house appropriations committee recommended funding the efs program at the fy2016 level of $120 million .

p.l .

115-31 included $120 million for the program .

the senate appropriations committee agreed to the obama administration proposal to shift the program from fema to hud , as long as an interagency agreement was executed within 60 days of the date of enactment and that the fy2018 budget included language "effectuating the transfer. .

the house appropriations committee report noted that fema and hud had failed to submit a plan as required by the fy2016 dhs appropriations act .

in the absence of a comprehensive plan "informed by comprehensive stakeholder outreach," the house did not recommend transferring the funds or administrative authority for efs from fema to hud .

the house also noted that if the administration wanted this change it could propose funding the program directly through hud .

the explanatory statement accompanying p.l .

115-31 noted that: if future budget requests again propose moving efsp to hud , they should do so directly within the hud budget , including the justification for moving the program ; a plan for funds transfer , including previously obligated amounts and recoveries ; a five - year strategic outlook for the program within hud ; a timeline for an interagency agreement effecting the transfer ; and a description of efforts to consult with the efsp national board on the proposed move .

