congress uses an annual appropriations process to fund the routine activities of most federal agencies .

this process anticipates the enactment of 12 regular appropriations bills to fund these activities before the beginning of the fiscal year .

when this process is delayed beyond the start of the fiscal year , one or more continuing appropriations acts ( commonly known as continuing resolutions or crs ) can be used to provide funding until action on regular appropriations is completed .

an interim continuing resolution ( cr ) typically provides that budget authority is available at a certain rate of operations or funding rate for the covered projects and activities , and for a specified period of time .

the funding rate for a project or activity is based on the total amount of budget authority that would be available annually at the referenced funding level , and is prorated based on the fraction of a year for which the interim cr is in effect .

in recent fiscal years , the referenced funding level has been the amount of budget authority that was available under specified appropriations acts from the previous fiscal year .

for example , the first cr for fy2018 ( h.r .

601 \ p.l .

115-56 ) provided , "... such amounts as may be necessary , at a rate of operations as provided in the applicable appropriations acts for fiscal year 2017. .

while a blanket continuation of the prior year's spending levels is one option for establishing the cr's funding rate , other funding levels also have been used to provide the funding rate .

for example , h.r .

601 stipulated that funding be continued at the rate provided in the applicable fy2017 appropriations bill , minus 0.6791% .

while recent crs have provided that the funding rates for certain accounts are to be calculated with reference to the funding rates in the previous year , congress could establish a cr funding rate on any basis ( eg , the president's pending budget request , the appropriations bill for the pending year as passed by the house or senate , or the bill for the pending year as reported by a committee of either chamber ) .

crs essentially lock dod funding accounts at the levels appropriated the previous year and prevent scheduled activities .

funding needs typically change from year to year across dod accounts due to a variety of factors―including emerging or increasing threats to national security―and accounts that are funded below their budgeted level under a cr cannot obligate funds at the anticipated rate .

this can restrict planned personnel actions , maintenance and training activities , and a wide variety of contracted support actions .

delaying or deferring such actions can also cause a ripple effect , generating personnel shortages , equipment maintenance backlogs , oversubscribed training courses , and a surge in end - of - year contract spending .

in testimony before the senate subcommittee on federal spending oversight and emergency management , committee on homeland security and governmental affairs , a senior government accountability office ( gao ) analyst remarked that crs can create budget uncertainty and disruptions , complicating agency operations and causing inefficiencies .

director of strategic issues heather krause asserts that "this presents challenges for federal agencies continuing to carry out their missions and plan for the future .

moreover , during a cr , agencies are often required to take the most limited funding actions. .

krause testified that agency officials report taking a variety of actions to manage inefficiencies resulting from crs , including shifting contract and grant cycles to later in the fiscal year to avoid repetitive work , and providing guidance on spending rather than allotting specific dollar amounts during crs , to provide more flexibility and reduce the workload associated with changes in funding levels .

when operating under a cr , agencies encounter consequences that can be difficult to quantify , including additional obligatory paperwork , need for additional short - term contracting actions , and other managerial complications as the affected agencies work to implement funding restrictions and other limitations that the cr imposes .

for example , the government can normally save money by buying in bulk under annual appropriations lasting a full fiscal year or enter into new contracts ( or extend their options on existing agreements ) to lock in discounts and exploit the government's purchasing power .

these advantages may be lost when operating under a cr .

all federal agencies face management challenges under a cr , but dod faces unique challenges in providing the military forces needed to deter war and defend the country .

in a letter to the leaders of the armed services committees dated september 8 , 2017 , secretary of defense james mattis asserted that "longer term crs impact the readiness of our forces and their equipment at a time when security threats are extraordinarily high .

the longer the cr , the greater the consequences for our force. .

dod officials argue that the department depends heavily on stable but flexible funding patterns and new start activities to maintain a modernized force ready to meet future threats .

former defense secretary ashton carter posited that crs put commanders in a "straight - jacket" that limits their ability to adapt , or keep pace with complex national security challenges around the world while responding to rapidly evolving threats like the islamic state .

in all but 4 of the past 40 years , congress has passed crs to enable agencies to continue operating when annual appropriation bills have not been enacted before the start of the fiscal year .

dod has started the fiscal year under a cr for 13 of the past 17 years ( fy2002-fy2018 ) and every year since fy2010 .

the average number of days of operation under a cr has increased over that same period .

dod has operated under a cr for an average of 125 days per year during the period fy2010-fy2017 compared to an average of 32 days per year during the period fy2002-fy2009 ( see figure 1 ) .

since 2010 , dod has spent over 38 months operating under a cr , compared to less than 9 months during the preceding 8 years .

senior defense officials have stated that the military services and defense agencies have consequently come to expect that a full - year appropriations bill will not be completed by the start of the fiscal year .

according to admiral john richardson , chief of naval operations , "the services are essentially operating in three fiscal quarters per year now .

nobody schedules anything important in the first quarter. .

given the frequency of crs in recent years , many dod program managers and senior leaders work well in advance of the outcome of annual decisions on appropriations to minimize contracting actions planned for the first quarter of the fiscal year .

the defense acquisition university , dod's education service for acquisition program management , imparts that , "members of the osd , the services and the acquisition community must consider late enactment to be the norm [emphasis in original] rather than the exception and , therefore , plan their acquisition strategy and obligation plans accordingly. .

replanning and executing short - term contracting actions can be reduced by building a program schedule in which planned contracting actions are pushed to later in the fiscal year when it is more likely that a full appropriation would be enacted .

additionally , managers can take steps to defer hiring actions , restrict travel policies , or cancel nonessential education and training events for personnel .

these efforts by defense officials to prepare for the potential of a cr appear to have reduced some of the need to request that specific anomalies be included in the cr .

however , former defense department comptroller mike mccord also held that no matter how the pentagon responds to these repeated cycles of crs , "there is no question that short - term funding creates enormous inefficiency.... .

