congress uses an annual appropriations process to fund discretionary spending , which supports the projects and activities of most federal government agencies .

this process anticipates the enactment of 12 regular appropriations bills each fiscal year .

if regular appropriations are not enacted prior to the start of the fiscal year ( october 1 ) , continuing appropriations may be used to provide temporary funding until the annual appropriations process can be concluded .

continuing appropriations acts are often referred to as continuing resolutions ( crs ) because they are typically enacted in the form of a joint resolution .

crs may be enacted for a period of days , weeks , or months .

if any of the 12 regular appropriations bills are not enacted by the time that the first cr for a fiscal year expires , further extensions of that cr might be enacted until all regular appropriations bills have been completed or the fiscal year ends .

none of the fy2017 regular appropriations bills was enacted prior to the enactment of h.r .

5325 .

as enacted , the measure provides continuing appropriations for projects and activities covered by 11 of the 12 regular appropriations bills from the beginning of the fiscal year — october 1 , 2016 — through december 9 , 2016 ( division c ) .

it also provides appropriations in the military construction and veterans affairs appropriations act for all of fy2017 ( division a ) , as well as emergency funds to combat the zika virus and provide relief for flood victims in louisiana and other affected states ( division b ) .

h.r .

5325 was passed by the senate and house on september 28 , 2016 , and signed into law by the president on september 29 ( p.l .

114-223 ) .

the purpose of this report is to provide an analysis of the continuing appropriations provisions in h.r .

5325 .

the first two sections summarize the overall funding provided ( "coverage , duration , and rate" ) and budget enforcement issues associated with the statutory discretionary spending limits ( "the cr and the statutory discretionary spending limits" ) .

the third section of this report provides short summaries of the provisions in this cr that are agency - , account - , or program - specific .

these summaries are organized by appropriations act title .

in some instances , additional information about those appropriations and how they operate under a cr is provided .

for general information on the content of crs and historical data on crs enacted between fy1977 and fy2016 , see crs report r42647 , continuing resolutions: overview of components and recent practices , by james v. saturno and jessica tollestrup .

this section of the report discusses the three components of a cr that generally establish the purpose , duration , and amount of funds provided by the act .

a cr's "coverage" relates to the purposes for which funds are provided .

the projects and activities funded by a cr are typically specified with reference to regular ( and , occasionally , supplemental ) appropriations acts from the previous fiscal year .

when a cr refers to one of those appropriations acts and provides funds for the projects and activities included in such an act , the cr is often referred to as "covering" that act .

the "duration" of a cr refers to the period of time for which budget authority is provided for covered activities .

crs usually fund projects and activities using a "rate for operations" or "funding rate" to provide budget authority at a restricted level , but they do not prescribe a specified dollar amount .

the funding rate for a project or activity is based on the total amount of budget authority that would be available annually for that project or activity under the referenced appropriations acts and is prorated based on the fraction of a year for which the cr is in effect .

in addition to the general provisions that establish the coverage , duration , and rate , crs typically include provisions that are specific to certain agencies , accounts , or programs .

these provisions are generally of two types .

first , certain provisions designate exceptions to the formula and purpose for which any referenced funding is extended .

these are often referred to as "anomalies. .

the purpose of anomalies is to preserve congress's constitutional prerogative to provide appropriations in the manner it sees fit , even in instances when only short - term funding is provided .

second , certain provisions may have the effect of creating new law or changing existing law .

most typically , these provisions are used to renew expiring provisions of law or extend the scope of certain existing statutory requirements to the funds provided in the cr .

substantive provisions that establish major new policies have also been included on occasion .

unless otherwise indicated , such provisions are temporary in nature and expire when the cr sunsets .

these anomalies and provisions that change law may be included at the request of the president .

congress could accept , reject , or modify these proposals in the course of drafting and considering appropriations measures that provide continuing appropriations .

in addition , congress may identify or initiate any other anomalies and provisions changing law that they want to be included in the cr .

this section of the report summarizes provisions in this cr that are agency - , account - , or program - specific , alphabetically organized by appropriations act title for 10 of the 11 regular appropriations acts covered in section 101 ( there are no anomalies concerning items funded in the state foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act ) , as well as a provision directing the use of fy2017 advance appropriations provided in the medical services account of the fy2016 military construction , veterans affairs , and related agencies appropriations act ( p.l .

114-113 , division j ) for the jason simcakoski memorial and promise act ( title ix of the comprehensive addiction and recovery act of 2016 , p.l .

114-198 ) .

the summaries generally provide brief explanations of the provisions .

in some cases they include additional information , such as whether a provision was requested by the president or included in prior year crs .

for additional information on specific provisions in the cr , congressional clients may contact the crs appropriations experts listed in table 1 at the end of the report .

