in january 2016 , senator orrin hatch , chairman of the senate finance committee , announced plans for a tax reform that would explore corporate integration .

corporate integration involves the elimination or reduction of additional taxes on corporate equity investment that arise because corporate income is taxed twice .

the corporation pays corporate tax ( at 35% for large corporations ) on its taxable income .

individuals , in turn , pay individual income taxes on dividends and on capital gains ( which arise from corporate retained earnings ) when realized .

this system of taxation produces differential tax burdens , potentially discouraging the realization of gains on the sale of corporate stock and favoring noncorporate equity investment over corporate investment , debt finance over equity finance , and retained earnings over dividends .

one goal of corporate integration is to reduce or eliminate these distortions .

work has continued on this proposal .

congress held hearings on may 17 , 2016 , on allowing a corporate dividend paid deduction and on may 24 , 2016 , on corporate integration and debt .

the focus on corporate tax integration differs from the approach in some recent tax reform plans that have largely proposed broadening the base of the corporate tax , reducing the corporate tax rate , and revising the tax treatment of foreign source income .

a number of these elements were addressed in the report of a senate finance committee working group in 2015 .

former chairman of the house ways and means committee dave camp introduced a corporate tax reform bill ( h.r .

1 ) in the 113 th congress .

a tax reform could combine these elements with an integration proposal .

corporate tax integration was the focus of a major treasury study issued in 1992 .

that study recommended approaches to integration that generally reduced or eliminated taxes at the shareholder level while retaining taxes at the corporate level , including an exclusion of dividends for shareholders .

over the years , taxes on shareholders have been reduced .

capital gains , taxed at ordinary rates under the tax reform act of 1986 ( p.l .

99-514 ) and capped at 28% in 1990 , were revised in 1997 and taxed at a maximum rate of 20% .

in 2003 , the president proposed a dividend exclusion for shareholders .

congress instead lowered tax rates on dividends ( which had been taxed historically at ordinary rates ) and capital gains , with a maximum rate of 15% .

these 2003 provisions , along with the 2001 tax cuts , were set to expire after 2010 .

after some extensions , in 2013 an agreement was reached to retain the lower tax rates on dividends and capital gains but to tax these amounts at high - income levels of 20% .

additionally , in 2010 , as part of the affordable care act ( p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) , an additional 3.8% tax was imposed on investment income , including dividends and capital gains , of high - income taxpayers .

several factors that are important in considering proposals have changed in the almost 25 years since the 1992 study , aside from the lower shareholder taxes that exist today .

one of these factors is the increased importance of a global economy and multinational firms with investments and activities in many countries .

these firms' choices with respect to the location of investment and profits are affected by firm - level rather than shareholder - level taxes .

a second change is that the fraction of shareholders who are not subject to u.s. shareholder taxes has increased , so that currently only about a quarter of corporate stock of u.s. firms is estimated to be owned by shareholders subject to u.s. individual taxes on dividends and capital gains ( compared to about half at the time of the study ) .

inflation and the expectation of inflation have also declined , affecting various relative tax rates .

finally , the growth and recognition of the importance of intangible assets that are tax - favored and are more dominant in the corporate sector affect the relative treatment of the corporate and noncorporate sectors in the aggregate .

the next section of the report , " corporate tax differentials under current law ," explains the differential effects of the current system of taxing corporate income .

the following section , " methods of addressing corporate tax distortions ," outlines the various options for addressing corporate tax integration .

the remaining sections address revenue , administrative , and efficiency concerns associated with various options ( see " revenue concerns ," " feasibility , administration , and compliance issues ," and " efficiency and other economic objectives " ) .

this section considers the current treatment of corporate and noncorporate income .

the first part of this section explains how the current system produces differential tax rates along different margins , not only by sector or form of finance but also by asset in the presence of tax preferences .

the next section provides estimates of the effective tax rate differentials that the current system produces , in preparation for subsequently discussing potential efficiency gains of the options discussed in the following section .

a number of approaches to integration or otherwise reducing the distortions caused by the corporate tax are possible .

these approaches can be divided into three basic types: ( 1 ) full integration ; ( 2 ) partial integration , which addresses only dividends ; and ( 3 ) proposals that also address the treatment of interest .

they also differ in other features including whether relief is provided at the firm level or the shareholder level , the administrative challenges , how tax - exempt and foreign shareholders are treated , how preferences are treated , and the potential revenue challenges .

the revenue effects , administrative and compliance issues , and efficiency effects will be discussed subsequently .

note that in the analysis of revenue and of efficiency effects , it is assumed that the tax treatment of u.s. shareholders of foreign firms is not changed , and that any attributions of income or payment of dividends taxed at ordinary rates , exclusions , or other changes , would be confined to stockholders of u.s. firms .

under some circumstances , such as those where tax rates are increased at the shareholder level in return for reduced tax at the corporate level , this treatment could be seen as appropriate .

in cases where taxes at the shareholder level are eliminated , it might be desirable to eliminate them on shares of foreign stock to simplify tax laws .

revenue impacts are an important consideration in any tax reform proposal .

this section examines whether proposals are likely to lose revenue and under what circumstances .

note that these revenue estimates are approximations .

their purpose is to determine general magnitudes , which will be informative of the feasibility of various proposals if revenue neutrality is also a goal .

the first step is to estimate current revenues , which then can be used as a base to compare proposals .

subsequent sections present estimates of the effects of full integration options , partial integration options , and restrictions on debt .

the full integration options are ( 1 ) the shareholder allocation with and without refundable corporate withholding taxes , ( 2 ) the mark - to - market proposal , and ( 3 ) taxation only at the corporate level .

the partial integration options include ( 1 ) dividend deductions with and without refundability , ( 2 ) dividend exclusions , and ( 3 ) additional revenue reductions for dividend proposals if capital gains taxes are also eliminate .

two proposals would clearly simplify tax administration and compliance: ( 1 ) taxing only at the corporate level ( which would eliminate all shareholder taxes ) and ( 2 ) the dividend exclusion .

the various shareholder allocation and dividend deduction proposals would add to the compliance burden with additional calculations by the shareholders to claim the credit , although if taxes on capital gains could be eliminated entirely ( i.e. , gains and losses because the net gain differed from the appreciation in value due to retained earnings also not be subject to tax ) , this change might lead to overall reductions in compliance costs .

the mark - to - market approach is uncertain in its impact .

it would initially appear that the mark - to - market proposal would eliminate the need to measure and calculate corporate tax liability including all of the deductions and credits that make up tax preferences , as well as the ordinary requirements of measuring depreciation and other costs .

for multinational firms that operate abroad , as well as u.s. subsidiaries of foreign parents , however , the corporate tax base must be calculated to address transfer pricing disputes between firms and their affiliates .

and , if a supplementary corporate tax were needed for revenue purposes , this administrative gain would not be realized .

taxes at the shareholder level would be simpler in some respects with no need for special treatment of dividends and gains on stock , but would be complicated by the need to mark to market .

this task could presumably be carried out by brokers and required to be reported on irs 1099 forms .

an additional concern about the mark - to - market approach is that income tax is being assessed on income that is not realized , which can create a cash flow issue .

this issue would be most serious for stock in companies that paid little or no dividends .

of course , the presence of tax reduction at the firm level should encourage firms to pay additional dividends out of those savings to finance shareholder tax payments , or alternatively taxpayers may self - select into firms that pay dividends in the presence of a cash flow issue .

finally , shareholders could always sell a portion of their stock to pay the tax .

a proposal that is accompanied by disallowance of interest deductions would also result in additional complexity for financial institutions , and other intermediaries ; presumably intermediaries ( such as banks and mutual funds ) would report the category of interest income ( tax - exempt or taxable ) .

the traditional objective of corporate tax integration is efficiency: to , as stated in the 1992 treasury report , reduce the distortions between corporate and noncorporate investment , between debt and equity finance , and between retaining and distributing earnings .

one might add to that , as compared with the partnership method , reductions in incentives to hold stock rather than sell stock to avoid the taxation of gain embodied in retained earnings .

another issue , intertwined with the others , is the distortions in allocation of investment caused by tax preferences .

the growth of international tax concerns since the 1992 report has expanded the scope of economic objectives to include disincentives to invest in the united states that occur by virtue of the concentration of corporate taxes at the firm level .

in addition , associated issues , such as retained earnings abroad in foreign subsidiaries that are only taxed when repatriated as a dividend , shifting profits to low - or no - tax jurisdictions , and inverting ( merging with a smaller foreign firm and making another country headquarters of the new combined firm ) have elevated interest in corporate tax reform .

this discussion begins with the traditional issues , followed by a review of consequences for taxation and behavior of multinational firms .

the proposals for integration in this report were examined in the light of revenue adequacy , administrative feasibility , and economic efficiency gains in reducing distortions .

all have drawbacks , which arise in part from the large fraction of tax - exempt or largely tax - exempt shareholders and in part from the increasing international concerns about profit shifting , repatriation , and inversions .

some proposals that initially appear to be ruled out by revenue inadequacy are shareholder allocation plans and dividend deductions with refundable credits .

however , these might be brought into revenue - neutral compliance with provisions disallowing interest deductions , eliminating tax preferences , and perhaps using only partial deductions .

provisions with nonrefundable credits could more easily achieve revenue neutrality with these additional changes and might even allow downward adjustments of corporate rates .

disallowing interest deductions has a number of potential benefits as well as helping to address revenue gaps , including addressing one of the largest distortions of all , the difference between debt and equity finance in the corporate sector .

it also would address issues such as profit shifting and inversions .

this debt - equity distortion also exists within the noncorporate sector as well , although it is not as serious , particularly if more creditors are taxable .

and although the treatment of debt creates a distortion within the noncorporate sector , it helps to even out the treatment between aggregate investment in the corporate and noncorporate sectors .

the major limitation associated with this approach is that it is administratively difficult to provide exclusions of interest income on the creditor's side .

most creditors do not pay tax on interest income , so that might not be a disqualifying problem .

it also would be possible to consider more limited approaches , such as disallowing the deduction for the inflation portion of interest , or a partial disallowance without making corrections on the creditor's side .

the mark - to - market proposal , because it taxes global economic income , eliminates a number of distortions both domestic and foreign .

mark - to - market issues with revenue inadequacy can be addressed , although they may present political challenges .

although keeping nonprofits at the same effective tax rate by imposing a tax on their earnings under mark to market is no different from keeping them at the same effective tax rate by imposing a nonrefundable withholding tax for dividend deductions , the former may be more obvious and more difficult politically .

similarly , foreign shareholders of u.s. firms are benefitting and it may be appropriate to increase taxes on them in a way consistent with a neutral burden .

even if these issues could be addressed , a major issue with the mark - to - market proposal , one that would be very difficult to overcome , is taxation of income ( reflecting capital gains ) even though stocks are not sold and income is not realized .

