this report provides background information and a summary of federal programs related to behavioral health among the american indian and alaska native ( ai / an ) population .

both congress and the administration have demonstrated an interest in addressing ai / an behavioral health .

congressional hearings have focused on behavioral health problems such as alcohol use disorders , drug use disorders , and youth suicide in the ai / an population .

members have introduced legislation containing behavioral health elements as part of larger efforts to improve the health of the ai / an population .

for example , some bills would call for recommendations to improve behavioral health ( among other things ) or fund demonstration projects addressing behavioral health ( among other things ) .

in 2014 , the president specifically mentioned behavioral health problems such as substance abuse and suicide in his remarks when he announced the creation of generation indigenous ( gen - i ) , a federal initiative that collaborates with organizations such as the aspen institute to assist tribal youth through programs , policies , and leadership opportunities .

this report begins by clarifying the scope of information covered .

it then provides background information about ai / an behavioral health — including the high prevalence of risk factors , the high prevalence of specific behavioral health problems , and limited access to care .

the report then summarizes each of the programs that meet criteria for inclusion .

it concludes with a brief discussion of how an understanding of the scope and limits of existing programs might inform certain policy decisions .

behavioral health among the ai / an population is a broad and potentially amorphous topic .

this report limits the scope by setting parameters for ( 1 ) the definition of behavioral health used , ( 2 ) the definition of the ai / an population used , ( 3 ) the federal agencies included , and ( 4 ) the types of programs included .

research on ai / an behavioral health demonstrates three key points: the ai / an population has ( 1 ) a high prevalence of risk factors for behavioral health problems , ( 2 ) a high prevalence of behavioral health problems , and ( 3 ) limited access to care for behavioral health problems .

ihs and samhsa have programs aimed at improving ai / an behavioral health .

in some cases , both agencies have programs with the same ( or a very similar ) specific focus ( eg , suicide prevention ) .

given the fundamental differences between the two agencies — with ihs primarily delivering health care services and samhsa primarily awarding grants — programs with similar names or goals may not be comparable .

programs and grants are listed separately below according to agency .

the programs in this report do not represent a comprehensive list of ihs programs that may treat behavioral health conditions and samhsa programs for which its and tos are eligible .

that is , ai / ans may receive behavioral health services as part of ihs programs that are not focused on behavioral health , and its or tos may receive funds from samhsa programs that have not been identified as particularly relevant to the ai / an population .

furthermore , some of the samhsa programs included in this report are not limited to its , tos , or the ai / an population .

for these reasons , presenting funding for the included programs would be misleading — underestimating spending in ai / an behavioral health in some ways and overestimating it in others .

this report is not intended to capture federal spending on ai / an behavioral health and does not include funding for the programs .

this report is intended to provide background information about behavioral health among the ai / an population and a summary of the most relevant federal programs .

the report is not intended to address policy options for modifying , eliminating , or adding such programs ( and future crs reports may explore these policies in greater detail ) ; however , the information in this report may help policymakers address a range of potential policy issues related to ai / an behavioral health care .

for example , one challenge that ihs and samhsa - supported programs face is the shortage of behavioral health providers , particularly in rural areas , where much of the ihs beneficiary population resides .

ihs , samhsa , and the health resources and services administration ( which administers the majority of federal health workforce programs ) are seeking to address these workforce issues .

policymakers may consider coordinating or modifying existing workforce programs to reduce the effects of workforce shortages on programs that support ai / an behavioral health prevention and treatment .

however , policymakers may face fiscal constraints in doing so , as a number of these programs have more applicants than can be supported with the funding available .

as another example , some research has found that improving access to culturally competent care ( eg , through integration of traditional ai / an healing practices with mainstream health care ) may lead to better health outcomes and better patient satisfaction .

although some existing federal programs aim to increase the number of ai / an behavioral health care providers ( eg , the american indians into psychology program ) , such training may take years to complete and may train only a limited number of providers .

policymakers may consider additional approaches to increase the culturally competent workforce , such as programs teaching qualified health care providers from other racial and ethnic groups about elements of ai / an culture .

policymakers may consider whether current data are sufficient to determine the need for programs and to evaluate their effectiveness .

as noted above , data collection is complicated by several factors: efforts to identify the ai / an population in research may be confounded by differences between self - identification and tribal membership ( or program eligibility ) ; getting a sufficient sample size for analysis of specific behavioral health conditions and comparison with other populations is difficult because the ai / an population is comparatively small ; and mapping the rates of conditions to the ai / an population served is an ongoing challenge .

policymakers may consider requiring additional data collection or may find that the need for services is so apparent that additional data collection is not necessary .

finally , many of the behavioral issues that ai / ans experience may be related to the ai / an socioeconomic conditions .

as such , policymakers may consider the balance among programs that address behavioral health directly , programs that address the socioeconomic conditions of ai / an ( which may affect behavioral health indirectly ) , and programs that address some combination of the two .

similarly , policymakers may consider whether they would like to see evaluations of the association ( if any ) between implementation of programs aimed at improving socioeconomic conditions and subsequent changes in the rates of behavioral health conditions .

