the 115 th congress and the trump administration are reviewing existing u.s. policies and programs in sub - saharan africa ( henceforth , "africa" ) as they establish their budgetary and policy priorities toward the region while also responding to emerging crises .

key issues for congress include the authorization and appropriation of u.s. aid to africa , the authorization and appropriation of funds for u.s. military activities on the continent , and oversight of u.s. programs and policies .

in support of congressional deliberations , this report provides background on select issues related to africa and u.s. policy in the format of frequently asked questions .

much of africa experienced rapid economic growth starting in the early 2000s , which spurred middle class expansion .

growth in many countries has slowed since 2015 , however , and most african countries still face significant development challenges .

these include unmet needs for health , education , and other social services — particularly for large youth populations — as well as climate and environmental shocks .

among the factors that hinder investment and economic growth are poor governance and infrastructure , poverty and low domestic demand , a lack of skilled labor , limited access to inputs and capital , political instability , and insecurity .

since the early 1990s , nearly all african countries have transitioned from military or single - party rule to at least nominally multiparty political systems in which elections are held regularly .

nonetheless , the development of accountable , functional democratic institutions remains limited in many countries .

state institutions often lack sufficient human and financial capacities and / or are beset by problems such as corruption and mismanagement .

enhancing democracy , the rule of law , and respect for human rights in the region have long been u.s. policy priorities , often as mandated by congress .

u.s. efforts to promote democracy , human rights , and economic development on the continent have been pursued through the use of diplomacy , foreign aid or restrictions on assistance , preferential tariff treatment , or the sanctioning or prosecution of human rights violators , often under close congressional oversight .

armed conflict and instability continue to threaten regional security , impede development , and contribute to widespread human suffering and humanitarian crises .

long - running civil conflicts continue to affect parts of the democratic republic of congo ( drc ) , somalia , and sudan , while newer conflicts have unfolded in recent years in the lake chad basin , the central african republic ( car ) , mali , and south sudan .

in a number of african countries , porous borders , weak state institutions , and corruption have created permissive environments for transnational threats , including terrorism , illicit trafficking , and maritime piracy .

three african countries — south sudan , nigeria , and somalia — face famine or a credible risk of famine in 2017 ; in each case , security - related restrictions have hindered humanitarian access to the affected populations .

the obama administration pursued several global development initiatives that sought to benefit africa , as well as a number of africa - specific initiatives and major programs .

in 2012 , the obama administration released a policy document entitled u.s. strategy toward sub - saharan africa , which prioritized as u.s. goals the strengthening of democratic institutions ; the expansion of economic growth , trade , and investment ; the advancement of peace and security ; and the promotion of opportunity and development .

the document did not represent a dramatic departure from traditional u.s. policy goals in africa , but it signaled a high - level effort to promote an integrated , comprehensive u.s. approach toward sub - saharan africa .

analysts continue to debate whether that strategy reflected an appropriate mix and ranking of priorities , and the degree to which the obama administration's actions reflected its stated goals .

trump administration views on many u.s. - africa policy issues have not been publicly stated .

in his first weeks in office , president trump called the presidents of several key african states , including south africa , nigeria , and kenya .

nationals of two african countries , somalia and sudan , are subject to a revised executive order on immigration signed by president trump in march 2017 that temporarily suspends , with some exceptions , entry into the united states by nationals of six countries identified as presenting a security threat .

other administration priorities remain unspecified , and may be contingent on forthcoming senior official appointments .

armed conflict and instability in parts of africa continue to threaten regional security , impede development and investment , and contribute to widespread human suffering .

this is underscored by the fact that multiple african countries rank among the most fragile states globally , according to the fragile states index ( see figure 2 ) .

a majority of the u.n.'s peacekeeping operations are located in sub - saharan africa , with eight missions currently authorized in the region .

the u.n. - authorized african union mission in somalia ( amisom ) is not u.n. - conducted , but it carries out peacekeeping activities , as well as broader stabilization and counterterrorist operations , primarily against the al qaeda - linked group al shabaab .

under the u.n. system of assessed financial contributions to peacekeeping , the united states is the top source of funding for u.n. peacekeeping missions , providing over a quarter of their cost .

the united states is a major funder of regional stabilization operations in africa , drawing on bilateral security assistance funding to prepare troop contributors and support deployment logistics .

the united states also supports various conflict prevention , mitigation , and mediation efforts in africa .

in addition to intrastate conflicts and localized instability , the continent faces diverse transnational threats , which continue to pose a challenge to both african and u.s. interests .

across africa , porous borders , weak government institutions , and corruption have created permissive environments for such threats , including operations by terrorist groups , illicit trafficking ( eg , of narcotics and people ) , and maritime piracy .

violent extremism .

violent islamist extremist groups in northwest and east africa — including al qaeda in the islamic maghreb ( aqim ) , al shabaab ( somalia ) , boko haram ( the lake chad basin region ) , and several emergent groups active in mali — threaten state stability , regional security , and u.s. national security interests .

while such groups have historically been most active in rural areas where there is little government presence , since 2013 there have been several mass casualty terrorist attacks targeting big city hotels , malls , and restaurants popular with westerners ( eg , in nairobi , kenya ; bamako , mali ; ouagadougou , burkina faso ; and grand bassam [near abidjan],cote d'ivoire ) .

other transnational threats .

in some parts of the continent , weak law enforcement and justice mechanisms — as well as collusion by state actors — have allowed transnational crime networks to operate with relative impunity .

in some countries , these syndicates may threaten state stability .

u.s. concern has grown over potential links between africa - based drug traffickers and terrorist groups — notably in connection with the transit through africa of latin american cocaine bound for europe and southwest asian heroin bound for various destinations .

reported links between armed extremist or insurgent groups and wildlife trafficking networks are another growing security concern , as is a rise in illegal poaching and wildlife trafficking generally .

maritime security .

africa's coastal waters , particularly along the gulf of guinea , the gulf of aden , and the western indian ocean , have been highly susceptible to illegal fishing , trafficking , and piracy in recent years .

african governments have generally been unable to adequately police the region's waters .

criminal elements exploiting the absence of state controls smuggle people , drugs , and weapons , and dump hazardous waste .

maritime commerce and offshore oil production facilities in some regions have faced high rates of maritime piracy , involving both theft and kidnapping for ransom , and sabotage .

waters off nigeria and in the broader gulf of guinea rank among the most dangerous in the world for acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea .

while the waters off the somali coast have seen a dramatic reduction in pirate attacks in the past five years as a result of international antipiracy efforts , analysts warn of the continued threat of piracy in the region .

in march 2017 , pirates seized an oil tanker off the somali coast of the indian ocean , marking the first hijacking of a large commercial vessel in waters off the somali coast since 2012 .

the 115 th congress has commenced consideration of current and prospective u.s. policies toward africa , as well as appropriations for u.s. foreign assistance , diplomacy , and military activities .

these discussions are progressing in the context of the trump administration's release on march 16 , 2017 , of its fy2018 "budget blueprint," which suggests significant shifts in executive branch foreign policy priorities and foreign aid funding levels .

the implications for u.s. africa policy , u.s. diplomatic relations with african governments , and aid programs on the continent remain to be seen .

other legislative initiatives and oversight activities are also likely to shape u.s. policy toward africa and toward specific countries , as was the case in the 114 th and previous congresses .

congressional responses to emerging crises , such as famine concerns in three african countries , increasingly intractable conflicts in south sudan and mali ( among others ) , transnational security threats , and the appropriate balance between u.s. diplomacy , development , and defense priorities in africa , may also influence or direct u.s. policy .

