congress's role in the united states' relationship with sri lanka is not limited exclusively to oversight of the administration's policy .

congress's role also includes decisions on a range of legislative issues including foreign assistance funding for democracy promotion , good governance , ethnic and religious reconciliation , demining , foreign military financing , and other measures .

in this context , sri lanka may be of increasing interest to members as the country's progress on constitutional and democratic reforms and ethnic reconciliation unfolds in the year ahead .

one question that may trigger increased congressional interest , for example , is whether what some observers may see as inadequate progress in furthering ethnic reconciliation should inhibit the united states' further developing bilateral relations , especially at a time when china has been seeking to develop and expand its trade , investment , and geopolitical influence in sri lanka and the broader indian ocean region .

this report provides the context within which congress will make both programmatic and oversight decisions , covering questions such as: what is the nature and direction of sri lanka's political landscape and democratic reform process ? .

what is sri lanka's geopolitical position in the indian ocean region ? .

what are the primary considerations congress should have in mind as it addresses decisions related to sri lanka ? .

should congress place requirements on the new administration as it develops its policy toward sri lanka ? .

the challenges facing sri lanka today are not limited to the political realm .

deforestation has been a serious problem with negative implications for global climate change and biodiversity .

deforestation is responsible for an estimated 10% - 12% of all global warming emissions .

according to one source , sri lanka's forest cover was depleted from 31.2% of the island in 1999 to 29.7% in 2010 with actual rates of forest depletion slowing to 0.23% of forest cover annually .

the forest department has set a goal of 35% forest cover for sri lanka by 2020 .

sri lanka is one of the most biologically diverse nations in asia , and an estimated one - quarter of tourists visiting the country visit one of sri lanka's national parks .

sri lanka instituted a ban on logging of natural forests in 1990 .

sri lanka also was devastated by the december 26 , 2004 , tsunami caused by a 9.1 magnitude earthquake off sumatra that affected 14 countries in the indian ocean region .

as many as 40,000 people may have died in sri lanka as a result of the tsunami .

the economic damage and loss to sri lanka was estimated to be as much as $1.45 billion , and an estimated 400,000 workers in sri lanka lost their means of livelihood as fishing boats as well as banana , rice , and mango plantations , and houses and infrastructure were destroyed .

the sri lankan economy is on less solid footing in 2016 than it was previously .

sri lanka experienced high rates of economic growth in the immediate post - war period due to increased investment and high rates of remittances from sri lankans working abroad .

interest payments on government debt accounted for 35% of government revenue and the budget deficit widened to 7.4% of gdp in 2015 .

government debt was also 76% of gdp in 2015 .

gdp growth is projected to be 5.1% in 2016 and average an annual rate of 5.2% for the period 2016-2020 .

the government's policies of increasing salaries and pensions for public servants and cutting taxes despite a slowing economy contributed to the balance of payments crisis .

sri lanka requested imf support and received an imf bailout package of $1.5 billion in march 2016 .

this package will require the government to increase tax revenues and cut the budget deficit .

in june 2016 , it was reported that the government will seek to raise the tax - to - gdp ratio from 10.8% in 2014 to 15% by 2020 through a new inland revenue act , reform of the value added tax , and the customs code .

remittances are a significant part of sri lanka's economy .

remittance growth declined from 9.5% in 2014 to 0.8% in november 2015 .

one possible explanation for this was optimism for investment immediately following the end of the war .

an estimated 55% of sri lanka's $3.8 billion in remittances in 2014 came from the middle east .

approximately one - quarter of sri lanka's total migrant workers are employed in saudi arabia .

sri lanka is situated near strategically important sea lanes that transit the indian ocean .

these sea lanes link the energy - rich persian gulf with the economies of asia .

the inaugural united states sri lanka partnership dialogue in february 2016 discussed sri lanka's "pivotal geo - strategic location within the indian ocean region and how to strengthen cooperation on issues of regional importance. .

more than 60,000 ships carrying 66% of the world's oil and 50% of the world's container shipments transit the sea lanes near sri lanka and the maldives each year .

members of congress and their staff have a range of interests related to sri lanka , both general and specific .

generally , members' interests may include consideration of foreign operations budget requests related to sri lanka ; potential hearings on bilateral relations , democratic reforms , and trade and investment ; the house democracy partnership with sri lanka ; the congressional caucus for ethnic and religious freedom in sri lanka ; ambassadorial confirmation hearings ; and meetings with sri lankan delegations .

more specifically , congress may be interested in exercising oversight in a number of areas including the administration's policy toward sri lanka with regard to support for democratic reform , ethnic reconciliation , human rights and transitional justice , geopolitics related to india and china in the indian ocean region , trade and investment , military - to - military relations , and the environment .

the united states has indicated its support for sri lanka's "unity , territorial integrity and democratic institutions" and is a "strong supporter of ethnic reconciliation. .

the united states has also provided over $2 billion in development assistance to sri lanka since 1948 .

the state department described sri lanka's 2015 presidential election as having "ushered in a new political era and opportunity for renewed u.s. diplomatic and development engagement. .

secretary of state john kerry visited colombo in may 2015 and congratulated sri lanka for continuing steps toward reconciliation at the u.s. - sri lanka partnership dialogue in february 2016 .

during his visit , secretary of state john kerry stated ... true peace is more than the absence of war .

true and lasting peace , especially after a civil conflict , requires policies that foster reconciliation , not resentment .

it demands that all citizens of the nation be treated with equal respect and equal rights , and that no one be made to feel excluded or subjugated .

in august 2016 , united states ambassador to sri lanka atul keshap noted the positive steps taken in a number of other areas: we applaud the establishment in law of an office of missing persons to help families who still grieve and seek answers .

we know the government has committed to establish truth and reconciliation and judicial mechanisms to investigate war crimes ; to replace the prevention of terrorism act ; to charge or release the remaining security - related detainees ; dismantle the culture of surveillance ; end discrimination against minorities ; return more land ; boost an open and free society for journalists and civil society ; and promote reconciliation and forge a reconciled , united , peaceful , prosperous sri lanka .

through its aid and diplomacy the united states has indicated that it supports initiatives that "increase accountability and transparency ; protect human rights and fundamental freedoms ; strengthen rule of law and democratic institutions ; increase security and stability ; promote reconciliation , interfaith harmony , and interethnic understanding ; and bolster good governance and economic growth. .

the united states and sri lanka have a strong trade relationship .

the united states is sri lanka's single largest market with approximately 25% of the nation's exports reaching the united states .

sri lanka's largest exports are garments , tea , spices , rubber , gems and jewelry , refined petroleum , fish , and coconuts / coconut products .

other large trading partners include neighboring india and several european union nations .

while china is not one of sri lanka's largest trade partners , it is a growing investment partner .

in december 2015 , the millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) board of directors selected sri lanka as eligible to develop a threshold program .

mcc threshold program assistance supports government efforts at reform .

the united states and sri lanka adopted a joint action plan to boost bilateral trade at the 12 th u.s. - sri lanka trade and investment framework ( tifa ) meeting in april 2016 .

u.s. goods exports to sri lanka increased 4.7% from 2014 to 2015 and were valued at $372 million .

the obama administration has sought to broaden and deepen the u.s. relationship with sri lanka , and the inaugural u.s. - sri lanka partnership dialogue was held in washington , dc , in february 2016 .

the dialogue discussed sri lanka's pivotal geostrategic location within the indian ocean region as well as economic cooperation , governance , development , and people - to - people ties .

the united states expressed its support for sri lanka's "plans for constitutional and legislative reform including public consultations on a new constitution and the repeal of the prevention of terrorism act. .

in considering how sensitive u.s. policy should be concerning the sinhalese buddhist majority's insecurities relative to tamil demands for greater autonomy , congress may assess the possibility , according to some observers , that western pressure could create opportunities for political factions from within the sinhalese buddhist community that would be less likely to adopt reconciliation measures with the tamil minority should they come to power .

on the other hand , it is also argued that without western pressure the prospects for true ethnic reconciliation are diminished .

looking forward , congress may consider a number of questions as it considers legislation and exercises oversight of policy related to sri lanka: does sri lanka's strategic significance merit stronger bilateral ties with colombo ? .

what is the nature of sri lanka's political and constitutional reform process ? .

should the united states continue to provide democracy assistance ? .

how sensitive should u.s. policy be to the sinhalese buddhist majority's insecurities relative to tamil demands for greater autonomy ? .

what are the policy implications of the sirisena government's level of sensitivity ? .

is the sirisena government's progress on ethnic reconciliation sufficient to justify enhanced collaboration and increase u.s. foreign assistance or should such assistance be diminished pending further improvement in this area ? .

is there a danger that by pushing colombo too hard on ethnic reconciliation the united states and the international community could unintentionally limit the sirisena government's political room for maneuver to achieve moderate efforts of reconciliation ? .

what are china's strategic interests in sri lanka and the indian ocean region ? .

are these potentially a threat to u.s. interests ? .

how do they relate to india's strategic interests ? .

congress may choose to reevaluate u.s. assistance programs toward sri lanka as the new administration develops its policy and as events unfold in sri lanka .

the new administration may , or may not , seek funding for policy objectives which may differ with current policy objectives .

events in sri lanka may also affect congressional decisionmakers' attitudes toward funding decisions as progress is , or is not , made in a number of areas of importance to members .

