russia , formally known as the russian federation , is the principal successor to the united states' former superpower rival , the union of soviet socialist republics ( ussr , or soviet union ) .

in its modern form , russia came into being in december 1991 , after its leaders joined those of neighboring ukraine and belarus to dissolve the ussr .

from 1922 to 1991 , soviet russia was the core of the ussr , established in the wake of the bolshevik revolution of 1917 and the civil war that followed .

the ussr spanned much the same territory as the russian empire before it .

prior to the empire's establishment in 1721 , russian states had existed in various forms for centuries .

today , russia's multiethnic federal structure is inherited from the soviet period and includes regions , republics , territories , and other subunits .

the country's constitution provides for a strong presidency and central authority .

the government is accountable to the president , not the legislature , and observers consider the presidential administration rather than the cabinet ( headed by a prime minister ) to be "the true locus of power. .

russia's president is vladimir putin , who has led the country as president ( 2000-2008 , 2012-present ) or prime minister ( 2008-2012 ) for more than 17 years ( see "vladimir putin" text box , below ) .

in recent years , opinion polls have reported increased levels of support for president putin .

since the annexation of ukraine's crimea region in march 2014 , he has consistently received approval from more than 80% of respondents in opinion polls .

this reported approval level is considerably higher than what putin received in polls over the previous two years , when his approval rating was in the low 60s .

russia's bicameral legislature is the federal assembly .

the upper chamber , the federation council , has 170 deputies , two each from russia's 83 regions and republics ( including two major cities , moscow and st. petersburg ) and four from ukraine's occupied region of crimea .

these deputies are not directly elected but are chosen by regional executives and legislatures .

the lower house , the state duma , has 450 deputies , half of which are elected by proportional representation and half of which are in single - member districts .

the state duma also includes members from occupied crimea: four from majoritarian districts and another four from party lists .

the judiciary is the least developed of russia's three branches .

courts are widely perceived to be subject to manipulation and control by government officials .

the supreme court is the highest appellate body .

the constitutional court rules on the legality and constitutionality of governmental acts and on disputes between branches of government or federative entities .

a 2015 law gives the constitutional court the legal authority to disregard verdicts by interstate bodies that defend human rights and freedoms , if the court concludes that such verdicts contradict russia's constitution ( although the latter requires compliance of rules established by international treaties over domestic law ) .

a supreme commercial court , which handled commercial disputes and was viewed by experts as relatively impartial , was dissolved in september 2014 , with its areas of jurisdiction transferred to the supreme court ; lower - level commercial courts continue to function .

the russian economy has gone through periods of decline , growth , and stagnation since 1991 .

in the first seven years after the dissolution of the soviet union ( 1992-1998 ) , russia experienced an average annual decline in gross domestic product ( gdp ) of 6.8% .

a decade of strong economic growth followed , in which russia's gdp increased on average 6.9% per year .

the surge in economic growth — largely the result of increases in world oil prices — helped to raise the russian standard of living and brought a significant degree of economic stability .

the russian economy was hit hard by the global financial crisis and resulting economic downturn that began in 2008 .

the crisis exposed weaknesses in the economy , including its significant dependence on the production and export of oil and other natural resources and its weak financial system .

the russian government's reassertion of control over major industries , especially in the energy sector , also contributed to an underachieving economy .

as a result , russia's period of economic growth came to an abrupt end by 2009 .

although russian real gdp increased 5.2% in 2008 , it declined by 7.8% in 2009 .

russia began to emerge from its recession in 2010 , with 4.5% gdp growth that year , but by 2013 growth had again slowed to 1.3% .

since 2014 , two external shocks — low oil prices and international sanctions — have contributed to considerable economic challenges .

in particular , russia has grappled with the following: economic contraction , with growth slowing to 0.7% in 2014 before contracting by 2.8% in 2015 ; capital flight , with net private capital outflows from russia totaling $152 billion in 2014 , compared to $60 billion in 2013 ; rapid depreciation of the ruble , more than 50% against the dollar over the course of 2014 ; increasing inflation , from 6.8% in 2013 to 15.5% in 2015 ; declining trade , with the dollar value of exports and imports down by 31% and 36% , respectively , from 2014 to 2015 ; budgetary pressures , with the budget deficit widening from 1.2% in 2013 to 3.4% in 2015 ; drawing on international reserves to offset fiscal challenges , with reserves falling from almost $500 billion in january 2014 to $356 billion in april 2015 ; and more widespread poverty , which increased from 16.1 million living in poverty in 2014 to 19.2 million in 2015 ( 13.4% of the population ) .

during 2016 , russia's economy largely stabilized , even as sanctions remained in place .

russia's economy only slightly contracted ( 0.2% ) ; net private sector capital outflows slowed , from more than $150 billion in 2014 to $19.8 billion in 2016 ; inflation fell by more than half since 2015 , to 7.0% ; the value of the ruble stabilized ; reserves began to rise ; and the government successfully sold new bonds in international capital markets in may 2016 .

around 19.8 million ( 13.5% of the population ) were estimated to be living in poverty .

net inflows of foreign direct investment ( fdi ) into russia , which essentially came to a halt in late 2014 and early 2015 , started to resume in 2016 .

most notably , a consortium of the qatar investment authority ( qia , qatar's national sovereign wealth fund ) and glencore , a swiss - based mining and commodity trading firm , purchased 19.5% of the state - controlled rosneft , russia's largest oil company , for €10.2 billion ( about $10.6 billion at the time ) .

according to the international monetary fund ( imf ) , russia's economy is projected to grow by 1.4% in 2017 .

the imf argues that after two years of recession , the economy is recovering due to a rise in oil prices and improved investor sentiment but that the medium - term prospects are subdued given oil prices still well below their peak and structural weaknesses in russia's economy .

low oil prices also have strained the government budget , which ran a deficit of 3.7% of gdp in 2016 , but the fiscal outlook has improved as oil prices have stabilized , with a budget deficit of 1.9% of gdp projected for 2017 .

the government has tapped one of russia's sovereign wealth funds , the reserve fund , to address the budget shortfall , and its resources have fallen to about $16 billion from $143 billion in 2008 .

the government is considering consolidating its two sovereign wealth funds as the government continues to face budget shortfalls .

russia's other sovereign wealth fund , the national wealth fund , was designed to help balance the pension system and has about $75 billion .

in the longer term , russia's economy faces long - standing structural challenges , including slow economic diversification , weak protection of property rights , burdensome administrative procedures , state involvement in the economy , and adverse demographic dynamics .

the imf argues that sanctions dampen the potential for accelerating investment growth .

some analysts also have noted that the low value of the ruble may hamper russia's attempts to innovate and modernize its economy and that the economy's continued reliance on oil makes it vulnerable to another drop in oil prices .

despite western sanctions and russia's own retaliatory ban against agricultural imports , the eu as a whole remains russia's largest trading partner .

in 2016 , 47% of russia's merchandise exports went to eu member states and 38% of its merchandise imports came from eu member states .

by country , russia's top three merchandise export destinations were the netherlands ( 10% ) , china ( 10% ) , and germany ( 7% ) , and its top three sources of merchandise imports were china ( 21% ) , germany ( 11% ) , and the united states ( 6% ) .

in recent years , many members of congress and other u.s. policymakers have paid growing attention to russia's active and increasingly forceful foreign policy , both toward neighboring states , such as georgia and ukraine , and in regard to operations further afield , such as the intervention in syria and interference in political processes in europe and the united states .

these actions have even resurrected talk of a new cold war .

although russian foreign policy has been increasingly active , observers note that the principles guiding it have been largely consistent since the soviet union's collapse in 1991 .

one principle is to reestablish russia as the center of political gravity for the post - soviet region and to minimize the military and political influence of rival powers , particularly nato and more recently the eu .

a second principle is to establish russia as one of a handful of dominant poles in global politics , capable in particular of competing ( and , where necessary , cooperating ) with the united states .

beyond these fundamentals , debates exist on a number of related issues .

such issues include whether strong responses by outside powers can deter russian aggression or whether these responses run a risk of escalating conflict ; how much states that disagree with russia on key issues can cooperate with moscow ; whether the russian government is primarily implementing a strategic vision or reacting to circumstances and the actions of others ; and the extent to which the russian leadership takes actions abroad to strengthen its domestic position .

russia's armed forces surprised most u.s. and european observers with their actions in ukraine starting in march 2014 and in syria from september 2015 .

since the end of the cold war , conventional wisdom about the russian military has tended to indicate a force in relative decline , with aging soviet - era equipment and with technology and a philosophy of warfare lagging well behind that of the united states and other nato members .

analysts have noted that the shortcomings of russia's military appeared to be confirmed by its relatively lackluster performance in the 2008 conflict with georgia ( see " russia and other post - soviet states ," above ) .

over the past three years , however , many analysts have been struck by the improved capabilities exhibited by the russian military , as well as the unexpected ways in which russia has used its military: russian special forces , elite airborne troops , and naval infantry effected a swift and bloodless seizure of ukraine's crimea region in march 2014 .

the subsequent russian involvement in the conflict in eastern ukraine highlighted the practice of "hybrid warfare," centered on the use of irregular "separatist" forces covertly backed by regular military troops , along with an information and propaganda campaign orchestrated to create misdirection and spread an alternate international narrative .

the campaign in syria , in addition to serving a number of broader russian interests and diplomatic objectives , has allowed russia to test and display how various components of its military work together in an expeditionary setting .

the syria operation has demonstrated noteworthy capabilities , such as the launch of long - range cruise missiles from naval vessels in the caspian sea and the deployment of russia's most modern combat aircraft .

it also has highlighted the russian military's ability to effect "area denial" with an air defense "bubble" of overlapping advanced missile systems .

at the same time , russia has been upgrading or constructing new facilities in the arctic and reactivating soviet bases in the arctic that fell into disuse with the end of the cold war .

in december 2014 , russia launched a new arctic joint strategic command .

in addition , russia has been forming two new brigades specializing in arctic warfare .

over the past several years , russia also has adopted an increasingly aggressive posture with its air and sea patrols and military exercises ( see "recent air and sea incidents" text box , above ) .

for more than 25 years , the u.s. - russian relationship has gone through positive and negative periods .

the spirit of the u.s. - russian "strategic partnership" forged by presidents bill clinton and boris yeltsin in the early 1990s was gradually overtaken by increasing tension and mutual recrimination , in large part as a consequence of disagreements over russia's efforts to reestablish a sphere of influence in the post - soviet region , u.s. promotion of nato enlargement to central and eastern europe , and nato's military intervention in the former yugoslavia in the mid - 1990s .

presidents george w. bush and vladimir putin believed they could restore u.s. - russian relations , particularly in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 .

the two countries reshaped their relationship on the basis of cooperation against terrorism and the economic integration of russia with the west .

however , tensions arose again around a number of issues , including the iraq war ; the so - called color revolutions in ukraine , georgia , and kyrgyzstan involving protests against electoral fraud that unseated corrupt regimes ; russian energy and security pressure on its neighbors ; and u.s. and nato plans to deploy missile defenses in europe .

cooperation continued in some areas , but the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict caused bilateral ties to deteriorate to their lowest point since the cold war .

moving forward , most expect congress to continue to play an active role in shaping u.s. policy toward russia .

in doing so , members of congress may consider several issues , including but not limited to the following: monitoring the administration's implementation of new sanctions requirements on russia ; monitoring the administration's implementation of programs intended to respond to russian interference in u.s. and european domestic political processes ; assessing current and possible future measures to reassure european allies and partners and to deter potential russian aggression ; considering ways to promote russia's compliance with its commitments to resolve the ukraine conflict ; developing responses to russian violations of the inf treaty ; determining whether additional possibilities exist to cooperate with russia in the resolution of the syria conflict and the fight against the islamic state ; and examining whether other policy areas still exist in which cooperation with russia remains both possible and in the u.s. interest ( eg , north korea nuclear program , arms control , cybersecurity dialogue , space ) .

