t he farm bill is an omnibus , multi - year law that governs an array of agricultural and food programs .

although agricultural policies are sometimes created and changed by freestanding legislation or as part of other major laws , the farm bill provides a predictable opportunity for policymakers to comprehensively and periodically address agricultural and food issues .

the farm bill is renewed about every five years .

the agricultural act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-79 , h.rept .

113-333 ) , referred to here as the "2014 farm bill," is the most recent omnibus farm bill .

it was enacted in february 2014 and generally expires in 2018 .

it succeeded the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-246 , "2008 farm bill" ) .

the 2014 farm bill contains 12 titles encompassing farm commodity revenue supports , agricultural conservation , international food aid and agricultural trade , nutrition assistance , farm credit , rural development , agricultural research , forestry , bioenergy , horticulture and organic agriculture , crop insurance and disaster assistance , and livestock issues .

provisions in the 2014 farm bill reshaped the structure of farm commodity support , expanded crop insurance coverage , consolidated conservation programs , reauthorized and revised nutrition assistance , and extended authority to appropriate funds for many u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) discretionary programs through fy2018 .

the omnibus nature of the bill can create broad coalitions of support among sometimes conflicting interests for policies that individually might not survive the legislative process , but it can also stir competition for available funds , particularly among producers of different commodities or between those who have differing priorities .

such competition often results in farm state lawmakers seeking urban legislators' backing for commodity price supports in exchange for votes on domestic food assistance programs — and vice versa .

in recent years , a more diverse range of groups has become involved in the debate , including national farm groups , commodity associations , state organizations , nutrition and public health officials , and advocacy groups representing conservation , recreation , rural development , local and urban farming facilities , faith - based interests , land - grant universities , and certified organic production .

for more background on the farm bill and the major provisions in the 2014 farm bill , see crs report r43076 , the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) : summary and side - by - side , and crs report rs22131 , what is the farm bill ? .

this report provides background on each of the major titles of the current farm bill and previews of some of the potential issue s that could factor into the debate .

 ( for a list of contributors to this report and for more direct assistance on specific programs and topics , see table on previous page for contact information for individual crs staff. ) .

since the 1930s , periodic farm bills have traditionally focused on farm commodity program support for a handful of staple commodities — corn , soybeans , wheat , cotton , rice , dairy , and sugar .

in recent farm bills , however , the breadth of the farm bill has steadily grown to include new and expanding food and agricultural interests .

titles have been added to address emerging issues , and the farm bill has become increasingly omnibus in nature .

prominent additions to the farm bill have been nutrition assistance , farmland conservation , agriculture - based biofuels , and horticulture ( specialty crops , such as fruits and vegetables , and organic agriculture ) .

farm bill titles have also become increasingly integrated .

for example , the conservation and commodity titles both include provisions that affect land use and markets .

support for specialty crops , despite its stand - alone title , includes a series of provisions contained in other farm bill titles .

the text box below briefly describes provisions in these titles .

see the appendix at the end of this report for a complete list of titles and subtitles of the 2014 farm bill .

as the 115 th congress considers a new farm bill , it does so in an economic setting of generally lower farm prices and income for the main commodity crops as well as continued focus on the overall cost of nutrition assistance programs .

the largest of these programs — the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , formerly the food stamp program ) — accounts for the overwhelming majority of total farm bill spending .

at the same time , some groups continue to call for further expansion of the farm bill to create and / or expand support for other competing policy priorities and to address equitability concerns across the nation's farm sectors .

these include enhanced support for small and medium - sized farms , specialty crops , cottonseed , organic agriculture , local and regional food systems , urban farming , healthy and nutritious foods , food waste reduction , research , conservation , and rural development , among others .

efforts to reduce overall farm bill costs , given overall constraints on federal spending , may create heightened competition and tension among a range of u.s. farm policy stakeholders .

there is also general uncertainty regarding priorities for farm policy under the new trump administration .

potential expiration of the current farm bill and the consequences of allowing it to expire may also motivate legislative action .

when a farm bill expires , not all programs are affected equally .

some programs cease to operate unless reauthorized , while others might continue to pay old obligations , as provided under current law .

for example , the farm commodity programs would not only expire but revert to permanent law dating back to the 1940s .

nutrition assistance programs require periodic reauthorization , but appropriations can keep them operating .

many discretionary programs would lose statutory authority to receive appropriations , though annual appropriations could provide funding and implicit authorization .

other programs have permanent authority and do not need to be reauthorized ( eg , crop insurance ) .

whether to retain the nutrition title in a new farm bill or to consider nutrition programs separately was debated during consideration of the 2014 farm bill .

in 2013 , after a farm bill with a nutrition title was defeated on the house floor , the house passed the bills separately — a farm bill without a nutrition title and a nutrition - only bill .

after the conference committee negotiations began , the bills were joined together .

the enacted law included a nutrition title .

some continue to argue for a separate snap reauthorization , but many farm and nutrition policy stakeholders argue for retaining the nutrition title in a new farm bill .

farm bills since 1973 have included reauthorization of the food stamp program ( renamed snap by the 2008 bill ) .

this partnership between nutrition programs and farm programs is generally understood to generate rural and urban support for the farm bill .

 ( for more information , see " food and nutrition ." ) .

the u.s. agricultural sector experienced a golden period from 2010 to 2014 , driven largely by strong commodity prices and agricultural exports .

this period included a four - year run of record farm income and land values that culminated with the enactment of the 2014 farm bill .

since 2014 , the u.s. farm economic outlook has changed dramatically .

bountiful u.s. crop harvests and fading international demand prospects have put downward pressure on commodity prices , farm incomes , and asset values while raising farm sector debt and debt - to - asset ratios .

usda projects that u.s. net farm income — a key indicator of u.s. farm well - being — will fall to $62.3 billion in 2017 , down 9% from 2016 and down 50% from 2013's record of $123.7 billion .

the 2017 forecast would represent the third year of decline and would be the lowest national net farm income since 2002 .

the forecast for lower net farm income is primarily the result of the outlook for both lower crop and livestock receipts .

record grain , oilseed , and meat supplies in 2016 have depressed prices for most commodities — especially when compared with the period of 2011-2013 , when prices for many major commodities experienced record or near - record highs .

agricultural exports were projected higher in 2017 at $134 billion , up 3% from 2016 but well below 2014's record $152.3 billion — due largely to a strong u.s. dollar coupled with a continued weak economic outlook in several major foreign importing countries .

despite the year - over - year decline , u.s. agricultural exports are still projected to account for over 30% of farm sector gross earnings in 2017 .

farm wealth is also projected to decline for a third year in 2017 ( down about 1% from 2016 ) to $2,836 billion .

farm asset values reflect farm investors' and lenders' expectations about long - term profitability of farm sector investments .

the outlook for lower commodity prices and the expected decline from the past four years' strong outlook for the general farm economy have reversed the growth of farmland values .

because they comprise such a significant portion of the u.s. farm sector's asset base , change in farmland values is a critical barometer of the farm sector's financial performance .

farm credit conditions also appear to be deteriorating: loan delinquencies and requests for loan extensions are increasing , and interest rates are rising .

despite the downturn in the u.s. agricultural sector's financial outlook , it is still outperforming u.s. households in general .

at the farm - household level , average farm household incomes have been well ahead of average u.s. household incomes since the late 1990s .

in 2015 ( the last year with comparable data ) , the average farm household income ( including off - farm income sources ) of $119,880 was about 51% higher than the average u.s. household income of $79,263 .

the outlook for lower commodity prices and farm income and wealth suggests a weakening financial picture for the agricultural sector heading into 2017 but with substantial regional variation .

relatively weak prices for most major program crops and livestock products signal tougher times ahead for agricultural producers and are expected to trigger substantial payments under the new safety net programs of the 2014 farm bill .

however , actual 2017 agricultural economic well - being will hinge on crop harvests and prices , as well as domestic and international macroeconomic factors , including economic growth and consumer demand .

the federal government supports farm income and helps farmers manage risks associated with variability in crop yields and prices through a collection of programs often referred to as the "farm safety net. .

these programs include ( 1 ) commodity - based revenue support programs ; ( 2 ) disaster assistance programs , which are reauthorized by periodic farm bills ( most recently by title i of the 2014 farm bill ) ; and ( 3 ) federal crop insurance , which is permanently authorized under the federal crop insurance act of 1980 .

each of these three components is covered in this section and summarized in table 3 .

through the first three years of the 2014 farm bill ( 2014 to 2016 ) , usda estimates the cost of farm safety net programs at $14.2 billion per year ( $5.2 billion for commodity programs , $2.4 billion for disaster assistance , and $6.6 billion for crop insurance ) .

most of the cost for the farm safety net is traditionally attributed to a few major crops .

for example , cbo projects that corn ( 48% ) , wheat ( 14% ) , soybeans ( 13% ) , rice ( 7% ) , peanuts ( 7% ) , and sorghum ( 3% ) will cumulatively account for 91% of commodity program payments under revenue support programs in fy2017 .

similarly , in 2016 four crops accounted for 77% of crop insurance premium subsidies: corn ( 38% ) , soybeans ( 20% ) , wheat ( 12% ) , and cotton ( 8% ) .

although these seven crops receive a majority of farm program support , they do not constitute a majority of farm output value: from 2010 to 2016 , these crops accounted for 32% of total farm receipts ( including fruits and vegetables , livestock , dairy , and poultry ) .

farm support began with the 1930s depression - era efforts to generally raise farm household income when commodity prices were low because of prolonged weak consumer demand .

while initially intended to be a temporary effort , the commodity support programs survived but have been modified away from supply control and management of commodity stocks to direct revenue support payments .

similarly , federal crop insurance has expanded over the decades , with expanded commodity coverage and increased producer subsidies .

during the past few farm bill debates , a diverse set of agricultural producers — covering specialty crops , certified organic agriculture , and local and regional foods — have argued that their sectors should occupy a larger role in farm bill policy discussions and that benefits supporting major commodity producers should be extended to these producers in order to create "a broader , more equitable farm bill. .

producers in these sectors are not eligible for support under usda's farm commodity revenue support programs , but these sectors are eligible for other types of usda programs and support throughout several farm bill titles .

these include , but are not limited to , programs in the nutrition , conservation , research , crop insurance , disaster assistance , rural development , and trade titles .

other federal agencies also play important roles in these sectors .

specialty crops — defined as "fruits and vegetables , tree nuts , dried fruits , and horticulture and nursery crops ( including floriculture ) " — comprise a major part of u.s. agriculture .

in 2012 , the value of farm - level specialty crop production totaled nearly $60 billion , representing about one - fourth of the value of u.s. crop production but only 3% of all harvested cropland acres .

usda reports that retail sales of fresh and processed fruits and vegetables for at - home consumption total nearly $100 billion annually .

exports of u.s. specialty crops totaled about $26 billion in 2015 .

in 2012 , about 244,000 farming operations grew more than 350 types of fruit , vegetable , tree nut , flower , nursery , and other horticultural crops .

specialty crop production is concentrated in california , florida , washington , oregon , north dakota , and michigan , but every state has some commercial specialty crop production .

agricultural products certified as "usda organic" account for a small but growing share of the u.s. farming sector .

usda reports that farm sales of certified organic products totaled $5.5 billion in 2014 , spanning an array of plant and animal products .

leading organic commodities based on farm value include milk , eggs , broiler chickens , lettuce , apples , meat products , grapes , corn for grain , hay , and spinach .

in 2014 , there were more than 14,000 organic farms and ranches , covering a total of 3.7 million acres , or about 1% of total u.s. cropland in farms .

production is concentrated in california , florida , washington , pennsylvania , oregon , texas , and wisconsin , but usda reports organic production in each u.s. state .

at the retail level , u.s. organic sales totaled $43.3 billion in 2015 , representing roughly 5% of all food sales in the united states .

exports of all u.s. organic products total about $2 billion annually .

in addition , a range of farm businesses are considered to be engaged in local food production .

there is no established definition of what constitutes a "local food," but generally local food systems refer to agricultural production and marketing that occurs within a certain geographic proximity ( between farmer and consumer ) or that involves certain social or supply chain characteristics in producing food ( such as small family farms , urban gardens , or farms using sustainable agriculture practices ) .

sales of locally produced foods also comprise a small but growing part of u.s. agricultural sales .

though estimates vary , usda reports that local food sales totaled an estimated $6.1 billion in 2012 , reflecting sales from nearly 164,000 farmers selling locally marketed foods .

this represents 8% of u.s. farms and an estimated 1.5% of the value of total u.s. agricultural production .

farm bills have traditionally not provided livestock and poultry producers with farm revenue support programs like those for major crops such as grains , oilseeds , and cotton .

instead , the livestock and poultry industries look to the federal government for leadership in protecting animal health ; establishing transparent , science - based rules for trading animal products ; resolving foreign trade disputes ; and assuring that supplies of domestic and imported meat and poultry are safe , of high quality , and free from pests and diseases .

the federal government has a long history of providing credit assistance to farmers .

this intervention has been justified by many factors , including market failure due to imperfect knowledge of information between lenders and farmers , lack of competition in some rural lending markets , insufficient lending resources in rural areas , and the desire to targeted lending to disadvantaged groups .

the agricultural lender with the greatest connection to the federal government is the usda farm service agency ( fsa ) .

it issues direct loans to farmers who cannot qualify for regular commercial credit and guarantees the repayment of certain loans made by other lenders .

fsa also has statutory mandates to target loans to beginning farmers and socially disadvantaged groups based primarily on race and gender .

of the $350 billion in total farm debt as of year - end 2015 , fsa provides about 2% through direct loans and guarantees about another 4% - 5% .

another agricultural lender with a federal mandate is the farm credit system ( fcs ) .

fcs is a cooperatively owned and federally chartered private lender with a statutory mandate to serve only agriculture - related borrowers .

fcs makes loans to creditworthy farmers .

it is not a lender of last resort but it is a government - sponsored enterprise receiving tax benefits , among other preferences , in return for restrictions on its lending base .

fcs accounts for about 40% of farm debt .

a third agricultural lender created by federal statute is farmer mac , another government - sponsored enterprise that is privately held and provides a secondary market for agricultural loans .

the statutory authority for fsa , fcs , and farmer mac is permanent , but farm bills often make adjustments to eligibility criteria and the scope of operations .

usda was created in 1862 in part to support agricultural research in an expanding , agriculturally dependent country .

usda conducts intramural research at federal facilities with government - employed scientists and supports external research at universities and other facilities through competitive grants and formula - based funding .

the breadth of contemporary usda research spans traditional agricultural production techniques , organic and sustainable agriculture , bioenergy , nutrition needs and composition , food safety , animal and plant health , pest and disease management , economic decisionmaking , and other social sciences affecting consumers , farmers , and rural communities .

four agencies carry out usda's research and education activities , grouped together into the research , education , and economics ( ree ) mission area .

the agricultural research service ( ars ) is usda's intramural science agency and conducts research on food and agriculture issues of national and regional importance .

the national institute of food and agriculture ( nifa ) sponsors extramural research by distributing federal funds to land - grant universities and other outside partners for state - and regional - level research , education , and extension activities .

the economic research service ( ers ) conducts economic and social science research about agriculture , rural development , food , commodity markets , and the environment .

finally , the national agricultural statistics service ( nass ) conducts the census of agriculture and provides official statistics on agricultural production and other relevant indicators about the farm sector .

the federal government provides support for u.s. agricultural exports through two types of programs: export market development and export credit guarantees .

the 2014 farm bill repealed the dairy export incentive program , thereby eliminating the use of direct export subsidies for u.s. agricultural products .

legislative authorizations for agricultural trade programs are included in the trade title of the 2014 farm bill .

usda's export promotion programs are administered by usda's foreign agricultural service ( fas ) and generally funded using mandatory monies .

one of the larger programs , map , was targeted for cuts or elimination in a number of deficit reduction proposals but was retained intact in the 2014 farm bill .

the united states has led global funding support for international food assistance for over 60 years .

these programs originated with blended goals to support the domestic agricultural safety net , agricultural trade goals , and the maritime industry in addition to supporting efforts to alleviate hunger abroad .

this blending of objectives is manifested through statutory requirements that most u.s. international food assistance be ( 1 ) based on the donation of u.s. agricultural commodities to be distributed as food or sold to generate funds for development programs and ( 2 ) shipped primarily on u.s. - flag vessels .

two agencies implement the international food assistance programs authorized under the farm bill: the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , and fas .

usaid implements the largest program , food for peace title ii ( emergency and private assistance programs ) , which averaged $1.8 billion in annual outlays from fy2006-fy2015 .

fas implements all other international food assistance programs funded through the farm bill authorization , with total annual average outlays of $395 million per year from fy2006-fy2015 .

domestic food assistance programs reauthorized in the farm bill's nutrition title include the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , formerly the food stamp program ) , the emergency food assistance program ( tefap ) , the commodity supplemental food program ( csfp ) , the food distribution program on indian reservations ( fdpir ) , and other programs administered by usda's food and nutrition service ( fns ) .

according to cbo's projected costs at the time of enactment , the nutrition title makes up nearly 80% of spending under the 2014 farm bill ( though subsequent estimates show that actual spending has been less than was projected at that time ; see table 1 and figure 1 ) .

snap accounts for the vast majority of the spending in this title .

at the time of enactment , the policy changes contained in the nutrition title of the 2014 farm bill were projected to save $8 billion relative to baseline spending over 10 years ( fy2014-fy2023 ) .

the savings are primarily from changes to snap , but there are increasing investments in some areas .

most farm bill domestic food assistance programs — except for csfp , fdpir , and the administrative cost component of tefap — are generally treated as mandatory spending for budget purposes .

snap is open - ended mandatory spending and is funded through appropriations laws .

as such , amending snap eligibility , benefits , or other program rules can have a budgetary impact , but the availability of appropriated funding also affects operations .

discretionary spending programs in the farm bill include csfp , the administrative cost component of tefap , and a portion of fdpir .

typically , the special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children ( wic ) and the child nutrition programs ( national school lunch program , school breakfast program , child and adult care food program , summer food service program , and others ) are not reauthorized in the farm bill .

these programs , located in the child nutrition act of 1966 and the richard b. russell national school lunch act , were last reauthorized in 2010 in p.l .

111-296 , the healthy , hunger - free kids act of 2010 .

despite efforts to complete the next child nutrition reauthorization during the 114 th congress , the legislation did not advance beyond committees .

the conservation title of the farm bill generally contains a number of reauthorizations , amendments , and new programs that encourage farmers and ranchers to voluntarily implement resource - conserving practices on private land .

starting in 1985 , farm bills have greatly broadened the range of topics considered to be conservation .

while the number of programs has increased and techniques to address resource problems continue to emerge , the basic approach has remained unchanged: financial and technical assistance supported by education and research programs .

since 1973 , omnibus farm bills have included a rural development title .

how to create and support new competitive advantage in rural areas so these areas can better compete in a global economic environment is a key issue framing current debates about the future of rural america .

while the search for new sources of rural economic development is part of the policy equation , also increasingly appreciated is the need to develop new approaches for federal assistance to rural areas that go beyond the largely piecemeal programming that has long characterized rural economic development policy .

the rural development title of farm bills generally provides assistance for rural business creation and expansion and also rural infrastructure with traditional assistance for housing , electrical generation and transmission , broadband , water and wastewater , and economic and institutional capacity in local communities .

in the past several farm bills , policymakers have also supported innovative and alternative business development ( eg , bioenergy , value - added production , local food production ) and innovative mechanisms to finance it ( eg , the rural microentrepreneur assistance program ) .

support for such alternative approaches is expected to continue as policymakers recognize the great diversity among rural communities , with some rural areas growing and prospering and others falling further behind as their primary industries ( including agriculture ) decline and population outmigration continues , particularly among younger , educated residents .

commercial interest in renewable energy , mainly ethanol and biodiesel production , expanded rapidly with the enactment of the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) and in response to a strong rise in domestic and international fuel prices .

many policymakers view agriculture - based biofuels as a catalyst for rural economic development , an important source of demand for agricultural production , and a home - grown response to lowering u.s. dependence on imports of foreign energy .

usda renewable energy programs have been used to incentivize adoption of renewable energy projects including solar , wind , and anaerobic digesters .

initially , the primary focus of these programs was to promote u.s. biofuels production and use — including cornstarch - based ethanol , soybean - based biodiesel , and cellulosic ethanol — but over time their focus has shifted toward promoting renewable power , biomass - based products , and efforts to bring biomass - based fuel , such as cellulosic ethanol , and other advanced renewable fuels to market .

many of the federal programs that currently support renewable energy production are outside the purview of usda and have legislative origins outside of the farm bill .

the 2002 farm bill ( farm security and rural investment act of 2002 , p.l .

107-171 ) was the first omnibus farm bill to explicitly include an energy title .

the energy title authorized grants , loans , and loan guarantees to foster research on agriculture - based renewable energy , share development risk , and promote the adoption of renewable energy systems .

the 2002 farm bill was followed by two major energy bills ( the energy policy act of 2005 , p.l .

109-58 ; and the energy independence and security act of 2007 , p.l .

110-140 ) , which established and expanded the rfs along with several other renewable energy programs .

one - third of the land area in the united states is forestland ( 766 million acres ) .

these lands provide wood for lumber , plywood , paper , and other materials , as well as a host of ecological services , including recreation , clean water , wildlife habitat , and more .

the federal government owns one - third of the forestland in the united states ( 238 million acres ) , and nonindustrial private landowners ( private , noncorporate entities that do not own wood processing facilities ) own 298 million acres ( 39% ) .

the forest service is the principal federal forest management agency , managing 19% of all u.s. forestlands ( 145 million acres ) .

in addition to administering the national forest system ( nfs ) , the forest service provides technical and financial assistance — primarily through state forestry agencies — to nonfederal landowners .

the forest service also conducts research to advance the science of forestry and engages in international forestry assistance and research efforts .

past farm bills have contained forestry provisions or a separate forestry title .

although many forestry provisions are permanently authorized , a new farm bill would allow congress to modify programs to support assistance to nonfederal forest owners , forest research , and the management of federal forests .

the forestry title of the 2014 farm bill repealed , modified , created , and reauthorized several forestry programs .

for example , the 2014 farm bill permanently authorized stewardship contracting and extended the good neighbor authority nationwide .

a new farm bill may modify existing programs and possibly establish new options for forestry research , management of federal lands , and assistance to nonfederal forest owners .

among the issues that might be considered in a new farm bill's forestry title are expanded wildfire protection , support of woody biomass for energy , and additional controls to address invasive species .

the threat of wildfires to forests , communities , and homes seems to have grown .

the 2002 farm bill authorized a new community wildfire protection program , but the program has been funded only as part of state fire assistance .

new programs to enhance wildfire protection on both federal and nonfederal lands might be considered in a new farm bill .

interest in producing energy from woody biomass and other renewable sources ( as discussed above ) derives from both supply and demand .

supply could come from efforts to reduce wildfire threats and to control invasive species .

demand is likely to be driven by state and federal requirements for renewable transportation fuels and possibly for electricity production .

many of the energy programs face budgetary challenges , and a new farm bill might extend , expand , alter , or terminate these programs or possibly replace them with alternative approaches .

invasive species , typically exotic plants and animals , are increasingly displacing or harming native plants and animals in the united states and worldwide .

invasive species have been described as one of the four major threats to the nation's forests and rangelands .

options and opportunities to prevent and control the spread of invasive species , especially forest pests and especially on private forestlands , might be a farm bill issue .

