the trade facilitation agreement ( tfa ) , finalized in december 2013 , is the newest international trade agreement to enter into force at the world trade organization ( wto ) , after two - thirds of wto member countries ratified the multilateral agreement as of february 22 , 2017 .

the tfa is important to congress because it may affect u.s. trade flows , the u.s. economy , and international capacity building efforts .

this report discusses the tfa , its background and current status , potential impact on u.s. trade agreement provisions , plans for implementation , and relevant policy options for congress to consider .

the tfa does not require further congressional approval because u.s. compliance with the agreement's commitments does not require changes to u.s. law .

the tfa aims to reduce trade costs by streamlining , modernizing , and speeding up the customs processes for cross border trade .

eliminating or reducing inefficiencies at the border may facilitate trade by lowering costs for importers ( and possibly consumers ) , as well as exporters .

by increasing transparency , instilling good governance practices , and simplifying processes at the border , the potential for corruption is also reduced .

furthermore , decreasing trade barriers at the border enables connectivity and may increase a country's foreign direct investment ( fdi ) inflows .

thus , improving trade flows benefits both exporting and importing countries and can be seen as a shared interest across all wto members .

improved trade flows require effective implementation of the tfa by all wto members .

while the tfa mandatory provisions are subject to wto dispute settlement for enforcement , the agreement contains the special and differential treatment provisions to provide additional implementation time and technical assistance and capacity building assistance for developing and least - developed countries .

the united states is already in compliance with most measures represented in the tfa , and thus does not have to change its current practices to comply with the tfa provisions .

part of the u.s. international trade commission's ( itc's ) statutory function is to examine the potential impact of trade deals on the u.s. economy for congress and the white house .

according to the itc , "the most direct effects [of trade agreements] are the removal of barriers to cross - border trade in goods and services and the facilitation of cross - border investment. .

to that end , the tfa aims to address multiple trade barriers u.s. exporters confront .

these include the lack of transparency on process and documentation requirements for exporting to a given country , which could also create opportunities for corruption .

for example , according to an itc report , "lack of clear information concerning duties and taxes on goods imported into the eu is also problematic for u.s. s mall and medium - sized enterprises ( smes ) . .

in business , delays at the border caused by extensive paperwork requirements , inefficient transport or processes , and lack of coordination between various border authorities within or between countries can be costly for u.s. firms .

the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) annual 2016 national trade estimate report describes several trade barriers across the globe that the tfa aims to address .

some examples follow .

in brazil , "specific information related to non - automatic import license requirements and explanations for rejections of non - automatic import license applications are lacking .

the lack of transparency surrounding these procedures creates additional burdens for u.s. exporters.... u.s. companies continue to complain of burdensome documentation requirements for the import of certain types of goods that apply even if imports are on a temporary basis. .

in the european union ( eu ) , "not only are the customs code committee ( ccc ) and other eu - level institutions ineffective tools for achieving the uniform administration and application of eu customs law , but the eu also lacks tribunals or procedures for the prompt review and eu - wide correction of administrative actions relating to customs matters... .

thus , obtaining corrections with eu - wide effect for administrative actions relating to customs matters is a cumbersome and frequently time - consuming process. .

in indonesia , "customs relies on a schedule of reference prices to assess duties on some imports rather than using actual transactions as required by the wto agreement on customs valuation .

indonesia's director general of customs and excise makes a valuation assessment based on the perceived risk status of the importer and the average price of a same or similar product imported during the previous 90 days. .

"clearing goods through algerian customs is the single most frequently reported problem facing foreign companies operating in algeria .

delays can take weeks or months , and in many cases are not accompanied by official explanations. .

modernizing customs and border processes can have benefits for both international businesses and exporters as well as domestic customers and government agencies .

 ( see south korea case study in text box . ) .

exporters and shippers can save time and money ; importing agencies can become more efficient , thereby sav ing money ( while also collecting fees and taxes faster ) ; and end customers can receive goods faster at lower costs if the seller passes along the related savings .

in this way , customs and border reform efforts are of benefit to both importing and exporting countries , improving their terms of trade , transparency , and good governance .

u.s. companies , from very small businesses to large multinational firms , face trade barriers that the tfa may alleviate .

e - commerce platforms allow smes to easily reach a global customer base , but many may be hesitant to serve foreign markets because of the complexity of global shipping and delivery .

compared with larger companies , smes have fewer resources to deal with the regulatory hurdles of international shipments , and trade costs represent a larger proportional burden for them .

r eforms to reduce these costs could therefore boost sme willingness to participat e in international trade .

for example , if each country post s customs information online , smes c ould more easily understand export and import processes and requirements .

if tfa implementation efforts were to also establish a standardized international format or template for posting required information , it c ould further reduce the burden on buyers and sellers trying to export to multiple countries .

reform efforts also help large multi national firms exporting large volumes or managing complex global va lue chains ( gvcs ) that rely on predictable , constant flow s of imports and exports .

for example , the use of automation and risk management required by the tfa will allow firms to submit information in advance so that an entire shipment is not delayed upon arrival at the border while officials determine what to inspect .

for express delivery firms , in particular , a shipment's smooth and rapid border crossing is crucial for providing good customer service to their customers .

according to the wto's 2015 annual report , trade costs in developing countries are equivalent to applying a 219% ad valorem tariff on international trade , while in developed countries the tariff equivalent is 134% .

however , full implementation of the tfa provisions has the potential to "reduce trade costs of manufactured goods by 18% and of agricultural goods by 10.4%. .

similarly , the organization for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) finds that tfa implementation could lower trade costs 12.5% - 17.5% globally .

furthermore , the oecd trade facilitation indicators ( tfis ) show relatively higher results when countries' implementation goes beyond the tfa's mandatory provisions to include the non - mandatory , suggested practices .

while all reform efforts related to the tfa are estimated to have positive impacts , the oecd sees the largest potential gains from improving trade formalities , such as simplifying documentation , streamlining border procedures , and automating the border processes .

 ( see table 1 for a summary of tfa section 1 provisions. ) .

tfa implementation could potentially have multiple positive outcomes , including improved customs clearance processes for exports and imports ; improved predictability and management of gvcs ; minimized loss of perishable goods due to reduced wait and processing times ; increased sme exports due to lower trade costs ; increased inflows of foreign direct investment ( fdi ) for small countries ; improved and faster collection of taxes , fees , and duties ; and decreased corruption at borders due to increased automation and transparency .

according to wto estimates , export gains from full implementation of the tfa could range from $750 billion to over $3.6 trillion dollars per year .

looking at 2015-2030 , the wto estimates it could increase world export growth by 2.7% a year and world gdp growth by over .05% a year .

existing and proposed u.s. free trade agreements ( ftas ) include trade facilitation commitments .

provisions are usually addressed in a specific customs administration chapter .

for example , the recent u.s. fta with south korea ( korus ) and the proposed trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) fta , from which the united states withdrew on january 30 , 2017 , each have a chapter titled "customs administration and trade facilitation. .

customs and trade facilitation provisions have evolved in u.s. ftas , with a focus first on customs administration and then expanding to incorporate broader enforceable trade facilitation provisions .

since 2004 , the united states has included provisions specific to expedited shipments , eventually mandating that partners have dedicated channels for express shipments .

some u.s. ftas include a specific de minimis provision , but observers have noticed its absence from the recent proposed tpp .

figure 1 reflects the diversity of customs administration and trade facilitation provisions across u.s. ftas .

the wto tfa and u.s. ftas share common features .

like the tfa , u.s. ftas encourage the use of international standards , cooperation , and transparency .

in general , the tfa is more prescriptive and provides more detailed discussion to provide greater clarity on the obligations .

the tfa contains a stronger emphasis on transparency , internal coordination , and procedures , perhaps reflecting a lowest common denominator to suit all wto parties across all levels of development .

compared with u.s. ftas , the tfa is more likely to endeavor or encourage best practices rather than obligate parties , such as for formalities and documentation requirements .

the tpp was the most recent free trade agreement that the united states negotiated and serves as an example of the most extensive and enforceable wto "plus" commitments on trade facilitation .

on january 23 , 2017 , president trump directed the ustr to withdraw the united states as a signatory to the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) agreement ; the acting ustr gave notification to that effect on january 30 .

compared with recent u.s. ftas , the tpp text contained similar but expanded provisions .

as a stand - alone agreement , the tfa contains more detailed provisions that may provide guidance to developing and least - developed countries with limited customs administration experience .

for example , the tfa article on publication and availability of information specifies the information that needs to be published , and the article on customs cooperation spells out the information to be included in a written request between members .

the tpp , on the other hand , simply stated: "each party shall make publicly available , including online , its customs laws , regulations , and general administrative procedures and guidelines , to the extent possible in the english language. .

the emphasis on english , as opposed to "one of the official languages of the wto," as is included in tfa , reflects the strong influence of the united states in the tpp negotiation .

in general , the tpp included more precise and enforceable terms than the tfa .

for example , the tpp provided specific timelines ( eg , 150 days for issuing an advance ruling , 48 hours for release of goods , etc. ) .

while the tfa provisions use phrases such as a "reasonable , time - bound manner" and "as rapidly as possible. .

both agreements refer to risk management , with tpp requiring use of such a system for assessing and targeting while tfa requires risk management "to the extent possible. .

both agreements encourage the use of international standards , with the tpp endorsing recommendations from the world customs organization ( wco ) and asia pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) forum .

however , while the tpp did not mention de minimis , the tfa encourages members to establish such a provision for expedited goods ( article 7.8.2.d ) .

the tfa also includes provisions related to the movement of goods under customs control within a single territory and freedom of transit for transshipments .

finally , tfa section ii contains articles on special and differential treatment for developing and least - developed countries , something not in tpp ( see below ) .

the united states is already in compliance with most measures represented in the tfa , and thus does not have to change its current practices to comply with the tfa provisions .

u.s. customs administration processes are often viewed as examples of good implementation from which other countries can learn .

in rankings of trade facilitation measures such as those outlined in the tfa , the united states scores relatively high in terms of availability of customs information , advance rulings , appeal procedures , documentation , automation , and other factors .

u.s. customs procedures are based on a "shared responsibility" approach , in which u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) is responsible for informing importers and exporters of their rights and responsibilities under customs laws and regulations , and traders must be aware of those legal obligations and make their own customs duty and valuation determinations through the process of "informed compliance. .

importers and exporters are legally responsible for their shipments and must exercise "reasonable care" to comply with customs laws and regulations .

if importers have questions about country of origin , classification , or valuation of merchandise , they may apply to cbp for a binding customs ruling prior to importation .

a key issue with the tfa is effective implementation by all wto members .

trade agreement implementation is not always smooth .

for example , there have been ongoing issues with south korea's implementation of korus provisions on express delivery shipment inspection and delays .

the world customs organization ( wco ) is working with the wto on implementation of the tfa .

it has released implementation guidance for each section i article of the agreement .

the guidance not only explains the provisions but provides tools , examples of member implementation that can be considered best practices , and quantitative indicators a country could use .

for example , the wco highlights u.s. customs mutual assistance agreements ( cmaas ) as a member implementation of article 12 .

different sets of indicators by various international organizations exist to measure levels of trade facilitation and could be used to monitor tfa implementation and impact ( see text box ) .

monitoring and publicizing metrics could help overcome some of the challenges related to implementation , such as lack of coordination or political will .

the oecd maintains trade facilitation indicators ( tfis ) that align with policy areas covered by specific tfa provisions .

the tfis measure the status of implementation , and are useful indicators of tfa implementation .

for example , the tfis measure information availability ( article 1 ) , internal and external border agency cooperation ( article 8 ) , and formality documentation and automation ( articles 7 and 10 ) .

the world bank's logistics performance index ( lpi ) focuses on logistics and measures the efficiency of international supply chains , an outcome of tfa implementation .

the lpi index ranks countries based on six dimensions ( customs ; infrastructure ; ease of arranging shipments ; quality of logistics services ; tracking and tracing ; and timeliness ) .

the top annual performers in the lpi 2010-2016 for each level of development were germany , south africa , india , and uganda .

the world bank doing business report is another possible mechanism for measuring implementation of the tfa .

the 2017 report shows that overall reform efforts are gaining momentum , with 137 economies studied adopting reforms to make it easier to start and operate smes .

the "trading across borders" indicators show increased use of a customs single window , supporting tfa implementation , but also highlight variations among countries .

digitalization efforts show benefits including higher revenue yields , faster processes , and lower corruption .

one concern with trade agreements is how to ensure commitments are effectively and fully implemented and , when necessary , use enforcement mechanisms through dispute settlement provisions .

section iii of the tfa is titled "institutional arrangements and final provisions. .

the first provision establishes a committee on trade facilitation to meet at least annually for members to consult on matters related to the agreement .

in addition to sharing experiences , the tfa encourages members to use the meetings to identify issues related to implementation , facilitate discussions , and aim to reach a mutually satisfactory solution .

this process could be similar to the specific trade concerns members raise in other wto committee meetings .

the tfa also requires each member to establish a national committee on trade facilitation for domestic coordination and implementation of the agreement .

the committee will maintain close contact with other international organizations dealing with trade facilitation , such as the wco or the world bank , and may draw from their expertise .

no congressional approval is needed for the united states to implement the tfa because it requires no change in u.s. law .

however , as implementation of the tfa may affect u.s. businesses , the u.s. economy , and international capacity building efforts , congress could conduct oversight of effective and efficient country implementation , as well as the u.s. single window , by cbp .

conduct oversight of u.s. involvement in tfa capacity building through the tfaf and gatf to ensure that u.s. funds are being spent effectively to achieve desired results .

instruct the executive branch to ensure coordination of u.s. capacity building efforts .

examine the benefits of a future expansion of the tfa to raise the level of commitments , for example by adopting clearer de minimus levels for expedited customs processing .

