member offices vary in their priorities and activities , but in addition to working on legislation , oversight , and other policy - related items , offices are commonly expected to provide constituent services .

a broader discussion of constituent service and its relation to other commonly held views of members' responsibilities can be found in crs report rl33686 , roles and duties of a member of congress: brief overview .

the expectation of constituent service has existed since the earliest congresses .

requests for assistance with revolutionary war pensions and other matters led the house , in 1794 , and the senate , in 1816 , to establish select committees for private claims .

today , many similar matters would be considered constituent service .

often , constituents contact congressional offices and initiate requests .

a constituent may contact a member office requesting basic information about a government entity or process .

sometimes , a congressional office is one of several places a constituent can turn to .

other programs , opportunities , or services may require a member office to serve as an intermediary .

each member office chooses how to engage with constituents and how to allocate resources in support of these activities .

additional information about the use of official office resources in the house and senate is available in crs report rl30064 , congressional salaries and allowances: in brief .

constituent service can present an opportunity for member offices to engage in outreach and provide education about federal government functions and services .

member offices will often post constituent service links on their official websites , or may mention available services in their newsletters or other constituent communications .

requests from constituents may also provide feedback for members of congress about how government programs are working and what issues could be addressed through formal oversight or legislation .

as one former house member observed , "you learn more about the job by doing constituent service work than anything else... .

it tells you whether or not the legislation is doing what it is supposed to do. .

the following sections provide a brief overview of many common constituent services provided by congressional offices .

it is not intended to be an exhaustive or a prescriptive list , as member offices are largely able to shape their own constituent service operations to suit their own representational priorities or the needs of their constituents .

references to additional crs products or other resources are also provided , when available .

members of congress may write letters recognizing constituents' public distinctions or achievements , subject to house or senate franking rules .

some common reasons for recognition include public office appointments or elections ; acts of heroism or citizenship ; or key awards or honors .

through local news and networks , member offices can sometimes identify individuals they wish to recognize .

member offices may also encourage constituents to notify them of possible recipients .

constituents are often interested in obtaining a u.s. flag flown over the capitol ; requests from individuals seeking a flag must be submitted to the architect of the capitol ( aoc ) by a member of congress .

flags are available in several sizes and must be purchased by the constituent , along with a certificate fee if the flag is flown over the capitol .

requests typically must be made at least two weeks in advance .

constituents can request that a flag be flown on a certain date , but no date guarantees can be made , due to weather and a varying volume of requests .

see http: / / www.aoc.gov / flags or contact the aoc for more information on the flag program .

the white house greetings office has provided greetings to u.s. citizens commemorating certain occasions , like birthdays , weddings , anniversaries , and boy scout or girl scout awards .

member offices sometimes submit requests to the white house on behalf of constituents ; these requests typically must be made at least six weeks in advance of an occasion .

