money laundering is a term generally associated with various types of financial transactions that are conducted by criminals to conceal the location , ownership , source , nature , or control of illicit proceeds .

in the process , illicit proceeds are made virtually unrecognizable from proceeds derived from legitimate sources and , thus , are usable within the national and international financial system .

money laundering is not a new problem and efforts to stem such activity remain a global policy concern .

money l aundering occurs in three stages , which , in practice , may involve additional complexity .

the first stage is "placement" and involves the introduction of illicit funds into the financial system .

the second stage involves "layering," whereby illicitly placed funds undergo a series of processes to conceal their true source and ownership .

the third stage is "integration," at which point illicit funds become indistinguishable from legitimately obtained funds and flow undetected through the financial system .

anti - money laundering ( aml ) policies are chiefly governed by national laws and regulations that establish the parameters of legal financial activity and the responsibilities of financial institutions and related sectors to comply with aml requirements .

in the united states , a robust policy apparatus is in place to implement national laws through financial regulations , enforcement actions including prosecutions , and targeted sanctions .

the u.s. government also supports the improvement of foreign government legal regimes and technical capacity for aml .

international treaty instruments that address crime provide some tools to encourage international cooperation on financial crime matters .

several international institutions provide standard - setting guidance and maintain capabilities to monitor and assess the status of national aml policies .

multilateral institutions and donor nations also provide training and technical assistance to improve aml capabilities .

halting the introduction and circulation of criminally generated proceeds in the financial system , and , ultimately , depriving criminals from using illicit wealth remains a challenge .

despite the existence of long - standing domestic regulatory and enforcement mechanisms , as well as international commitments and guidance on best practices , policymakers are challenged to identify and address policy gaps and new laundering methods that criminals continue to exploit .

moreover , policymakers also may attempt to balance aml efforts with principles of financial inclusion , including providing access to financial services in developing countries , and avoiding unnecessary administrative and compliance burdens being placed on the public and private sectors .

the scope of money laundering as a global problem is often framed in terms of the volume of illegal transactions , breadth of geographic concerns , and varied consequences resulting from such activity .

money laundering is a difficult phenomenon to accurately measure .

in 1998 , the international monetary fund ( imf ) released a "consensus range" estimate of money laundering transactions totaling some 2% - 5% of global gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

based on 2009 data , the united nations ( u.n. ) reviewed in 2011 existing national and international studies on money laundering and global crime proceeds to conclude that the scope of money laundering likely remained within the bounds of the imf's rough estimate: approximately 2.7% of global gdp , or $1.6 trillion .

due to its global dominance , the u.s. dollar generates trillions of dollars daily in transactions through u.s. financial institutions , which in turn exposes the u.s. financial system to potential money laundering activity and cross - border illicit financial flows .

the u.n. report further estimated that the united states , in 2010 , likely generated some $300 billion in illicit proceeds ( excluding tax evasion ) , or roughly 2% of u.s. gdp .

in 2015 , the u.s. department of the treasury confirmed that the u.n.'s estimates are "comparable to u.s .

estimates. .

as in the united states , international surveys indicate that the most significant sources of illicit proceeds are generated through white collar crime ( i.e. , fraud , identity theft , and tax evasion ) and organized crime , particularly drug trafficking .

smaller sums , which are nevertheless significant for political and security reasons , are associated with public corruption and international terrorism .

in seeking to clean dirty money , launderers wield a wide range of methods to conceal from authorities the true origins , ownership , and volume of illicit proceeds .

particularly attractive are methods that preserve anonymity ( eg , use and movement of cash ) , avoid aml - related recordkeeping and reporting requirements ( eg , structuring bank deposit and withdrawal ) , and involve techniques that are hard for authorities to detect ( eg , trade - based money laundering ) .

money laundering may involve the use of complicit individuals ( eg , nominees , corrupt officials , banking insiders , front company business owners ) and illegal financial service providers ( eg , unregistered money services businesses ) .

money laundering may also involve the exploitation of legal off - shore corporate structures that obscure beneficial ownership ( eg , shell companies ) and permissive foreign jurisdictions , including those accessible by correspondent banking relationships and business sectors with potentially lax aml controls .

"beneficial owner" refers to the natural person who , directly or indirectly , controls or manages a legal entity and its assets .

according to the financial action task force ( fatf ) , an international aml standard - setting body , the lack of available information on the legal and beneficial ownership of corporate vehicles increases their vulnerability to exploitation for the purposes of laundering illicit proceeds .

the treasury department describes money laundering as "a necessary consequence of almost all profit generating crimes and can occur almost anywhere in the world. .

as a global issue , the effectiveness of international aml efforts is often described as dependent on the international community's weakest links: countries or jurisdictions that fail to establish appropriate aml safeguards .

unchecked money laundering can have global consequences ; it can: undermine the integrity of the international financial system , reduce consumer confidence in the financial system , and damage the reputation of financial regulatory bodies .

introduce economic distortions that affect economic growth , international trade , business competitiveness , money demand , capital flows , foreign investments , exchange rates , and securities markets .

violate border and customs controls through the facilitation of bulk cash smuggling and trade - based laundering methods that evade duties , tariffs , and taxes — legitimate sources of government revenue that become unavailable for public expenditure .

contribute to and exacerbate state fragility by rewarding illicit behavior at the expense of transparency , good governance , the rule of law , and accountability of public and private institutions .

enable criminals to sustain their networks and realize profits generated by their illicit activities , including political corruption .

facilitate the financing of terrorism .

the 114 th congress introduced or passed several bills pertaining to aml , and funded ongoing executive branch efforts , as well as holding a number of hearings exploring aml issues .

many of these efforts pertained to combating terrorist financing , sanctions , the disclosure of beneficial ownership , and corruption — issues that will likely persist during the 115 th congress .

as the 115 th congress develops its legislative agenda , a number of aml policy questions remain — including the status of efforts to address the critiques of the december 2016 fatf mutual evaluation of the united states , particularly with respect to beneficial ownership transparency , and the implementation of enacted legislation from the 114 th congress , particularly with respect to the application of new sanctions , including secondary sanctions , against designated foreign persons , entities , and jurisdictions .

drawing from past legislative activity , the 115 th congress may also revisit proposals to require the executive branch to develop a roadmap for identifying key aml policy challenges and balancing aml priorities in a national strategy .

although the national and international consequences of money laundering have the potential to be economically and politically significant , and despite robust aml efforts in the united states , challenges , both new ( eg , cyber - enabled financial crimes and emerging payment methods ) and old ( eg , exploitation of cash and international trade for money laundering ) , remain .

over time , the scale of global money laundering and the diversity of illicit methods to move and store ill - gotten proceeds through the international financial system has not diminished .

gaps in legal , regulatory , and enforcement regimes , including uneven availability of international training and technical assistance for aml purposes , continue to limit the application of a globally consistent policy approach to aml .

ultimately , the crafting of aml policy involves an ongoing balance of implementation costs , relative to the risks and consequences of money laundering — a balance affected by statutory requirements , regulatory implementation , financial institution compliance , enforcement actions , international cooperation , and changing perceptions of the risk environment .

some see the beginning of the 115 th congress as an opportunity to revisit the existing aml policy framework , assess its effectiveness , and propose regulatory and statutory changes .

in february 2017 , for example , the financial services industry association the clearing house offered multiple proposals to significantly modify the bsa / aml regime , including proposals to reshape the relationship between fincen and other federal regulators and oversight bodies , enact beneficial ownership legislation , modify sar filing and disclosure requirements , and , ultimately , rebalance the distribution of financial and resource costs associated with preventing , identifying , and reporting on illicit financial activity .

other proposals may emerge as the 115 th congress continues to tackle aml policy issues .

