the federal government is the largest source of funding for academic research and development ( r&d ) at u.s. universities and colleges , obligating more than $28 billion in fy2016 .

as part of oversight of federal funding for academic research , congress and federal agencies have established requirements through statutes , regulations , and guidance documents that u.s. universities , colleges , and other research institutions must comply with when applying for , receiving , and reporting on the results of federal research grants .

such requirements are implemented to ensure transparency and help prevent waste , fraud , and abuse .

academic stakeholders generally recognize the need for oversight to ensure accountability , safety , and the integrity of the research enterprise .

however , for more than a decade many have raised concerns that federal regulations and administrative requirements are having unintended consequences , such as reducing research productivity and the potential return on federal investments and discouraging students from pursuing careers in academic research .

this report contains background information and selected issues on federal regulations and administrative requirements related to federally funded academic research .

it is not an exhaustive treatment of all federal regulations and administrative requirements related to federally funded academic research , but rather provides a general overview and discussion of select issues .

other crs products provide additional information on the federal grants process and federal regulations and administrative requirements more broadly .

academic research and development , particularly in science and technology , is widely considered to be an important contributor to american innovation , competitiveness , and economic growth .

federal funds provide more than half of the total amount u.s. universities and colleges spend on r&d each year .

institutional funds from u.s. universities and colleges are the next largest source of support , providing approximately one - quarter of the total r&d funds spent each year .

businesses , state and local governments , and nonprofit organizations , among others , provide the remaining sources of funding for academic r&d .

federal funds are provided through grants and other mechanisms by more than two dozen federal agencies .

over 90% of this funding comes collectively from the national institutes of health ( nih ) , the national science foundation ( nsf ) , the department of defense ( dod ) , the department of energy ( doe ) , and the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) ( table 1 ) .

nih alone provides u.s. universities and colleges with more than 60% of all federal funding for academic r&d ( figure 1 ) .

a 2012 survey by the federal demonstration partnership ( fdp ) to "determine the impact of federal regulations and requirements on the research process" found that researchers spent on average 42% of their time on federally funded projects meeting administrative requirements rather than conducting research directly .

according to the survey , "most respondents agreed that administrative workload associated with federally - funded research has increased in the past 5 to 6 years. .

furthermore , a 2015 report by vanderbilt university estimated the cost of compliance with federal research regulations across 13 u.s. universities and colleges at between 11% and 25% of each institution's research expenditures .

broadly , the academic community has indicated an interest in harmonizing federal regulations across agencies and eliminating some regulations .

in a joint statement , the association of american universities , association of public and land - grant universities , and council on governmental relations asserted the following: minimizing administrative and compliance costs ultimately will provide a cost benefit to the federal government and to university administrators , faculty , and students by freeing up resources and time to directly support educational and research efforts .

a similar sentiment has been expressed by some members of congress .

for example , in a 2016 subcommittee hearing , a few members raised concern that federal laws , regulations , and reporting requirements are creating a situation where too much time and resources are spent on complying with federal requirements .

in a 2014 subcommittee hearing , the nsf inspector general highlighted the importance of maintaining accountability in efforts aimed at reducing investigators' administrative workloads , stating: as accountability professionals , my office and the ig community are committed to striking the appropriate balance between reducing burden and maintaining proper accountability .

to that end , we are focused on ways to ensure that that balance is maintained or strengthened , not diminished .

as described in a 2016 government accountability office ( gao ) report , federal research grants can be divided into several stages — pre - award , award , post - award implementation , and closeout — that are each associated with specific administrative requirements .

for example , after a grant is awarded , grant recipients must meet a number of federal requirements associated with post - award implementation , including documenting personnel expenses and the purchase of research equipment and supplies , managing and reporting on the project's budget , and reporting on any subaward recipients .

while this report focuses on federal requirements , academic institutions also develop internal policies for managing awards more broadly , including federal , state , and nonprofit awards .

requirements set by the institution facilitate compliance with federal regulations but may also add to the administrative workload .

institutional requirements vary depending on such factors as the size and focus of the institution and its research program , as well as the availability , or lack of , a sponsored research office .

the following subsections describe a selection of the overarching federal laws , regulations , and guidance pertaining to academic research awards .

numerous evaluations have looked at the impacts of federal grant regulations on academic research .

in 2016 , the gao and the national academy of sciences ( nas ) each released reports evaluating federal regulations and administrative requirements placed on research grant recipients .

the gao report concluded that some of the efforts by omb and agencies to allow more institutional flexibility ( eg , expanded authorities for certain aspects of budget management and revised requirements for personnel documentation ) had led to reduced administrative workloads and costs , though more could be done .

the nas report concluded that a new framework was needed "to ensure that regulatory requirements are justified , proportional to the problems being addressed , and harmonized across funding agencies so as to create a more effective and efficient partnership between funding agencies and research institutions. .

additionally , in 2014 , the national science board ( nsf's governing body ) released a report examining administrative workload of federally funded investigators , which asserted a "consensus that some of these [administrative and compliance] requirements are interfering with the conduct of science out of proportion with the accepted need to ensure accountability , transparency , and safety. .

and as previously discussed , the federal demonstration partnership released reports from survey findings in 2012 and 2005 indicating a substantial portion of a researcher's time is spent addressing administrative tasks .

collectively , these reports offer recommendations to issues that are long - standing .

for example , a 1999 report on the nih initiative to reduce regulatory burden highlighted multiple regulatory concerns that continued to be raised in the recent gao and nas reports .

in 1999 , the author concluded that a number of issues were "not new , often having been identified by other studies" and addressing them would require "sustained attention. .

across these reports , stakeholders have cited a variety of areas as contributing to administrative workload and costs .

these include grant proposal preparation , financial management , effort reporting and personnel management , monitoring of grant subrecipients , and progress reporting .

broadly , analysts and stakeholders have recommended that the federal government continue its work to reduce administrative workloads ; assess , modify , and eliminate ineffective or duplicative requirements ; and improve coordination and harmonization among agencies and between agencies and grant recipient communities .

more specifically , recommendations have included creation of an overarching body and an administrator position at omb for reviewing regulations and standardizing policies ; wider use of preliminary proposals , and simpler , standardized progress reports ; creation of a central database of investigator information ; development of a standard grant form and a standard conflict of interest form that more narrowly targets areas of greatest risk for researchers ; changes to effort reporting processes , and guidance on acceptable methods ; and modifications to the threshold for requiring competitive bidding of purchases ( eg , laboratory equipment ) , requirements for monitoring award subrecipients , and audit processes .

reflecting congressional concerns over the amount of time and resources spent complying with federal regulations and administrative requirements , legislation in the 114 th congress sought to streamline and reduce federal academic research requirements .

legislation passed in the 114 th congress builds on prior efforts to address issues and recommendations regarding regulatory requirements for federally funded academic research .

this section discusses potential areas of congressional interest .

the amount of time and costs associated with regulations and requirements for federally funded academic research are of ongoing concern to scientists and administrators .

legislation passed by the 114 th congress to address many of the long - standing issues raised in recent reports has had broad support from the scientific community , though challenges and uncertainties remain .

academic institutions can help maximize federal efforts to streamline and harmonize requirements by working to improve their own internal policies and procedures .

as prior assessments have noted , no one regulation or policy is the major cause of stakeholder concern ; rather , it is the cumulative impact across a range of requirements .

congressional oversight may be an important part of monitoring the progress of implementing the provisions enacted in the 114 th congress in a holistic way and evaluating their overall effectiveness .

further , congress may broadly consider the appropriate balance between supporting the nation's academic research enterprise through efforts to streamline regulations and maintaining mechanisms for oversight , transparency , and accountability .

forthcoming assessments from such efforts as the revised common rule , final guidance from payroll certification pilot programs , and omb review of ug components , may help to inform any future efforts to optimize federal research policies .

