cuban migration to the united states is a topic of long - standing congressional interest .

u.s. immigration policy toward cuba is the product of a unique set of circumstances and is unlike u.s. immigration policy toward any other nation in the world .

efforts by the obama administration to normalize relations with cuba following president obama's december 2014 announcement of a major policy shift toward that country focused increased attention on migration issues , leading some policymakers to reexamine the policies on immigration and federal assistance that apply to cuban migrants .

the november 2016 death of cuba's fidel castro may spur a broader reexamination of these policies .

at the same time , concern among some in cuba about possible changes to current u.s. migration policy is seen as a key factor behind recent upticks in cuban arrivals to the united states .

"normal" immigration from cuba to the united states has not existed since the cuban revolution of 1959 brought fidel castro to power .

for more than 50 years , the majority of cubans who have entered the united states have done so through special humanitarian provisions of federal law .

for example , between 1962 and 1979 hundreds of thousands of cubans entered the united states under the parole provision in the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) .

the ina parole provision authorizes the attorney general ( now the secretary of homeland security ) "to parole into the united states temporarily under such conditions as he may prescribe only on a case - by - case basis for urgent humanitarian reasons or significant public benefit any alien applying for admission to the united states. .

although the cubans who arrived in the united states after the cuban revolution were paroled in , they were considered to be refugees fleeing persecution .

at the time , the ina did not contain the current definition of a refugee or the provisions on refugee admissions and asylum ; these were added by the refugee act of 1980 .

in 1980 , the ina parole provision was again used when a mass migration of asylum seekers — known as the mariel boatlift — brought approximately 125,000 cubans ( and 25,000 haitians ) to south florida over a six - month period .

the carter administration described these arrivals as "cuban - haitian entrants. .

the ina parole provision continues to be used today by executive discretion to allow some cubans to enter the united states .

steps taken by the obama administration to date to normalize relations with cuba have not changed u.s. policy toward cuban migrants .

however , these efforts have raised questions about the potential for changed policies in the future through either executive or congressional action .

much of this attention has focused on the caa , which , as discussed , grants dhs the discretionary authority to adjust the status of eligible cubans .

generally speaking , the executive could be said to have some latitude under the caa to determine whether to exercise this discretion toward individual cuban migrants or classes of cuban migrants .

with respect to congressional action , bills were introduced in the 114 th congress to repeal the caa .

if enacted , measures such as these would eliminate the special adjustment of status pathway for cubans , requiring them to qualify for adjustment of status under the applicable provisions in the ina .

other legislation was introduced in the 114 th congress that would eliminate the special treatment that cuban entrants receive with respect to federal refugee resettlement assistance and other federal assistance .

proposals limited to ending federal assistance , however , would not change existing immigration policies toward cubans and , thus , would not directly impact the ability of cubans to enter the united states or to adjust status under the caa .

these three figures provide available data on the migration of unauthorized cubans to the united states .

these are the same data included in figure 1 .

the figures display annual data since fy1995 on u.s. coast guard interdictions ( figure a - 1 ) and u.s. border patrol apprehensions between u.s. ports of entry ( figure a - 2 ) , and annual data since fy2004 on inadmissible cubans encountered at u.s. ports of entry ( figure a - 3 ) .

as discussed , the recent increases in all three measures are widely attributed to cuban concerns that u.s. treatment of cuban migrants may soon change .

the data , however , also reflect considerable variability in earlier years .

observers have identified a number of factors that may have contributed to these annual changes .

on the u.s. side , these include u.s. economic conditions ( eg , the 2007-2009 recession and slow recovery ) and migration - related policies affecting cubans ( eg , changes in coast guard patrolling methods ) .

