this report provides policy and historical background about puerto rico's political status — referring to the relationship between the federal government and a territorial one .

congress has not altered the island's status since 1952 , when it approved a territorial constitution .

status is the lifeblood of puerto rican politics , spanning policy and partisan lines in ways that are unfamiliar on the mainland .

puerto rico has been in political flux in recent years , culminating most recently in the 2017 plebiscite .

momentum toward that outcome began in the 2016 elections , when puerto ricans selected a prostatehood new progressive party ( npp / pnp ) governor , resident commissioner , and majorities in the legislative assembly .

shortly after assuming office , the governor and legislature enacted a territorial law authorizing a plebiscite containing two ballot choices: statehood or free association / independence .

 ( free association is a form of independence entailing negotiated close ties between two countries. ) .

after the u.s. department of justice declined to certify the release of federal funds to support the plebiscite , puerto rico amended its plebiscite law to add a status - quo option on the ballot .

some political parties and other groups on the island encouraged their supporters to boycott the plebiscite .

on june 11 , 23.0% of voters turned out for the plebiscite , where 97.2% selected statehood ; 1.5% selected free association / independence ; and 1.3% chose the "current territorial status. .

in anticipation of a statehood victory in the plebiscite , the territorial legislature enacted , and the governor signed , legislation in june 2017 to pursue a "tennessee plan" path to statehood .

that method traditionally involves sending an appointed or elected "delegation" to washington to lobby congress to grant statehood .

because the u.s. constitution grants congress broad discretion over territories , the house and senate may choose to reexamine puerto rico's political status , or to decline to do so .

if congress chose to alter puerto rico's political status , it could do so through statute regardless of whether a plebiscite were held or what sentiment such a vote revealed .

as with all crs reports , this product provides background information and analysis for congress .

it emphasizes those facets of the status policy debate that historically have been most relevant for house and senate consideration , and that appear to remain most relevant for members and staff who are considering those issues .

it emphasizes the current status debate in puerto rico specifically rather than examining status in all u.s. territories .

this report is not intended to substitute for a comprehensive analysis of the complex and culturally sensitive issues surrounding puerto rico's more than 100-year affiliation with the united states .

the report also is not intended to be an analysis of the various legal , economic , or social issues that might arise in considering puerto rico's political status or a change in its relationship with the united states .

parts of this report are adapted from another crs product , which provides additional discussion of the 2012 plebiscite .

puerto rico has been the subject of strategic and political attention for more than 500 years .

spain was the first colonial power to claim the island .

christopher columbus landed on the west coast of the main island of present - day puerto rico on november 19 , 1493 .

there , he encountered native taíno indians , who called the island "borinquén" ( or , in some spellings , "borinkén" ) .

as one scholar has noted , "[a] permanent foothold was finally established in 1508 , when juan ponce león led a group of settlers from hispaniola. .

spanish colonizers forced the taíno into servitude , and "[b]y 1521 , the indian borinquén had become another spanish settlement in an expanding empire. .

for the next 400 years , puerto rico served as a spanish agricultural and mining outpost in the caribbean .

when the united states defeated spain in the spanish - american war ( 1898 ) , the united states acquired puerto rico , guam , and the philippines from spain via the treaty of paris .

puerto rico provided the united states with a central location from which to exercise military and strategic power in the caribbean , particularly before world war ii .

the u.s. military briefly administered the island until congress established a civilian government in 1900 .

today , puerto rico is both deeply integrated into american society and insulated from it .

on one hand , the american flag has flown over san juan , the capital , for more than 100 years .

in addition , those born in puerto rico are u.s. citizens .

many live and work on the mainland and serve in the military .

on the other hand , as shown in figure 1 , the island is geographically isolated from the mainland united states ; it lies approximately 1,500 miles from washington and 1,000 miles from miami .

residents of puerto rico lack full voting representation in congress , typically do not pay federal income taxes on income earned on the island , do not have the same eligibility for some federal programs as those in the states , do not vote in presidential elections ( although they may do so in party primaries ) , and enjoy a culture and predominant spanish language that some argue more closely resembles latin america than most of the 50 states .

puerto rico is a u.s. territory subject to congressional authority derived from the territory clause of the u.s. constitution .

the territory clause grants congress "power to dispose of and make all needful rules and regulations respecting the territory or other property belonging to the united states. .

congress has enacted various statutes to address specific matters concerning the island's political status .

puerto rico's current political status , as determined by federal statute ( or otherwise , as noted ) , is summarized briefly below .

after military governance since the united states acquired puerto rico in 1898 , congress established a civilian government on the island in 1900 .

among other points , the foraker act established an "executive council" consisting of a presidentially appointed civilian governor and various department heads .

the new government also included a popularly elected house of delegates ( which shared decisionmaking power with the executive council ) and a u.s. - style judiciary system .

the foraker act also established the resident commissioner position to represent island interests in washington .

these duties came to include nonvoting service in the u.s. house of representatives ( the primary role of the resident commissioner today ) .

through the jones act ( 1917 ) , congress authorized appropriations for legislative staff and franking privileges for the resident commissioner .

devoted primarily to strengthening puerto rico's civil government , the jones act also extended u.s. citizenship to puerto ricans and established a bill of rights for the island .

major governmental changes included establishing a three - branch government similar to the one on the mainland .

congress recognized island authority over matters of internal governance in 1950 through the federal relations act ( fra ) and when it approved the island's constitution in 1952 .

no major status changes have occurred since .

after enactment of the fra and approval of the territorial constitution , puerto rico became known formally as the "commonwealth of puerto rico. .

use of the word "commonwealth" and whether the term carries particular legal or political significance is a topic of substantial historical and scholarly debate — most of which is not addressed herein .

a brief summary of the competing major perspectives , however , provides important context for understanding the ongoing status debate .

some contend that puerto rico's commonwealth status signifies a unique recognition somewhere between territory and state .

this perspective is often called "enhanced commonwealth" or "new commonwealth. .

as longtime territories scholar arnold h. leibowitz has summarized , those holding this view have argued that more than local self - government was achieved by the 1950-1952 legislation .

it contends that a new legal entity was created with a unique status in american law: the commonwealth , a status which is an internationally recognized non - colonial status... .

most important , in this view , commonwealth is not a "territory" covered by the 'territory clause' of the constitution , nor quite obviously is it a state ; rather , commonwealth is sui generis and its judicial bounds are determined by a "compact" which cannot be changed without the consent of both puerto rico and the united states .

others , however , contend that , at least in the puerto rican context , the term "commonwealth" does not hold particular legal or political significance .

from this viewpoint , "commonwealth" is a stylistic or historical term of art , as used in the formal names of states such as the commonwealth of pennsylvania .

some also suggest that commonwealth refers to a form of government , but does not designate a unique nonterritorial status .

as leibowitz has observed , from the outset the non - commonwealth parties in puerto rico , seeking either statehood or independence ... questioned the concept of the commonwealth .

they have argued that although congress may delegate powers to a territorial government , the broad powers granted to congress under the territorial clause of the constitution and the implied powers of the national government remain and may be exercised should the need arise .

further they cite the legislative history of public law 600 [the fra] to challenge the compact and commonwealth concept .

debate over significance of the "commonwealth" term notwithstanding , action by congress would be necessary to alter puerto rico's political status .

doing so , of course , would require passage of legislation by congress and approval by the president .

finally , those rejecting the status quo also generally suggest that puerto rico's current status was not intended to be — or perhaps should not be — permanent , and that statehood or independence are natural next steps .

before the 2017 plebiscite , puerto rico had held five status plebiscites or referenda since adopting its current relationship with the united states .

these votes were held in 2012 , 1998 , 1993 , 1991 , and 1967 .

ballot wording and options during each plebiscite or referendum differed .

most recently , in 2012 , voters were asked to answer two questions: ( 1 ) whether they wished to maintain puerto rico's current political status ; and ( 2 ) regardless of the choice in the first question , whether they preferred statehood , independence , or to be a "sovereign free associated state. .

figure 2 shows a sample ballot .

according to results certified by the puerto rico state elections commission , approximately 54.0% of those who cast ballots answered "no" to the first question .

in the second question , approximately 61.2% of voters chose statehood .

however , results of the plebiscite were controversial .

debate focused on whether almost 500,000 blank answers on the second question should be included in the total , thereby affecting whether any option received a majority .

a concurrent resolution approved by the territorial legislature and supported by pdp governor alejandro garcía pad illa ( who was elected on the same day as the plebiscite ) contended that the results were "inconclusive. .

another crs report provides additional detail about the 2012 plebiscite .

after governor garcía padilla assumed office in 2013 , momentum toward revisiting status waned on the island .

as explained below , interest in status rebounded in 2016 .

in washington , the house and senate provided federal funds to support a future plebiscite .

specifically , in the fy2014 omnibus appropriations law , congress appropriated $2.5 million for "objective , nonpartisan voter education about , and a plebiscite on , options that would resolve puerto rico's future political status. .

these plebiscite - education funds remain available until expended , but congress placed conditions on their release that appear to exclude the "enhanced commonwealth" status option as a choice on the ballot .

as discussed below , the justice department determined in 2017 that enhanced commonwealth remained inconsistent with the u.s. constitution .

in the 2016 general election , puerto rico voters selected npp candidates for both the governor and resident commissioner posts .

the prostatehood npp also retained majorities in the territorial house and senate .

governor - elect ricardo rosselló announced that he "intend[ed] to make joining the union [as a state] the central focus of his administration. .

soon after the november election , some in the npp began urging congressional action to admit puerto rico as a state .

in his election night victory speech , according to one media report , rosselló called his election an "'unequivocal mandate to tell the world that the transition to statehood has started,' which he will promote through the tennessee plan. .

the "tennessee plan" is a term of art referring to the method by which tennessee and six other states joined the union .

each territory employed this method somewhat differently , but the central thrust of the tennessee plan involves organizing a political entity that is essentially a state in all but name .

steps typically include drafting of a state constitution , election of state officers , and sending an elected congressional delegation to washington to lobby for statehood .

these developments notwithstanding , there is no single path to statehood .

changing puerto rico's political status by the tennessee plan or any other method ultimately would require a statutory change by congress with presidential approval .

in january 2017 , rosselló assumed the governorship and the npp assumed the majority in the legislature .

puerto rico was thus now primarily represented by a governor , legislative majority , and resident commissioner who publicly favored statehood .

on february 3 , 2017 , the legislature enacted , and the governor subsequently signed , legislation setting the june 11 , 2017 , plebiscite date .

the new npp government framed the 2017 plebiscite as the first "sanctioned" by the federal government ( through the fy2014 appropriations language discussed above ) .

the legislature also characterized the 2017 plebiscite as a way to "reassert the desire for decolonization and the request for statehood" from 2012 .

similar arguments that had surrounded the previous plebiscite language resurfaced in 2017 .

similar criticisms also emerged from those who opposed the plebiscite .

as explained below , the initial ballot was subsequently amended after the u.s. department of justice ( doj ) declined to certify the federal funds appropriated in fy2014 ( discussed above ) to administer the plebiscite .

npp supporters argued that the 2012 plebiscite established that puerto rican voters preferred a nonterritorial option , and that statehood or a form of independence were the only constitutionally permissible choices .

the plebiscite law thus included two "non - territorial and non - colonial political status" options on the ballot: ( 1 ) "statehood" and ( 2 ) "free association / independence. .

the law further specified that only ballots marking one of those options would be counted — a reference to controversy over "blank" ballots believed to be cast in protest in 2012 .

the law also directed that if the "free association / independence" option received a majority in the june 11 plebiscite , an october 8 , 2017 , referendum would be held for voters to select from these two choices .

both free association and independence would entail puerto rico becoming an independent country .

the former suggests an ongoing , mutually negotiated relationship in which the united states might continue to provide some benefits or services , such as the united states today has with the western pacific nations of the federated states of micronesia ( fsm ) , the republic of micronesia , and the republic of palau .

pdp supporters objected to the ballot wording and choices .

they argued that the ballot improperly omitted a status - quo option and was biased to favor a statehood outcome .

after the legislature enacted the initial law establishing the plebiscite date and ballot , attention turned to whether the u.s. justice department would approve releasing the federal funds appropriated in fy2014 .

importantly , puerto rico does not require federal approval to conduct a plebiscite or to otherwise reconsider its political status , but plebiscite supporters argued that federal approval would enhance the vote's perceived legitimacy in washington .

on april 13 , 2017 , acting deputy attorney general dana boente wrote to governor rosselló that "multiple considerations preclude [doj] from notifying congress that it approves of the plebiscite ballot and obligating the funds. .

according to the letter , "the department does not believe that the results of the 2012 plebiscite justify omitting puerto rico's current status as an option on the [2017] ballot. .

boente explained that doj also had determined that the ballot language included "several ambiguous and potentially misleading statements , which may hinder voters' ability to make a fully informed choice as well as efforts to ascertain the will of the people from the plebiscite results. .

in particular , doj raised concerns about what it regarded as deficiencies in how u.s. citizenship rights were explained in the "statehood" ballot description ; and the chance that voters could "misperceive" the "free association" option as a constitutionally impermissible form of "enhanced commonwealth. .

after doj issued its determination , attention shifted back to the island .

as discussed briefly below , the prostatehood government amended the plebiscite law to include a commonwealth option .

soon after the doj issued its april 13 letter , the rosselló administration and the npp majority in the legislature announced that they would amend the plebiscite law .

the amended "statement of motives" declared that,"[d]ue to the position stated by the u.s. department of justice , [the legislative assembly has] acted , under protest , on [doj's] recommendation to include the current territorial status among the options , so that the plebiscite may be fully supported by the federal government. .

as figure 3 below shows , the revised ballot included three options: ( 1 ) statehood , ( 2 ) "free association / independence," and ( 3 ) "current territorial status. .

the justice department did not formally respond to the ballot changes before voters went to the polls .

however , supporters framed the new ballot options as tantamount to federal endorsement for the plebiscite .

opponents noted that the department had not approved the language .

changing the ballot language was intended to address the justice department's concerns , but it also reignited political controversy among the island's political parties .

the independence party ( pip ) , which initially announced that it would encourage its supporters to participate in the plebiscite in hopes of defeating statehood , changed its position .

in light of what it regarded as a colonial "commonwealth" ballot option now being included , the pip announced that it would boycott the plebiscite , as did the pdp , in addition to some other nonparty groups .

pdp leadership called for repealing the plebiscite law and beginning anew .

on june 11 , 2017 , voters in puerto rico chose among the three options on the revised plebiscite ballot .

97.2% of voters chose statehood , 1.5% of voters chose free association / independence , and 1.3% of voters chose the "current territorial status. .

turnout for the plebiscite was 23% ( approximately 518,000 of 2.3 million voters ) .

in anticipation of a statehood victory in the plebiscite , the territorial legislature enacted , and the governor signed , legislation in june 2017 to pursue a "tennessee plan" path to statehood , including appointing a "delegation" to advocate for statehood before the house and senate in washington .

the pdp opposition criticized the law and vowed to challenge it in court and in future elections .

as discussed elsewhere in this report , the house and senate may determine how or whether to respond to these developments .

two status bills have been introduced in the 115 th congress .

one proposes statehood , while the other proposes a form of independence .

brief discussion appears below .

one day after assuming office , puerto rico's newly elected resident commissioner , jenniffer gonzález - cólon , introduced legislation to admit the island as a state .

h.r .

260 proposes that if voters choose statehood in the plebiscite provided for in the fy2014 omnibus appropriations law ( discussed previously ) , puerto rico would join the union as a state by january 3 , 2025 .

separate legislation , introduced in february 2017 , would require the puerto rico legislature to "provide for a referendum" between two status options .

specifically , h.r .

900 , introduced by representative gutiérrez , proposes a popular vote between independence and free association .

the bill also authorizes treaty negotiations to implement either outcome .

unlike h.r .

260 , h.r .

900 would permit mainlanders ( or others ) of puerto rican descent to participate in the referendum .

the bill specifies voting eligibility for those "born in puerto rico" or those who "[have] a parent who was born in puerto rico. .

status was not a major component of debate in the 114 th congress .

status was , however , a contextual issue as congress considered legislation related to the island's ongoing economic crisis .

the 114 th congress did not enact any legislation directly affecting puerto rico's political status , but committees held hearings that partially addressed the topic .

one bill devoted to puerto rico's political status was introduced in the 114 th congress .

h.r .

727 ( pierluisi ) would have authorized the puerto rico state elections commission to "provide for a vote" in the territory on admitting puerto rico as a state .

the bill did not advance beyond introduction .

h.r .

727 specified that the proposed ballot "shall" include a single question: "shall puerto rico be admitted as a state of the united states ? .

yes___ no___. .

the bill further specified a statehood admission process to be followed , to conclude on january 1 , 2021 , if a majority of voters selected statehood .

much of the status debate emphasizes governance , political participation , and democratic principles rather than economic issues or other policy matters .

furthermore , the relationship between status and economics is subject to ongoing debate , with some arguing that the two issues are inextricably linked and others replying that the status debate distracts from long - standing economic problems .

most recently , puerto rico's ongoing financial crisis has , however , shaped some aspects of recent attention to status , as discussed briefly below .

as noted previously , economic issues are otherwise beyond the scope of this report .

in june 2016 , congress enacted legislation responding to an ongoing economic crisis in puerto rico .

the puerto rico oversight , management , and economic stability act ( promesa ; p.l .

114-187 ) establishes a process for restructuring the island government's public debt .

promesa also establishes a federal oversight board , formally known as the financial oversight and management board for puerto rico , with "broad powers of budgetary and financial control over" the island .

status was not a central component of the congressional deliberation over promesa , although some members addressed status in testimony or floor statements .

some hearings also addressed the topic .

perhaps most consequentially for the status debate , some of those who opposed promesa , including some members of congress , characterized the broad powers provided to the oversight board as undemocratic .

in particular , opponents objected to the board's powers to approve fiscal plans submitted by the governor and to approve territorial budgets , among others .

although not necessarily addressing the oversight board explicitly , proponents generally argued that , in the absence of bankruptcy protection for territories , promesa was necessary to help the island's government to restructure its debts in an orderly fashion .

critics , on the other hand , contended that the oversight board undermines the mutually agreed status relationship established in 1952 .

connections between promesa and status also were a component of the 2016 puerto rico elections ( discussed previously ) .

one brief section of promesa explicitly addresses status .

section 402 of the law states that "[n]othing in this act shall be interpreted to restrict puerto rico's right to determine its future political status , including" through another plebiscite as authorized in the fy2014 omnibus appropriations law ( p.l .

113-76 ) .

a december 2016 report released by a congressional task force established in promesa ( devoted primarily to economic issues ) recommended that if such a plebiscite is held , congress "analyze the result ... with care and seriousness of purpose , and take any appropriate legislative action. .

just as status provides context for debates about other areas of public policy , status also can arise in legal cases that primarily concern other topics .

in june 2016 , the supreme court of the united states issued an opinion in puerto rico v. sanchez valle .

this report does not provide a legal overview of the case , which concerned the application of the u.s. constitution's double jeopardy clause to criminal prosecutions in puerto rico .

as another crs product explains , the case examined "whether defendants in a criminal case can be prosecuted under the local laws of puerto rico if they have been previously convicted under federal criminal law for the same conduct. .

the court's opinion did not alter puerto rico's political status .

however , those interested in the status debate followed the case closely in anticipation of how the court would describe the island's relationship with the united states .

the majority opinion addressed the island's political and status history to establish background for the double - jeopardy analysis .

particularly important for status discussions , the court traced the "ultimate source" of puerto rico's prosecutorial power to congress .

as the court summarized , puerto rico's "constitution , significant though it is , does not break the chain" of congressional authority .

as crs has written elsewhere , although sanchez valle was "limited [and] did not address broader issues of puerto rico's sovereignty," the holding suggests that "when congress passes legislation affecting puerto rico's government , as it did recently with the passage of ... promesa , sanchez valle would not appear to suggest a limit on congress's constitutional authority over puerto rico. .

puerto rican politicians representing diverse perspectives have suggested that sanchez valle signals that the commonwealth status does not provide the local autonomy that some , particularly in the pdp , have long suggested .

in addition , some have suggested that sanchez valle is inconsistent with the u.s. government's previous characterization to the united nations ( u.n. ) of puerto rico's status .

in brief , the u.n. determined in 1953 that puerto rico , in light of enactment of the territorial constitution and the federal relations act , was sufficiently self - governing to terminate a previous u.s. reporting requirement that applied to non - self - governing territories .

however , meetings of the u.n. special committee on decolonization remain a venue for debating the island's political status and for u.n. monitoring of the island's relationship with the united states .

at the special committee's june 2016 meetings , after sanchez valle , representatives of various puerto rican parties and interest groups testified that the ruling suggested the need to reexamine the island's relationship with the united states .

in particular , governor garcía padilla ( pdp ) has suggested that in light of sanchez valle and "through promesa , the united states has effectively backtracked from the democratic accomplishments of 1953 and must respond for this new position before the international community. .

the special committee's attention to puerto rico post - sanchez valle is not necessarily remarkable in and of itself , as the committee and the u.n. regularly examine territorial issues worldwide .

furthermore , as a practical matter , the decolonization committee's inquiries on puerto rico tend to be comparatively less prominent in washington policy debates than in those held on the island .

consequently , the topic might or might not be a prominent aspect of future congressional attention to puerto rico's status debate .

nonetheless , it is potentially noteworthy that both the departing and incoming governors , representing two opposing political parties ( pdp and npp , respectively ) , testified that sanchez valle raises questions about the island's degree of self - governance .

