tax reform has been a subject of debate in the past several congress and many policymakers agree that the u.s. tax system is in need of reform .

recent tax reform proposals seek to lower tax rates , broaden the tax base , and provide a simpler and fairer tax system overall .

the difficulty with tax reform , however , is agreeing on the crucial details needed to refresh the tax system .

how far should rates be lowered ? .

which tax provisions should be modified or eliminated ? .

should the reformed tax system be income - based or consumption - based ? .

what are the objectives regarding federal deficits and the debt ? .

to assist congress as it continues to debate tax reform options , this report provides a review of recent legislative proposals introduced since the 113 th congress .

policymakers often speak of the goal to achieve comprehensive reform of the entire tax code .

if comprehensive tax reform is not deemed feasible , congress could choose to consider reforms to certain parts of the code as an alternative .

for example , the corporate tax system could be reformed first and the individual tax system , and perhaps payroll tax system , at a later date .

similarly , congress could choose to reform only portions of the corporate system , such as just the international aspects of the corporate system .

alternatively , congress could choose to evaluate business - only options , which would involve changes to the corporate system and portions of the individual system under which "pass - through" business income generated by sole proprietors , partnerships , limited liability companies , and s corporations is taxed .

before reviewing recent reform proposals , it may be helpful to review the three criteria by which economists often evaluate tax policy — equity , efficiency , and simplicity .

equity concerns the fairness of a particular tax system .

economists rely on two concepts of equity — horizontal equity and vertical equity .

horizontal equity holds that taxpayers with similar incomes should face similar tax burdens .

vertical equity examines the distribution of tax burdens across different income groups .

under an ability - to - pay standard , vertical equity suggests that taxpayers in higher income groups should pay more .

efficiency relates to the degree to which the tax system distorts economic decision making .

low marginal tax rates applied to a broad tax base , with few exclusions or exemptions , tend be more economically efficient .

s implicity considers the amount of resources that must be committed to administering , enforcing , and complying with the tax system .

tradeoffs may exist between these three objectives .

tax reform continues to be actively debated in the 115 th congress .

although no comprehensive tax reforms have been introduced into legislation yet in the 115 th congress , two 2016 reform proposals appear to be at the forefront of current congressional debates — the house gop's "a better way" tax reform proposal , released in june , 2016 , and president trump's campaign reform proposal , released in september 2016 .

the house gop's tax reform proposal is intended to be revenue neutral .

on the individual side , the proposal , also referred to as the tax reform "blueprint," calls for consolidating the current seven tax rates on individual labor income into three: 10% , 20% , and 25% .

the proposal also would reduce taxes on active pass - through business income , dividends , and capital gains ; increase the standard deduction ; repeal the affordable care act ( aca ) - related tax provisions ; and repeal the alternative minimum tax ( amt ) .

to offset the revenue loss associated with these proposals , the blueprint calls for the repeal of all itemized deductions , except the deduction for charitable contributions and mortgage interest ; the repeal of personal exemptions ; and the repeal of various and to - be - determined tax expenditures .

on the corporate side of the tax code , the house blueprint proposes reducing the corporate tax rate to 20% and repealing the corporate amt .

investment would be eligible for expensing , although the interest on new debt would not be deductible .

other fundamental changes include implementing a territorial tax system and a border adjustment ( exports would not be subject to tax ; imports would be subject to tax ) .

currently held untaxed overseas earnings would be subject to a deemed repatriation tax of 8.75% on cash and cash - equivalents , and 3.5% on earnings held in all other forms .

most current corporate tax provisions would be repealed with the exception of net operating loss ( nol ) carryforwards , last - in - first - out ( lifo ) accounting , and the research and design ( r&d ) tax credit .

president trump's campaign proposal is also intended to be revenue neutral .

similar to the house plan , the president's campaign proposal calls for consolidating the seven tax rates on individual income into three: 12% , 25% , and 33% .

the proposal also would increase the standard deduction , limit deductions , and repeal the 3.8% unearned medicare tax , as well as the amt .

all businesses ( corporate and pass - through ) would be subject to a 15% income tax .

the income of corporations with overseas operations would no longer be eligible for deferral , and previously earned foreign - source income would be subject to a 10% deemed repatriation tax , payable over 10 years .

most corporate tax expenditures would be eliminated except for the r&d tax credit .

the 114 th congress did not enact comprehensive tax reform or legislation to replace the income tax system .

several major tax reform proposals were put forward by members in the 113 th congress , but not enacted .

some of these may inform the current debate in the 115 th congress .

the tax reform act of 2014 ( h.r .

1 ) was introduced late in the 113 th congress .

this formal legislative proposal was preceded by several tax reform discussion drafts , the first of which was introduced during the 112 th congress .

the tax reform act of 2014 would have made substantial changes to the current federal tax system , modifying individual , corporate , and business income taxes , as well as the tax treatment of multinational corporations .

the proposal also would have made a number of changes related to the treatment of tax - exempt entities , tax administration and compliance , and excise taxes .

under the proposal , there would have been two regular income tax brackets , with rates of 10% and 25% .

a third bracket would have applied to an alternative definition of income , making for a top statutory rate of 35% .

the 35% bracket results from a 10% tax on modified adjusted gross income ( magi ) above certain income thresholds ( $400,000 for single filers and $450,000 for joint filers , adjusted for inflation ) .

the 10% bracket would have phased out for certain higher - income taxpayers .

brackets would have been adjusted for inflation using chained - cpi .

dividends and capital gains would have been taxed as ordinary income , but 40% of net capital gains and qualified dividends would have been excluded from taxable income .

the proposal also would have repealed amt .

other substantial changes to the individual income tax system's structure included eliminating personal exemptions and increasing the standard deduction .

the standard deduction would have been set at $22,000 for joint filers and $11,000 for other individual filers .

an additional standard deduction of $5,500 would have been available for single filers with at least one child .

the standard deduction would have been phased out for certain higher - income taxpayers .

the proposal also would have modified or eliminated a number of individual income tax credits , deductions , and other provisions .

major changes included eliminating the deduction for state and local tax payments ; scaling back the mortgage interest deduction and earned income tax credit ( eitc ) ; modifying the charitable deduction and education incentives ; and changing 401 ( k ) and roth ira retirement savings vehicles .

under the proposal , all c corporations would have been taxed at a top statutory rate of 25% , with the statutory rate reduction phased in through 2019 .

other business income , including income earned by s corporations , partnerships , and sole proprietorships , would have been taxed through the individual income tax system .

similar to the individual system , the proposal would have modified or eliminated a number of corporate and business income tax credits , deductions , and other provisions .

the proposed changes included eliminating the modified accelerated cost recovery system ( macrs ) ; requiring amortization of research and experimental expenditures and advertising expenses ; modifying the net operating loss ( nol ) deduction ; repealing by phasing out the section 199 domestic production activities deduction ; and repealing the last - in , first - out ( lifo ) method of inventory accounting .

the corporate also amt would have been repealed .

the proposal would have made significant changes to the tax treatment of foreign source income earned by u.s. multinational corporations .

specifically , it proposed adopting a 95% exemption for dividends received by u.s. corporations from foreign subsidiaries .

subpart f rules would have been modified , providing broad taxation of intangible income of foreign subsidiaries when earned , with foreign intangible income subject to a 15% rate ( once fully phased in ) .

the proposal also included "thin capitalization" rules that would have restricted domestic interest deductions and a one - time tax on previously untaxed earnings and profits ( e&p ) of u.s. corporations' foreign subsidiaries .

e&p retained as cash would have been taxed at 8.75% and any remaining e&p would have been taxed at 3.5% .

numerous changes also were proposed with respect to tax - exempt entities , administration and compliance , and excise taxes , including an excise tax on systemically important financial institutions .

the family fairness and opportunity tax reform act ( s. 1616 ) proposed substantive changes to the current income tax .

specifically , s. 1616 would have consolidated the tax brackets , repealed the amt , provided an additional child tax credit and personal credit , eliminated the standard deduction and most itemized deductions ( retaining , with modifications , the deduction for mortgage interest and charitable contributions ) , in addition to making other changes to the tax code .

the flat tax rate act ( h.r .

5882 ) would have imposed a single income tax rate of 15% .

several proposals were introduced in the 113 th congress that would have replaced the income tax system with some alternative form of taxation at the federal level .

the fair tax act of 2013 ( h.r .

25 / s. 122 ) would have repealed the individual income tax , the corporate income tax , all payroll taxes , the self - employment tax , and the estate and gift taxes .

these taxes would have effectively been replaced with a national retail sales tax .

thus , under h.r .

25 / s. 122 , the current federal tax system , based on taxing income , would have been replaced with a system that taxes consumption .

the fair tax act was reintroduced in the 114 th congress ( discussed above ) .

the flat tax act ( h.r .

1040 ) proposed to allow taxpayers to elect to be subject to a flat tax , as an alternative to the current tax system .

individuals and businesses electing a flat tax would pay a flat rate of 19% for the first two years , and a rate of 17% thereafter .

the smart act ( s. 173 ) also proposed a 17% flat tax on individuals' wages and businesses' taxable incomes .

the flat tax systems proposed in h.r .

1040 and s. 173 were structurally similar to the hall - rabushka flat tax proposal .

both of these proposals were reintroduced in the 114 th congress ( discussed above ) .

the american growth & tax reform act of 2013 ( h.r .

2393 ) would have required the secretary of the treasury to submit to congress a legislative proposal for a progressive consumption tax .

h.r .

2393 would have been designed to eliminate the public debt outstanding .

specifically , the treasury would have been directed to provide rates and details on a progressive consumption tax to eliminate the public debt under scenarios in which ( 1 ) the consumption tax would be in addition to all other federal taxes in effect on the date of enactment ; ( 2 ) the consumption tax would replace the individual income tax ; and ( 3 ) the consumption tax would replace the corporate income tax .

the progressive consumption tax act of 2014 ( s. 3005 ) proposed a 10% consumption tax on most goods and services ( structured as a value - added tax [vat] ) ) .

although the legislation would not fully replace the income tax system , it would have reduced individual and corporate income tax rates to a maximum rate of 28% and 17% , respectively .

the legislation also would have broadened the income tax base , eliminating a number of individual tax expenditures .

further , the legislation would have provided an allowance of $50,000 for single filers ( $100,000 for married filing jointly ) , that would have effectively exempted most taxpayers from the individual income tax .

refundable tax credits for families would effectively be replaced with rebates to offset consumption tax liability for lower - income families .

legislation introduced in the 113 th congress would have eliminated the existing tax code , leaving it to congress to design a new tax code .

the tax code termination act ( h.r .

352 ) would have terminated the irc and declared that any new tax system be a simple and fair system that met a set of criteria , as noted above .

the end wasteful tax loopholes act ( s. 8 ) proposed to express the sense of the senate that congress should pass legislation to ( 1 ) eliminate wasteful tax loopholes ; ( 2 ) eliminate corporate tax loopholes and wasteful tax breaks for special interests ; ( 3 ) enhance tax fairness by reforming or eliminating tax breaks that provide excessive benefits to millionaires and billionaires ; ( 4 ) crack down on tax cheaters and close the tax gap ; ( 5 ) use the revenue saved by curtailing tax loopholes to reduce the deficit and reform the federal tax code ; ( 6 ) address provisions in the tax code that make it more profitable for companies to create jobs overseas than in the united states ; and ( 7 ) reform the tax code in a manner that promotes job creation , competitiveness , and economic growth .

although no legislation was ever proposed , former committee on finance chairman max baucus released several discussion drafts related to tax reform in the 113 th congress .

the former chairman released discussion drafts related to international tax reform , tax administration , cost recovery and accounting , and energy tax policy .

the discussion drafts were released in addition to a series of tax reform options papers put forward by the committee earlier in 2013 .

under senator baucus's international tax reform proposal , passive and highly mobile forms of foreign - earned income would have been taxed at the full u.s. rate , as would have income earned from goods ultimately consumed in the united states .

two alternatives were put forth for taxing income earned from products and services sold abroad .

"option y" would have subjected all foreign - earned income to a minimum tax , which the draft set at 80% of the u.s. statutory rate .

"option z" would have taxed 60% of foreign active business income at the u.s. rate .

similar to chairman camp's international tax proposals contained in tax reform act of 2014 ( h.r .

1 ) , undistributed foreign earnings would have been subjected to a one - time tax .

the baucus discussion draft set this rate at 20% .

reforms to cost recovery and accounting rules were also put forward by former chairman baucus as a discussion draft .

proposed reforms would have eliminated the macrs , enacting instead a system that uses asset pools and longer lives that more closely approximate economic depreciation .

certain intangibles , including research and experimentation as well as advertising expenditures , would have been capitalized and amortized .

lifo inventory accounting rules would have been repealed .

small - business expensing allowances would have been increased such that more businesses would have been allowed to use cash accounting .

a number of similar proposals appeared in the tax reform act of 2014 , discussed above .

former chairman baucus had also released a discussion draft related to tax administration and energy tax reform .

this tax administration draft contained several proposals designed to reduce the tax gap , enacting additional data reporting requirements and anti - fraud provisions .

the energy tax reform discussion draft proposed clean energy production and investment tax credits designed to replace existing incentives for renewables and other clean electricity resources ( eg , nuclear , carbon capture , and sequestration ) .

these credits would have been available for the long term , but were designed to begin phasing out once the annual average greenhouse gas emissions rate fell below a specified threshold .

the proposal also contained a new tax credit for clean transportation fuels .

