the federal government supports adoption in two primary ways: federal grants to state governments and tax benefits for individual taxpayers that help offset the costs of adopting a child .

this report focuses on federal adoption tax benefits , which consist of an adoption tax credit and an income tax exclusion for employer - provided adoption assistance .

this report provides an in - depth overview of these tax benefits .

it is structured to first provide a brief summary of adoption in the united states , including the number of adoptions and the average cost of adoption .

the report then turns to a detailed description of the adoption tax credit and the exclusion for employer - provided adoption assistance , including a summary of administrative data on the adoption credit ( similar data on the exclusion are unavailable ) .

next , the report summarizes the legislative history of these tax benefits .

finally , the report concludes with a discussion and analysis of potential policy options related to these benefits .

adoption is a social and legal process in which an adult is formally made the parent of another individual ( usually a child ) .

the legal process in adoption generally requires that a court terminate the parental rights and responsibilities of birth parents ( or earlier adoptive parents ) and subsequently grant those rights and responsibilities instead to the adoptive parents .

for the purposes of understanding adoption tax benefits , adoption can be categorized in one of three ways: 1 .

domestic public agency adoption: an adoption facilitated with the involvement of a state child welfare agency .

 ( note that most domestic public adoptions are special needs adoptions , discussed subsequently. ) .

2 .

domestic private adoption: an adoption facilitated by a private agency , adoption facilitator , or attorney .

3 .

intercountry or foreign adoption: an adoption of a noncitizen or nonresident child by families who are citizens or legal residents of the united states .

the adoption tax credit helps qualifying taxpayers offset some of the costs of adopting a child .

although the credit may be claimed for nearly all types of adoptions ( excluding the adoption of a spouse's child ) , there are some special rules related to claiming the credit for intercountry adoptions and for adoption of children with special needs .

in 2018 , taxpayers may be able to receive an adoption credit of up to $13,810 ( this amount is annually adjusted for inflation ) .

the credit is reduced for taxpayers with income over $207,140 and is phased out completely for taxpayers with more than $247,140 in income ( these amounts are subject to annual inflation adjustment ) .

the adoption credit is not refundable .

however , the credit may be carried forward and claimed on future tax returns for up to five years after initially claimed .

the eligibility rules and calculation of the credit are described in detail below .

taxpayers whose employers offer qualifying adoption assistance programs as a fringe benefit may not have to pay income taxes on some or all of the value of this benefit .

the maximum amount that can be excluded from the taxpayer's income is capped at a maximum amount per adoption which is the same maximum amount of the credit: $13,810 in 2018 .

since the exclusion reduces income subject to taxation , it reduces taxes in proportion to the taxpayer's tax bracket .

for example , if a taxpayer receives $2,000 of excludible employer - provided adoption assistance and is in the 10% tax bracket , the exclusion results in $200 of avoided income taxes .

if a taxpayer is in the 35% tax bracket , the same $2,000 exclusion is worth $700 in tax savings .

 ( by contrast , the tax credit reduces tax liability dollar for dollar of the value of the credit .

for example , if a taxpayer had $2,000 of qualifying adoption expenses and applied those expenses toward the adoption credit , he or she could receive a credit of $2,000 , irrespective of the taxpayer's tax bracket. ) .

taxpayers can claim the exclusion and the credit concurrently for the same adoption , but cannot claim both tax benefits for the same expenses .

hence , for one adoption , a taxpayer is eligible for up to $13,810 in tax - free employer - provided adoption assistance and a $13,810 adoption credit .

 ( taxpayers who claim both benefits for the same adoption must reduce the amount of qualified adoption expenses eligible for the credit by the amount of qualified adoption expenses excluded under an employer - provided adoption assistance plan. ) .

combined , the maximum value of these two tax benefits could equal up to $18,920 in reduced tax liability per adoption in 2018 depending on a taxpayer's expenses , income level , and availability of employer - sponsored adoption assistance program at their work .

in addition to having the same per - adoption maximum as the adoption tax credit , the exclusion for employer - provided adoption assistance is subject to the same income limitation ( i.e. , phaseout ) and the same definitions of "qualified adoption expenses" and "eligible child. .

similar rules that apply to special needs children for the credit also apply for the exclusion .

in other words , if a taxpayer adopts a child with special needs and an employer has a qualified adoption assistance program , the taxpayer will be able to exclude up to $13,810 of income regardless of what the actual adoption expenses are and even if the taxpayer or the employer does not actually pay any qualified adoption expenses .

the filing requirements for the exclusion are the same as for the credit .

finally , the same timing rules that apply to the adoption credit for domestic versus foreign adoption also apply to the exclusion .

thus , in order for the employer - provided adoption benefits to be excludable from income ( and hence not taxable ) for a foreign adoption , the amounts paid under the adoption assistance program must be paid either during or after the year the adoption becomes final ( see table 1 ) .

employer - provided adoption assistance programs are a separate employee benefit that must fulfill all of the following requirements to be excludable from an employee's income: 1 .

the employer must provide notice of the plan to eligible employees .

2 .

the plan must not discriminate in favor of highly compensated employees .

3 .

employees must provide reasonable substantiations of qualifying expenses .

as long as these requirements are met , employers generally have discretion over other aspects of these plans .

administrative data from the irs on the exclusion of employer - provided adoption assistance — comparable to the data on the adoption tax credit — are unavailable .

before the enactment of the adoption tax credit and exclusion for employer - provided adoption assistance in the mid - 1990s , congress enacted an itemized deduction for adoption expenses associated with the adoption of a special needs child as part of the economic recovery tax act of 1981 ( p.l .

97-34 ) .

this deduction was repealed five years later by the tax reform act of 1986 ( p.l .

99-514 ) .

the joint committee on taxation provided several reasons for the repeal of this tax benefit: adoption assistance for special needs children was more appropriate through an expenditure program .

the itemized deduction provided its greatest benefits to higher - income taxpayers who had less need for federal assistance for adoption .

agencies with expertise in adoption ( i.e. , not the irs ) should have budgetary control over adoption assistance .

however , a decade later , congress again enacted tax incentives designed to encourage adoptions .

a summary of enacting legislation and major legislative changes is provided below .

for brevity , laws that made technical corrections or minor changes are not discussed .

there are several ways economists evaluate tax benefits , including adoption tax benefits .

specifically , economists may assess whether adoption tax benefits encourage adoptions , the distribution of these benefits among taxpayers , and the complexity of administering the tax provision .

these perspectives may be helpful to policymakers interested in analyzing or modifying adoption tax benefits and are discussed subsequently .

adoption tax benefits were originally enacted to encourage more adoptions , especially of american children in the foster care system .

more recently congress temporarily made the credit refundable for 2010 and 2011 , expanding eligibility for the credit to lower - and middle - income taxpayers .

congress may in the future seek further modifications to the credit or exclusion for employer - provided adoption assistance to achieve certain policy goals .

some of these options are discussed below .

given that there is little evidence that adoption tax benefits increase adoptions , congress may be interested in eliminating these benefits and replacing them with direct spending on adoption , especially if it views a direct spending program as more effective at encouraging adoptions .

alternatively , congress could eliminate adoption tax benefits and direct any additional revenue to deficit reduction .

congress could modify the benefits in a variety of ways to make them larger .

for example , they could increase the credit and exclusion percentage from 100% to 200% of qualifying expenses , doubling the amount of the credit and exclusion .

alternatively , congress could increase ( or eliminate ) the current statutory cap on the value of the benefits ( $13,810 in 2018 ) , so that the tax benefits were closer to the actual adoption costs .

while this would increase the value of adoption tax benefits for many taxpayers , it is still unclear if it would encourage more adoptions .

while there is some evidence that the type of adoption is influenced by cost ( i.e. , families may pursue a domestic foster care adoption due to cost versus a more expensive international adoption ) , there is little evidence of any effect of adoption tax benefits on the decision to adopt .

in addition , increasing the size of adoption tax benefits will increase the total cost of adoption tax benefits .

data from the irs indicate that on 2015 tax returns , about $251 million worth of adoption tax credits were claimed .

 ( similar data for the exclusion are unavailable , although estimates from the tax policy center suggest that the cost of the exclusion is small in comparison to the credit. ) .

congress could choose to make the adoption tax credit refundable , so that taxpayers with little or no tax liability could claim the entire value of the credit in a given year .

as previously discussed , under current law , the adoption tax credit is nonrefundable , meaning the value of the credit claimed in any year cannot exceed income taxes owed in that year .

in effect , tax liability acts as a cap on the value of a nonrefundable tax credit .

however , unlike other nonrefundable credits for individuals , the amount of the credit in excess of income taxes owed in a given year may be carried forward and claimed for up to five years after initially claimed .

the adoption tax credit was temporarily refundable for two years — 2010 and 2011 — which may provide some insights into the benefits and costs of making this credit refundable .

policymakers interested in expanding eligibility for the adoption tax credit to low - and middle - income taxpayers may consider making the adoption tax credit refundable .

this would promote equity among taxpayers at different income levels who are able to adopt .

making the credit refundable may also reduce taxpayers' compliance burden in claiming the credit and result in current claimants receiving the full value of the credit sooner , instead of carrying the credit forward for up to five years .

as previously discussed and illustrated in figure 2 , when the adoption tax credit was nonrefundable , taxpayers on average claimed significantly less than the maximum amount of the credit .

given that adoption expenses tend to exceed the maximum credit amount , many of these taxpayers may have carried the adoption credit forward on subsequent tax returns .

this would require diligent record keeping on the part of taxpayers until they had claimed the total credit amount or they had exhausted the five - year time limit of the carryforward , whichever came first .

it would also mean that among those taxpayers who carried forward the credit , there could be a significant lag between when adoption expenses were incurred and when the credit for those expenses was actually claimed .

for example , if a taxpayer incurred $10,000 in legal expenses in 2010 for a foreign adoption that was finalized in 2012 , they could only begin claiming the credit on their 2012 income tax return , filed in early 2013 .

depending on their tax liability , they could continue to carry forward the credit for those expenses until their 2017 tax return , a return filed generally in early 2018 .

finally , making the credit refundable could encourage the adoption of more children from the domestic foster care system , an often repeated goal of these tax benefits ( see " legislative history of the credit and exclusion " ) .

data indicate adoptions from foster care tend to account for a greater share of adoptions among low - income taxpayers — who would likely not be eligible for a nonrefundable credit — than higher - income taxpayers .

one study found that "foster care adoptions accounted for about 10 percent of the adoptions completed by filers with incomes over $100,000 , compared with more than 25 percent of the adoptions completed by filers with incomes below $50,000. .

the same study found that foster care adoption accounted for 29% of adoptions among taxpayers with income under $25,000 , while overall foster care adoptions accounted for 18% of adoptions among all tax filers .

on the other hand , making the credit refundable could potentially increase compliance burdens on taxpayers claiming the credit as well as pose administrative challenges to the irs .

insofar as policymakers remain concerned about the improper payments of refundable tax credits , they may seek ways to prevent taxpayers from either mistakenly or fraudulently claiming the adoption tax credit .

depending on the processes used to reduce improper payments , taxpayer burden could increase , as could administrative difficulties for the irs .

for example , when the adoption tax credit was temporarily refundable , the irs required taxpayers claiming the credit to file a paper return ( they could previously e - file ) , and include both irs form 8839 as well as specific adoption - related documentation , which varied based on whether the adoption was foreign or domestic , final or not final , and of a child with special needs or not .

finally , making the adoption tax credit refundable could increase the budgetary cost of the credit if no other modifications to the credit were made ( like reducing the maximum credit amount ) .

as illustrated in figure 3 , the total amount of the credit claimed in 2010 ( $1.2 billion ) — the first year the credit was refundable — and 2011 ( $610 million ) was nearly four times and two times , respectively , the average annual aggregate credit amount between 2002 and 2009 ( approximately $325 million per year ) .

some of the increased cost in 2010 may have been a result of taxpayers with unused "carried forward" credit dollars claiming all of the remaining credit in 2010 , as opposed to carrying it forward after 2010 .

taken as a whole , the 2010 and 2011 data provide some indication as to the range of the cost of making the credit refundable with no alterations to the formula .

policymakers could also make the credit refundable and adjust the credit formula ( and the phaseout income level ) to reduce the budgetary cost of refundability .

as previously discussed , the legislative history indicates that congress intended to provide the largest tax benefits to taxpayers adopting children from the u.s. foster care system .

insofar as this policy goal changes , congress may modify adoption tax benefits to provide parity between different types of adoption .

for example , if congress was interested in encouraging more foreign adoptions , it could change the timing rules of foreign adoptions to be identical to domestic adoptions .

currently , taxpayers who adopt a child from abroad can only claim tax benefits once the adoption is finalized , unlike those who adopt domestically , who can claim benefits the year after expenses are incurred ( see table 1 ) .

in addition , congress could modify the definition of "special needs adoption" to include children adopted through domestic private adoption or internationally , allowing more families to claim the maximum benefit regardless of actual expenses incurred .

as previously discussed , when the credit became refundable , the irs required taxpayers to file a paper tax return with copies of adoption documentation .

while this policy was intended to help the irs verify adoption claims , the irs , according to the taxpayer advocate , seemed unfamiliar with the enormous varieties of documentation , and flagged many returns erroneously for audit .

one potential solution that congress may consider is allowing taxpayers to use a standard third - party affidavit that allows the relevant adoption intermediary , be they a state or private agency , to attest to the adoption .

this would also provide irs examiners with one standardized document to verify , potentially reducing confusion among irs examiners , and burden among taxpayers .

the exclusion for adoption assistance is only available to taxpayers whose employers provide adoption assistance benefits .

one option to expand the availability of this benefit is to convert the exclusion into a deduction that could be claimed regardless of whether adoption assistance was provided as an employee benefit .

for example , the exclusion could be converted to an "above - the - line" deduction available to all taxpayers regardless of whether they itemize their deductions or not .

the same formula for the credit and income phaseouts could apply .

while this policy change might expand the availability of this benefit , it would also likely increase the cost of the provision and complexity for taxpayers , who could now claim both a credit and deduction for their expenses .

in addition , the value of the deduction in terms of tax savings — like the exclusion — depends on the taxpayer's tax bracket .

a $5,000 deduction ( or exclusion ) can save a taxpayer up to $500 in the 10% tax bracket , but $1,750 if he or she is in the 35% bracket .

in other words , deductions and exclusions tend to provide the greatest tax savings to the highest - income taxpayers .

appendix a .

timing rules and carryforwards of the adoption credit below is an illustrative example of how a taxpayer who incurs $20,000 in adoption expenses would claim the adoption tax credit using the carryforward .

for simplicity , this example is a domestic private adoption ( i.e. , not a special needs nor a foreign adoption ) .

in addition it is assumed that the taxpayer's income is below the phaseout amount , so he or she can claim the maximum credit .

in 2012 , the taxpayer incurs $5,000 of expenses , but since the adoption is not finalized , the credit cannot be claimed on his or her 2012 income tax return .

instead , the taxpayer must wait to file a 2013 tax return to apply these expenses toward claiming the credit .

 ( for domestic adoptions , if the adoption is not yet finalized , the expenses can be applied toward claiming the adoption tax credit the year after they are incurred. ) .

on a 2013 tax return , the taxpayer can apply expenses incurred in 2012 and claim up to a $5,000 tax credit for that year .

however , in 2013 the taxpayer's income tax liability is $3,000 , so the actual amount of the adoption tax credit the taxpayer can claim in 2013 is $3,000 .

the taxpayer can carry forward the difference of $2,000 .

on the taxpayer's 2014 tax return , he or she can apply the $15,000 of expenses incurred in 2013 as well as the $2,000 in carried - forward expenses from the previous year , for a total of $17,000 of expenses .

 ( the $15,000 of expenses incurred in 2014 can be claimed on the taxpayer's 2014 return because the adoption is finalized in 2014. ) .

the maximum amount of the credit the taxpayer can claim in 2014 is $10,190 ( the statutory maximum minus the $3,000 of credit already claimed ) .

as a result of the $3,000 tax liability in 2014 , the taxpayer will claim a $3,000 credit , and carry forward the difference of $7,190 .

on a 2015 tax return , even though the taxpayer has incurred no additional expenses , he or she can apply the carried - forward expenses of $7,190 and continue to claim the credit .

the maximum amount of the credit that can be claimed in 2015 is $7,400 ( the statutory maximum minus the $6,000 of credit already claimed ) .

however , in 2015 the taxpayer's income tax liability is $4,000 , so the actual amount of the adoption tax credit the taxpayer can claim in 2015 is $4,000 .

the taxpayer can carry forward the difference of $3,190 .

the taxpayer can apply the carried - forward expenses of $3,190 and continue to claim the credit on a tax return in 2016 .

the maximum amount of the credit that can be claimed in 2016 is $3,460 ( the statutory maximum minus the $10,000 of credit already claimed ) .

in 2016 the taxpayer's income tax liability is $4,000 , so the actual amount of the adoption tax credit the taxpayer can claim in 2016 is $3,190 .

the taxpayer has no additional carryforward .

