on september 5 , 2017 , attorney general jeff sessions announced that deferred action for childhood arrivals ( daca ) , an obama administration initiative , was being rescinded .

a related memorandum released by the department of homeland security ( dhs ) that same day rescinded the 2012 memorandum that established the daca process .

daca was created to provide temporary relief from removal from the united states for individuals without a lawful immigration status who were brought to the united states as children and met other criteria .

under the daca process , both initial grants of deferred action and renewals are issued for a period of two years .

in addition to rescinding the 2012 daca memorandum , the september 2017 memorandum states that dhs will "execute a wind - down" of daca , during which it will "adjudicate certain requests for daca and associated applications meeting certain parameters. .

these requests include initial and renewal requests for daca accepted by dhs by september 5 , 2017 , and renewal requests from current daca beneficiaries whose benefits will expire between september 5 , 2017 , and march 5 , 2018 , and whose renewal requests are accepted by dhs by october 5 , 2017 .

the memorandum also states that dhs will not terminate previously issued grants of deferred action or employment authorization "solely based on the directives in this memorandum. .

to provide context for the trump administration's rescission of daca and possible congressional action , this report addresses frequently asked questions about the daca initiative .

the daca initiative was announced by former dhs secretary janet napolitano in a june 15 , 2012 , dhs memorandum entitled , "exercising prosecutorial discretion with respect to individuals who came to the united states as children. .

the daca initiative was not established by executive order .

the eligibility criteria are under age 16 at the time of entry into the united states ; under age 31 on june 15 , 2012 ; continuous residence in the united states for at least five years before june 15 , 2012 ( that is , since june 15 , 2007 ) ; physical presence in the united states on june 15 , 2012 , and at the time of making the request for consideration of deferred action ; not in lawful immigration status on june 15 , 2012 ; not convicted of a felony , a significant misdemeanor , or three or more misdemeanors , and not otherwise a threat to national security or public safety ; and in school , graduated from high school or obtained general education development certificate , or honorably discharged from the u.s. armed forces or the coast guard .

in addition , an individual must be at least age 15 to request daca , unless he or she is in removal proceedings or has a final removal order or voluntary departure order .

an individual must have filed the following three forms with dhs's u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) : form i - 821d , consideration of deferred action for childhood arrivals form i - 765 , application for employment authorization form i - 765ws , worksheet the individual also should have submitted evidence that he or she met the daca eligibility requirements ( see " what are the eligibility requirements for consideration of daca ? .

" ) .

yes .

the fees , which most recently totaled $495 , consisted of a form i - 765 filing fee of $410 and biometric services fee of $85 .

there were limited fee exemptions available .

an individual must have requested and received a fee exemption before submitting a daca request without a fee .

yes .

the biographic and biometric information submitted by applicants is checked against databases maintained by dhs and other federal agencies .

according to dhs , information provided in a daca request generally "will not be proactively provided to other law enforcement entities ( including ice and cbp ) for the purpose of immigration enforcement proceedings unless the requestor poses a risk to national security or public safety" or meets certain criteria .

at the same time , dhs maintains the following: this policy , which may be modified , superseded , or rescinded at any time without notice , is not intended to , does not , and may not be relied upon to create any right or benefit , substantive or procedural , enforceable by law by any party in any administrative , civil , or criminal matter .

no .

uscis's decision on a daca request is discretionary .

the period has closed .

uscis stopped accepting initial daca requests as of september 5 , 2017 .

however , the agency will reportedly adjudicate initial requests for daca accepted by that date .

individuals granted deferred action may receive work authorization if they can demonstrate an economic necessity for employment .

previously , an individual granted deferred action under daca who wanted to travel outside the united states could apply to uscis for advance parole .

advance parole is permission for a foreign national to re - enter the united states after temporarily traveling abroad .

uscis , however , is no longer approving advance parole requests associated with daca .

at the same time , the september 2017 dhs memorandum stated that dhs "will generally honor the validity period for previously approved applications for advance parole. .

daca recipients , like other foreign nationals without lawful immigration status , are barred from receiving federal public benefits with the exception of certain forms of short - term , emergency assistance .

no .

daca recipients are not granted a lawful immigration status and are not put on a pathway to a lawful immigration status .

during the period of deferred action , however , the daca recipient is in a period of stay authorized by dhs .

presumably , yes .

according to dhs , the agency "will continue to exercise its discretionary authority to terminate or deny deferred action at any time when immigration officials determine termination or denial of deferred action is appropriate. .

the daca recipient must satisfy the following criteria: the individual did not depart from the united states on or after august 15 , 2012 , without first obtaining advance parole ( see " are daca recipients allowed to travel outside the united states ? .

" ) ; the individual has continuously resided in the united states since submitting his or her latest approved daca request ; and the individual has not been convicted of a felony , a significant misdemeanor , or three or more misdemeanors , and is not a threat to national security or public safety .

according to dhs , it will accept renewal requests from eligible daca recipients until october 5 , 2017 ( see " introduction " ) .

to request a renewal of deferred action under daca , an individual must file the following three forms with dhs / uscis: form i - 821d , consideration of deferred action for childhood arrivals form i - 765 , application for employment authorization form i - 765ws , worksheet the forms are available on the uscis website , http: / / www.uscis.gov .

an individual requesting a daca renewal does not have to submit any documents that he or she previously provided to uscis in connection with an approved daca request .

however , the individual does have to submit any new documents related to removal proceedings or criminal history .

uscis will request additional documentation from the individual , if needed .

there is a total fee of $495 , consisting of a form i - 765 filing fee of $410 and biometric services fee of $85 .

no .

the decision on a request to renew daca is discretionary , as it is on an initial daca request .

no .

an individual granted deferred action ( an initial grant or a renewal ) is not given a lawful immigration status and is not put on a pathway to a lawful immigration status ( see " are daca recipients granted lawful immigration status ? .

" ) .

an individual who loses daca would no longer have the protection from removal that daca provides .

whether or not the u.s. government would take steps to remove that individual from the country is a separate issue .

as of march 31 , 2017 , a total of 787,580 initial daca requests and 799,077 renewal requests had been approved .

of all the initial daca requests accepted by uscis for consideration and decided by march 31 , 2017 , approximately 92% were approved and 8% were denied , terminated , or withdrawn .

for renewal requests accepted and decided by march 31 , 2017 , the approval rate was approximately 99% and the denial / termination / withdrawal rate was 1% .

no legislation on daca has been enacted .

during the 113 th congress , however , the house of representatives passed a bill ( h.r .

5272 ) to prohibit using federal funds to process daca applications .

that bill read , in part: no agency or instrumentality of the federal government may use federal funding or resources after july 30 , 2014 — ( 1 ) to consider or adjudicate any new or previously denied application of any alien requesting consideration of deferred action for childhood arrivals , as authorized by executive memorandum dated june 15 , 2012 and effective on august 15 , 2012 ( or by any other succeeding executive memorandum or policy authorizing a similar program ) ... .

several bills have been introduced in the 115 th congress to provide different forms of immigration protection to unauthorized childhood arrivals who satisfy specified eligibility criteria .

some of these bills , including the bar removal of individuals who dream and grow our economy ( bridge ) act ( s. 128 / h.r .

496 ) and the securing active and fair enforcement ( safe ) act ( s. 127 ) , would provide temporary protection from removal and employment authorization to eligible individuals .

other measures , including the encourage new legalized immigrants to start training ( enlist ) act ( h.r .

60 ) , the recognizing america's children act ( h.r .

1468 ) , the american hope act of 2017 ( h.r .

3591 ) , and the dream act of 2017 ( s. 1615 / h.r .

3440 ) , would establish pathways for eligible individuals to become u.s. lawful permanent residents ( lprs ) .

 ( these measures bear similarities to development , relief , and education for alien minors ( dream ) act bills introduced in past congresses. ) .

legislation known as the development , relief , and education for alien minors ( dream ) act was introduced in past congresses .

this legislation sought to establish a process for eligible unauthorized individuals who entered the united states as children to obtain lpr status .

dream act provisions were introduced both as stand - alone bills and as parts of larger immigration reform bills .

although dream act legislation has never been enacted , some measures have seen legislative action .

for example , in the 111 th congress , the house approved dream act language as part of an unrelated bill , the removal clarification act of 2010 ( h.r .

5281 ) .

in the 113 th congress , the senate passed the border security , economic opportunity , and immigration modernization act ( s. 744 ) , which incorporated dream act language in its legalization provisions .

