program eligibility requirements and payment limits are central to how various u.s. farm programs operate .

these requirements fundamentally address various equity concerns and reflect the goals of government intervention in agriculture .

they determine who receives federal farm program payments and how much they receive .

eligibility requirements and payment limits are controversial because they strongly influence what size farms are supported .

policymakers have debated what limit is optimal for annual payments , whether payments should be proportional to production or limited per individual or per farm operation , and whether the limit should be specific to each program or cumulative across all programs .

furthermore , program eligibility requirements and payment limits generate considerable congressional interest because their effects differ across regions and by type of commodities produced , and because a substantial amount of annual u.s. farm program payments are at stake — direct federal outlays have averaged $13.9 billion per year from 1996 through 2015 .

when federal crop insurance premium subsidies are included , annual farm payments have averaged $17.5 billion over the same period .

not all farm businesses are eligible to participate in federal farm programs .

a number of statutory and regulatory requirements govern federal farm program eligibility for benefits under various programs .

some farm businesses , although eligible to participate , are restricted from receiving certain benefits or may be limited in the extent of program payments that they may receive .

over time , program eligibility rules have evolved , expanding to more programs and including more limitations .

cross - cutting methods of determining program eligibility — such as adjusted gross income ( agi ) thresholds — are relatively new .

discussed below are cross - cutting eligibility requirements that affect multiple programs , including participant identification , foreign ownership , nature and extent of participation ( i.e. , actively engaged in farming criteria ) , means tests , and conservation requirements .

the process of tracking payments to an individual through various levels of ownership in single and multi - person legal entities is referred to as "direct attribution. .

several types of legal entities may qualify for farm program payments .

however , ultimately every legal entity represents some combination of individuals .

for example , a joint operation can be made up of a combination of individuals , partnerships , and / or corporate entities .

a particular individual may be part of each of these three component entities , as well as additional sub - entities within each of these components .

farm payments flow down through these arrangements to individual recipients .

congress defines a legal entity as an entity created under federal or state law that ( 1 ) owns land or an agricultural commodity , or ( 2 ) produces an agricultural commodity .

this broad definition of legal entity encompasses the multi - person legal entities discussed earlier such as family - farm operations , joint ventures , corporations , and institutional arrangements .

ownership shares in a multi - person legal entity are tracked via a person's social security number or employee identification number , as reported in the usda forms mentioned earlier , ccc - 901 and ccc - 902 .

identification at the individual payment - recipient level is critical for assessing the cumulative payments of each individual against their annual payment limit .

direct attribution was originally authorized in the 2008 farm bill ( §1603 ( b ) ( 3 ) ) .

all farm program payments made directly or indirectly to an individual associated with a specific farming operation are combined with any other payments received by that same person from any other farming operation — based on that person's pro rata interest in those other operations .

it is this accumulation of an individual's payments — tracked through four levels of ownership in multi - person legal entities — that is subject to the annual payment limit .

the first level of attribution is an individual's personal farming operation .

subsequent levels of attribution are related to those legal entities in which an individual has an ownership share .

if a person meets his or her payment limit at the first level of attribution ( i.e. , on his or her own personal farming operation ) , then any payments to legal entities at lower levels of attribution are reduced by that person's pro rata share .

when the eligibility criteria — including aef , agi , and others — are met , the cumulative benefits across certain farm programs are subject to specific annual payment limits ( detailed in table 1 ) that can be received by an individual or legal entity .

explicit payment limits date back to the 1970s .

despite their longevity , payment limits are not universal among programs .

payment limits are enforced differently for different types of legal entities ( as mentioned earlier and summarized below ) .

for example , certain program limits may be expanded depending on the number of participants , or they may be subject to exceptions , or may not exist .

the major categories of farm program support and the applicability of annual payment limits , if any , are briefly discussed below .

theoretically , market prices — based on relative supply and demand conditions and assuming competitive market conditions hold — provide the most useful signals for allocating scarce resources .

in other words , in a situation where no policy support is available , most producers would make production decisions based primarily on market conditions .

if these conditions hold , then tighter payment limits ( i.e. , a smaller role for government support policies ) would imply that more land would be farmed based on market conditions , and less land would be farmed based on policy choices .

supporters of payment limits use both economic and political arguments to justify tighter limits .

economically , they contend that large payments facilitate consolidation of farms into larger units , raise the price of land , and put smaller , family - sized farming operations and beginning farmers at a disadvantage .

even though tighter limits would not redistribute benefits to smaller farms , they say that tighter limits could help indirectly by reducing incentives to expand , thus potentially reducing upward price pressure on land markets .

this could help small and beginning farmers buy and rent land .

politically , they believe that large payments undermine public support for farm subsidies and are costly .

in the past , newspapers have published stories critical of farm payments and how they are distributed to large farms , non - farmers , or landowners .

limits increasingly appeal to urban lawmakers , and have advocates among smaller farms and social interest groups .

critics of payment limits ( and thus supporters of higher limits or no limits ) counter that all farms are in need of support , especially when market prices decline , and that larger farms should not be penalized for the economies of size and efficiencies they have achieved .

they say that farm payments help u.s. agriculture compete in global markets , and that income testing is at odds with federal farm policies directed toward improving u.s. agriculture and its competitiveness .

in addition to these concerns , this section briefly reviews other selected payment - limit issues and eligibility requirements .

a large amount of money is involved in farm payments — much of it goes to a small share of large operators .

according to usda's 2012 agricultural census , farms with market revenue equal to or greater than $250,000 accounted for 12% of farm households , but received 60% of federal farm program payments .

selecting a particular dollar value as a limit on annual government support payments involves a fundamental choice about who should benefit from farm program payments .

this has important , but complex , policy implications .

for example , numerous academic studies have shown that government payments are usually capitalized into cropland values , thus raising rental rates and land prices .

higher land values disfavor beginning and small farmers who generally have limited access to capital .

as a result , critics contend that there is a lack of equity and fairness under the current system of farm program payments that appears to favor large operations over small , and that payment limits are really about farm size .

in contrast , supporters of the current system argue that larger farms tend to be more efficient operators , and that altering the system in favor of smaller operators may create inefficiencies and reduce u.s. competitiveness in international markets .

furthermore , they contend that tightening payment limits will have different effects across crops , thus resulting in potentially harmful regional effects .

tighter payment limits do not affect all crops and regions equally .

as limits are tightened , they will likely first impact those crops with higher per - unit and per - acre production value .

among the major u.s. program crops , higher valued crops include rice , peanuts , and cotton , all of which tend to be produced in the southeast , mississippi delta , and western states .

furthermore , payment limits may influence local economic activity .

in particular , payment limits are likely to have a greater economic impact in regions where agricultural production accounts for a larger share of economic output — that is in rural , agriculture - based counties — and where there may be fewer opportunities for diversification to offset any payment - limit - induced reduction in agricultural incomes .

under the 2008 farm bill , the annual limit on payments for title i commodity programs attributable to a person was split into two components: a $40,000 limit on direct payments and a $65,000 limit for combined ccp and acre payments , while there was no limit on benefits under the marketing assistance loan program ( table a - 1 ) .

the 2014 farm bill established a single aggregate limit of $125,000 for combined annual payments under the ldp and mlg benefits of the marketing assistance loan program and the plc and arc programs ( which replaced the previous ccp and acre programs ) .

as a result , in those situations where marketing assistance loan benefits are negligible and an individual relies primarily on either plc or arc , then his / her individual limit has been significantly expanded .

for example , consider a producer that relied on ccp and direct payments under the 2008 farm bill .

suppose that under the 2014 farm bill that same producer now relies almost exclusively on the plc program for support ( in part since direct payments were eliminated by the 2014 farm bill ) .

in this case , his / her annual payment limit has been nearly doubled from $65,000 for ccp to a new $125,000 limit for plc payments .

thus , depending on market conditions and a producer's mix of program activities , aggregation of the program limits could result in situations that favor specific crops and programs ( table a - 1 ) .

the absence of a limit on benefits received under the marketing assistance loan's ( mal's ) commodity certificate exchange and forfeiture options represents the potential for unlimited , fully coupled usda farm support outlays .

as a result , an apparent equity issue emerges when comparing program benefits of a producer facing a hard cap for arc and plc payments as compared to a producer with access to mal forfeiture or commodity certificates .

furthermore , mal program outlays count directly against u.s. amber - box spending limits under world trade organization ( wto ) commitments .

to the extent that such program outlays might induce surplus production and depress market prices , they could result in potential challenges under the wto's dispute settlement mechanism .

when eligibility requirements or payment limits are changed , rational producers are likely to alter their behavior to mitigate the effect of the policy changes while optimizing net revenue under the new set of policy and market circumstances .

for example , new eligibility requirements or tighter payment limits may result in a reorganization of the farm operation to increase the number of eligible persons , or to lower the income that counts against a new agi limit or the farm program payments that count against a smaller payment limit ; a change in the crop and program choices or marketing practices , for example , to take advantage of the absence of a payment limit on mal certificate exchange gains and forfeitures benefits ; or a change in land use , such as , instead of farming the same acreage , renting out or selling some land to farmers that have not hit their payment limits .

payment limits applied per unit or per base acre represent an alternative to per - person payment limits that may avoid distortions to producer behavior .

an example of such a per - unit payment limit is the 85% payment reduction factor applied to base acres receiving payments under either the plc or arc programs .

the reduction factor is applied equally across all program payments irrespective of farm size , agi , or total value of payments .

such a payment reduction factor is generally applied for cost - saving reasons rather than for "fairness" or equity reasons that at least partially motivate per - person payment limits .

analysis by usda ( 2016 ) found that the number of farms affected by the single 2014 farm bill agi cap ( $900,000 ) is well below the number affected by the multiple farm ( $500,000 ) and non - farm ( $750,000 ) agi caps of the 2008 farm bill .

for example , while federal income tax data are not available for the $900,000 cap level , published data from 2013 , a year of record - high farm income , found that only about 0.7% of all farm sole proprietors and share rent landlords reported agi in excess of $1 million .

thus , it is likely that consolidating the separate agi farm and non - farm limits into a single agi limit with a higher bound has restored eligibility for farm program payments to some farm operations that had previously been disqualified .

other major exemptions from the agi limit include state and local governments and agencies , federally recognized indian tribes , and crp contracts entered into prior to october 1 , 2008 .

furthermore , the 2014 farm bill shifted the farm safety net focus away from traditional revenue support programs and toward crop insurance programs , which are not subject to the agi cap .

during the five - year period of 2011-2015 , federal crop insurance premium subsidies averaged $6.8 billion annually .

extending the agi cap to crop insurance subsidies was considered during the 2014 farm bill debate , however , concerns were raised that the elimination of subsidies for high - income participants could affect overall participation to the extent that it could damage the soundness of the entire program .

in contrast , usda estimates that in most years , less than 0.5% of farms and less than 1% of premiums would be affected by the $900,000 income cap if it were extended to crop insurance participation as well as to farm programs .

