the u.s. constitution — article i , section 2 , clause 3 , as modified by section 2 of the 14 th amendment — requires a population census every 10 years to serve as the basis for apportioning seats in the house of representatives .

decennial census data are used , too , for within - state redistricting and in certain formulas that determine the annual distribution of more than $450 billion in federal funds to states and localities .

census counts are , in addition , the foundation for constructing intercensal estimates of current population size and projections of future size .

businesses , nonprofit organizations , researchers , and all levels of government are steady consumers of decennial and other census data .

the constitution stipulates that the once - a - decade enumeration is to be conducted "in such manner as they [congress] shall by law direct. .

congress , through title 13 of the united states code , has delegated this responsibility to the secretary of commerce and , within the department of commerce , the bureau of the census ( census bureau ) .

as specified in title 15 u.s.c. , section 1501 , and title 13 u.s.c. , section 21 , both the commerce secretary and the director of the census bureau are appointed by the president , by and with the advice and consent of the senate .

the bureau's task in conducting the enumeration can be summarized in very basic terms: count each person whose usual residence is in the united states ( the aim of complete census coverage ) ; and count that person only once , at the right location , where the person lives all or most of the time ( the goal of census accuracy ) .

title 13 u.s.c. , section 221 , requires compliance with the census and provides for a fine of up to $100 for nonresponse .

in accordance with provisions of the sentencing reform act of 1984 , title 18 u.s.c. , sections 3559 and 3571 , the possible fine has been adjusted to not more than $5,000 .

the resources committed to each decennial census , measured not only in large sums of public money but in years of planning , testing , and related efforts as well , serve one chief purpose: to obtain the best possible accounting of all u.s. residents , regardless of their race , ethnicity , socioeconomic characteristics , or living circumstances .

to the extent that the census falls short of this goal , the allocation of house seats , other political representation , and federal dollars may be less than equitable , particularly for those whom the census is most likely to miss , and census data with myriad uses may be flawed .

the tension between funding the census sufficiently to produce good results and controlling census costs is apparent .

much of this report will discuss past and recent calls for cost containment , the bureau's response for the 24 th decennial census in 2020 , and factors like technology and funding that could affect the census .

the report also will compare estimates of coverage in the previous two censuses and note some sociodemographic factors that could complicate the count in 2020 .

table 1 shows the dates for selected major 2020 census activities and several legal deadlines the census bureau must meet for finalizing the census questionnaire , conducting the census , and delivering apportionment and redistricting data .

the 2020 questionnaire is not yet available , but , as mentioned below in the discussion of the 2015 national content test , the questionnaire will ask for only the most basic demographic , household , and housing data .

the same was true in 2010 .

long - form data — detailed data that formerly were collected from a population sample in conjunction with the decennial census — now are gathered by the american community survey ( acs ) .

the bureau conducts the acs separately from the census and at more frequent intervals .

the following discussion focuses on repeated calls for cost containment in the decennial count and the sociodemographic factors tending to drive up census costs as well as impede a complete , accurate enumeration .

as the census bureau prepares for the next enumeration , it is focusing on cost - control innovations in the four key areas discussed below .

the bureau estimates that these innovations , if successful , could "save approximately $5.2 billion compared to repeating the 2010 design in the 2020 census. .

the estimated cost to repeat the 2010 design is $17.5 billion , compared with $12.3 billion for a reengineered census .

the bureau's overarching census enterprise data collection and processing ( cedcap ) initiative dates from 2014 .

cedcap , in the bureau's words , "will create an integrated and standardized system of systems that will offer shared data collection and processing across all censuses and surveys," including , prominently , the 2020 census .

the initiative is intended to "consolidate costs by retiring unique , survey - specific systems and redundant capabilities" and bring a much larger share of the bureau's total information technology ( it ) expenditures under one "centrally managed program. .

the bureau's plan is to "put in place a solution that will be mature and proven for the 2020 census. .

gao testified to congress in 2016 that the 2020 census "relies heavily on cedcap to deliver key systems to support its redesign. .

the census could receive greater congressional attention as 2020 approaches ; the bureau requests larger appropriations leading up to the count ; and issues like house apportionment , within - state redistricting , federal funds distribution , and other uses of the decennial data gain prominence .

the bureau is asking congress to make substantial investments in census operations , particularly those related to information technology , which could invite increasing scrutiny of them .

the discussion below notes concerns raised thus far about it and it security for the census , the status of census testing and findings from tests of nonresponse follow - up operations in two sites , and funding for census preparations .

in congressional testimony toward the end of 2016 , gao observed that 2020 census operations will depend on about 50 it systems , including 11 cedcap "enterprise systems. .

with respect to cedcap , the bureau "developed several pilot systems to provide and test different capabilities" but in may 2016 decided to acquire six of them "from a vendor , using a commercial - off - the - shelf it platform , rather than continue to develop the capabilities in - house. .

gao questioned whether the bureau would be ready for the 2018 end - to - end census test , which , as previously mentioned , is scheduled to begin in august 2017 .

by october 2016 , according to gao , only 3 of the 50 systems for the test had been delivered ; the remaining 47 systems were in various stages of development .

moreover , the bureau had not "identified the entire infrastructure ( i.e. , cloud solutions and / or data centers ) " for the end - to - end test or 2020 operations , and "did not yet have a time frame for the implementation of the infrastructure. .

gao further questioned whether the bureau was "effectively managing its significant contractor support," such as for "the technical integration" of all "key systems and infrastructure , and the development of many of the data collection systems" ; "development of the it platform" that will be used for most data collection ; "procurement of the mobile devices and cellular service" for nonresponse follow - up ; and "development of the it infrastructure in the field offices. .

adding to the uncertainty is the fact that , as gao noted , the 2020 census will be the first time the bureau relies on "contractor support" for this kind of technical integration , collects data nationwide online , and employs mobile devices for nrfu .

the bureau's "past efforts to acquire and implement new approaches and systems have not always gone as planned," gao cautioned , citing the 2010 census to illustrate the point .

the bureau intended "to use handheld mobile devices to support field data collection," including for nrfu , in 2010 .

it switched from trying to develop the devices in - house to contracting for them , then encountered "significant problems" when it tested the devices .

"cost overruns and schedule slippages" were additional problems noted by gao .

the bureau thus abandoned its plan to use the handhelds for nrfu and "reverted to paper - based processing , which increased the cost of the 2010 census by up to $3 billion" and greatly heightened "the risk of not completing the census on time. .

gao accordingly "designated the 2010 census a high - risk area in march 2008. .

because of government - wide it challenges , gao cited "improving the management of it acquisitions and operations as a key area" in its 2015 high - risk report and similarly named cedcap as "one of nine programs across the federal government in need of the most attention. .

gao's february 2017 update to the high - risk list included the 2020 census , largely due to the bureau's complex innovations for 2020 ; the need for improved "ability to manage , develop , and secure its it systems" ; and , related to both of these factors , the need for "better oversight and control over its cost estimation process. .

the crucial role assigned to technology for the 2020 census , with the associated emphasis on web responses , heightens the need for information security in many interrelated areas .

areas identified by gao include ensuring that only those authorized to see respondents' personal data have access to such data and that all bureau employees , both permanent and temporary , are aware of the need for security ; protecting data on roughly 300,000 mobile devices that will be used for nonresponse follow - up ; minimizing the threat of cybercrimes against data , respondents , and bureau employees ; ensuring that those hired to fill key it positions have expertise in information security ; controlling "security performance requirements in a cloud environment" ; and having "contingency and incident response plans" in place for all it systems that will support the census .

the end - to - end test could enable the bureau to determine whether it can "adequately secure" its it systems for the census and deal with security breaches if they occur .

because most systems to be tested are not yet in place , however , the bureau "has not finalized" and assessed all the security controls that are to be implemented , developed plans for remediating any weaknesses in them , and determined whether it has time for remediation before the test begins .

in january 2017 , gao reported on its evaluation of nonresponse follow - up operations ( nrfu , as previously noted ) in the bureau's two 2016 census test sites , harris county , texas , and los angeles county , california .

gao observed that although nrfu in both sites generally took place as planned , about 30% of the nrfu cases in harris county and 20% in los angeles county were coded as "non - interviews. .

in these cases , the bureau collected "no data or insufficient data," either because it tried unsuccessfully to visit nonresponding households , a maximum of six tries per household , or because problems such as "language barriers or dangerous situations" prevented the bureau from completing visits .

bureau officials , gao reported , were "not certain" what accounted for so many non - interviews and were "researching potential causes. .

one possible cause cited by gao was enumerators' apparent lack of uniform understanding that proxy interviews are important in nrfu and their inconsistent adherence to "procedures for completing interviews with proxy respondents. .

gao noted that a proxy is a "non - household member , at least 15 years old , and knowledgeable about the nrfu address. .

proxy data , as gao pointed out , can make the difference between completed interviews and non - interviews , and thus are "important to the success of the census. .

the bureau informed gao that it will "continue to refine procedures" for collecting proxy data in 2020 .

the 2016 test showed as well , according to gao , a certain lack of flexibility in the automated case management system for fieldwork during nonresponse follow - up and inadequate training for enumerators in using the system .

enumerators , for example , had "difficulty accessing recently closed , incomplete cases. .

in addition , gao's field visits disclosed instances when enumerators had been told by a respondent or otherwise learned that returning at a specific time on a later date would improve their chance of obtaining an interview from either a household respondent or a property manager .

according to the bureau , while there was a mechanism for capturing and using this information , it was not uniformly available to the enumerators , nor did the enumerators always use the mechanism when appropriate .

gao expressed concern about the bureau's decision , for budgetary reasons , not to conduct 2017 tests of field operations in puerto rico , the standing rock indian reservation in north and south dakota , and the colville indian reservation and off - reservation trust land in washington .

gao cited , again with concern , the bureau's intention to consider incorporating these test sites into the 2018 test of all 2020 systems and operations .

doing so , in gao's assessment , will put "more pressure on the 2018 test to demonstrate that enumeration activities will function as needed for 2020. .

as discussed above , the census bureau's uncertainty about fy2017 appropriations led it to stop work on some of the tests it intended to conduct in 2017 .

the decision illustrates a problem the bureau has encountered throughout the ramp - up phase of the 2020 census , when heightened preparations for the count have required steady increases in funding .

the bureau director testified to congress in late 2016 that enacted appropriations for the census were "significantly" less than requested from fy2013 through fy2016 .

in fy2013 , the budget request was $131.4 million ; the enacted amount was $94.4 million .

in fy2014 , the requested and enacted amounts were $244.8 million and $232.7 million , respectively ; in fy2015 , $443.2 million and $344.8 million ; and in fy2016 , $662.6 million and $625.3 million .

the 2020 census request for fy2017 was $778.3 million .

fy2017 appropriations legislation was not enacted by the end of fy2016 .

instead , the continuing appropriations and military construction , veterans affairs , and related agencies appropriations act , 2017 , and zika response and preparedness act , h.r .

5325 , p.l .

114-223 , division c , provided funds for the bureau , including the 2020 census , at the fy2016 level , with a 0.496% reduction , from october 1 , 2016 , through december 9 , 2016 .

the further continuing and security assistance appropriations act , 2017 , h.r .

2028 , p.l .

114-254 , was enacted on december 10 , 2016 .

in general , division a of the legislation funds the bureau at the fy2016 level , minus a 0.1901% reduction , through april 28 , 2017 .

under section 152 , however , the bureau may draw on money from the periodic censuses and programs account — which includes the decennial census and other major programs , such as the economic census , the census of governments , and intercensal demographic estimates , together with geographic and data - processing support — at the rate necessary for conducting operations to maintain the 2020 census schedule .

the bureau director stated that the bureau still requires "the timely appropriation of the remainder of the 2017 president's budget request in order to stay on track" for the 2018 census test .

nevertheless , the level of funding for the rest of fy2017 remains unclear .

