c oncerns arise during debt limit episodes that the lack of action to raise or suspend the debt limit could impede the u.s. treasury's ability to meet federal obligations .

in october 2015 , the u.s. treasury argued that allowing the debt limit to constrain the government's ability to meet its obligations "would represent an irresponsible retreat from a core american value: we are a nation that honors all of its commitments" ; and that " ( f ) ailing to increase the debt limit would have catastrophic economic consequences .

it would cause the government to default on its legal obligations. .

how the term "default" would apply to treasury's ability to pay federal bills , however , has been controversial .

for instance , during a september 2015 house ways and means committee markup of h.r .

692 , some members stated that a binding debt limit that would limit the treasury secretary's ability to meet federal obligations on a timely basis would be tantamount to default , while other members stated that default would only encompass a failure to make principal and interest payments linked to u.s. treasury securities .

this report discusses the concept of default in the context of the federal government's financial obligations .

the report then discusses past cases in which the federal government failed to make certain payments on time .

during the war of 1812 , the lack of a fiscal agent and the pressures of funding military operations at times left the u.s. treasury without the means of meeting its obligations .

the suspension of the gold standard in 1933-1934 has been considered by some to constitute default , even though the supreme court affirmed that taking that action was within the power of congress to set monetary policy .

during the 2011 debt limit episode , some noted that the u.s. treasury had failed to make timely payments to some small investors in the spring of 1979 , which in the eyes of some , constituted a "technical default. .

the 1979 incident , however , is more properly regarded as an inadvertent payment delay .

how the term "default" is applied depends on specific contexts .

default can be defined as failure to make a payment or more generally the failure to act or appear .

default , in the sense of failure to pay or perform , generally derives from contract law .

private contracts typically specify in some detail what actions or omissions would constitute default .

for example , a firm that has borrowed funds by issuing a bond could in a contract be considered in default by failing to pay interest or principal , or by taking on additional debt , or by failing to deliver additional collateral in the event of a credit rating downgrade .

bond contracts can run to thousands of pages , in which various contingencies and default consequences are described .

private contractual terms can be specified in greater detail than public laws , and can be shaped to the interests of particular counterparties .

default in some cases may be "cured" in some way that brings a party back into compliance with a contract .

for example , a default caused by failure to pay may be cured by payment , perhaps along with specified penalties .

a damaged party may also sue for breach of contract to compel a counterparty to perform as agreed or to void a contract or to seek other remedies .

during recent debt limit episodes , treasury secretary lew and his predecessors have urged congress to act to avoid an unprecedented failure to meet obligations .

for instance , secretary lew on october 15 , 2015 , asked congress to take action on the debt li mit so that the treasury would not be "unable to satisfy all of these obligations for the first time in the history of the united states. .

an examination of american fiscal history , however , suggests that the federal government's record of meeting its obligations is not unblemished .

this report focuses on three historical events in which the federal government's reputation has been questioned: the war of 1812 , the withdrawal from the gold standard during the great depression , and the so - called 1979 "mini - default. .

others might point to additional incidents , not considered in this report , such as the refusal to redeem continental paper money issued during the revolutionary war , or the issuance of "greenbacks" during the civil war , or the abandonment of the gold standard in the early 1970s during the breakup of the post - world war ii system of fixed exchange rates .

the historical record appears not to support the contention that the u.s. government has had an unblemished payment record since its origin .

under any reasonable definition of default , the federal government defaulted in 1814 .

the treasury secretary of the time , alexander dallas , referred to "every sort of embarrassment. .

the current website of the u.s. treasury notes that secretary dallas faced a "bankrupt" treasury .

the failure of the treasury to pay interest on its securities due to boston banks in 1814 represents an unambiguous default event .

whether the suspension of the gold standard in 1933-1934 amounted to a default is controversial .

bondholders were repaid , albeit on terms other than those specified in their contracts .

breaking the linkage between gold and the dollar enabled the federal government to implement a more modern monetary policy that helped promote economic recovery .

that linkage , however , could also have been severed in a way that could have mitigated losses of owners of bonds that contained gold clauses .

claims that payment delays to small investors holding treasury securities in the spring of 1979 constituted a default or a "technical default" appear weaker .

delays affected only a relatively small proportion of treasury securities and the federal government responded to mitigate the inconvenience suffered by those investors .

the legal document setting out terms for treasury securities contained no default clause .

claims that such payment delays increased federal borrowing costs appear weak , if not implausible , in the face of stronger explanations reflecting shifts in monetary conditions and policy .

delays to holders of treasury securities might also be put in context of delays to other federal payees .

federal statutes provide no clear basis for prioritizing payment of one obligation over another .

in an organization as complex as the federal government , delays in meeting some financial obligations may be inevitable , and bondholders affected by the so - called 1979 mini - default represent a small fraction of those affected by federal payment delays .

analysis of available evidence suggests that the federal government's ability to borrow did not suffer lasting damage from any of the events discussed in this report .

after the war of 1812 concluded , belated collections from internal revenue measures came into the treasury and the resumption of international trade and higher tariff rates led to a rebound in customs revenues .

federal revenues in the following decades were strong enough to retire the federal debt in 1835 .

recent research , discussed above , indicates that the u.s. treasury faced little or no observable difficulty in borrowing after the 1933-1934 suspension of the gold standard .

in 1979 , as noted above , a major shift in monetary policy and conditions can explain changes in market yields on treasury securities .

financial markets exhibited no discernable reaction to newspaper reports of the treasury payments delays to some small investors .

the u.s. experience accords with broader research on sovereign default .

countries that defaulted in the 19 th century or 1930s , but not since , have suffered no credit market consequences .

that the u.s. treasury's ability to borrow on reasonable terms was not hindered by events in the 19 th century or 1930s does not suggest that the consequences of a treasury default in the present day would be minor .

the market for u.s. treasuries is broad , meaning that large numbers of buyers and sellers trade in them , and liquid , meaning that traders believe they could engage in large transaction in treasuries without significant price effects .

treasuries often serve as collateral , enabling financial firms to borrow or lend at low cost , which promotes the efficient supply of credit .

concerns about the quality of collateral assets can cause serious problems in credit markets .

market participants have stated that systematic payment delays by the u.s. treasury could have serious economic consequences .

in each historical episode examined here , the federal government was confronted with financial and operational challenges that it was poorly prepared to meet .

the neglect of operational capacities appears to have played a key role .

more recently , the federal government has paid more attention to contingencies that could affect its financial operations .

for instance , the u.s. treasury recently changed its cash management policies to keep a larger cash cushion to ensure continuity of operations in the face of catastrophic events .

on the other hand , expressions of fiscal constraint , such as promises to balance federal budgets , were not sufficient to prepare the federal government to address fiscal emergencies .

in the years preceding each episode , policymakers had expressed a strong commitment to budgetary and fiscal discipline .

treasury secretary gallatin had reduced federal debts in the decade preceding the war of 1812 , and president herbert hoover attempted to maintain a balanced budget in the early years of the great depression .

less than four weeks before the first treasury payment delay in april 1979 , congress stated it "shall balance the federal budget" and directed the budget committees to submit budget plans for the next three fiscal years that would be in balance .

the failure to establish or maintain key operational capabilities , however , presented the government with obstacles that could not be overcome in short order .

the lack of a fiscal agent or the administrative capacity to administer internal revenues undermined the u.s. treasury's ability to meet federal obligations during the war of 1812 .

on a smaller scale , the u.s. treasury in 1979 found itself unable to cope with the strains of overhauling financial processing systems and procedures while relocating some of its fiscal operations , in the face of unprecedented increases in small investor demands for treasury securities .

president franklin roosevelt , when he took office in march 1933 , by way of contrast , was aided by proposals drafted by officials from the hoover administration .

furthermore , the reconstruction finance corporation , which the hoover administration had created , provided the federal government with a powerful vehicle for economic policy .

the reluctance to set aside adequate fiscal resources to respond to emergency conditions may also have played a role .

congress , in the view of historians , was slow to make military or fiscal preparations ahead of declaring war in 1812 .

in more modern terms , macroeconomists have stressed the importance of "fiscal space," that is , having a sound fiscal situation that enables a government to respond energetically to serious economic downturns .

even if the payment history of the u.s. government is not completely unblemished , it does compare favorably to nearly all other advanced countries .

acknowledging past episodes when the u.s. treasury's ability to meet obligations was strained would underline the benefits of maintaining a strong fiscal and credit reputation .

