congressional actions on air quality issues have been dominated since 2011 by efforts — particularly in the house — to change the environmental protection agency's ( epa's ) authority to promulgate or implement new emission control requirements .

often under court order , the obama administration's epa used authorities congress gave epa in the clean air act amendments of 1970 , 1977 , and 1990 to address long - standing issues posed by emissions from various sources .

a continuing focus of congressional interest under the clean air act ( caa ) has been epa regulatory actions to limit greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions using existing caa authority .

epa actions have focused on six gases or groups of gases that multiple scientific studies have linked to climate change .

of the six gases , carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) , produced by combustion of fossil fuels , is by far the most prevalent , accounting for about 80% of annual emissions of the combined group when measured as co 2 equivalents .

members from both sides of the aisle have expressed concerns about epa proceeding with ghg regulations that could have major economic impacts .

some have argued that the case for ghg controls has not been proven .

others maintain that epa should delay taking such action until congress more explicitly authorizes it .

of the ghg emission standards promulgated by epa , four sets of standards , which have had the broadest impacts , are discussed below: those for power plants , the oil and gas industry , trucks , and light - duty vehicles ( the latter two topics are combined under the heading " standards for motor vehicles " ) .

epa finalized ghg standards for power plants in august 2015 ; set ghg emission standards for oil and gas industry sources in june 2016 ; finalized a second round of ghg standards for trucks in august 2016 ; and completed a mid - term evaluation ( mte ) of the already promulgated 2022-2025 ghg standards for light - duty vehicles ( cars and light trucks ) in january 2017 .

most of these rules are under review at epa .

at the outset of the 115 th congress , with a republican president and republican majorities in both the house and senate , much was made of the opportunity presented to override epa regulatory actions from the final days of the obama administration through use of the congressional review act ( cra ) .

the cra provides expedited procedures that can be used during a limited period of time after promulgation of an agency rule to bring resolutions disapproving regulations to the senate floor , where they cannot be amended or filibustered .

in doing so , the cra can remove commonly used obstacles to senate action .

a december 15 , 2016 , crs analysis concluded that joint resolutions disapproving regulations promulgated and received in congress on or after june 13 , 2016 , were eligible to use these fast - track senate procedures during the first 60 legislative days of the 115 th congress .

a list of major rules promulgated on or after june 13 included six clean air act rules promulgated by epa: the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) program standards for 2017 and biomass - based diesel volume for 2018 ; formaldehyde emission standards for composite wood products ; the cross - state air pollution ( csapr ) update rule ; the phase 2 medium - and heavy - duty truck ghg emission rule ; new source performance standards for methane emissions from municipal solid waste ( msw ) landfills ; and emission guidelines for existing msw landfills .

the cra's fast track authority expired on may 11 , 2017 , without any of these rules being disapproved .

these and other rules — those promulgated and received in congress before june 13 , 2016 — could still be addressed by congress through targeted legislation or through the appropriations process .

in the 115 th congress , the house energy and commerce committee has reported three bills that would overturn or delay specific epa air regulations: h.r .

1917 , the brick act , which would delay implementation of hazardous air pollutant emission standards affecting brick and ceramic manufacturers until all legal challenges to the rules are settled ; h.r .

1119 , the sense act , which would ease emission limits for electric generating units powered by coal refuse ; and h.r .

453 , which would delay the implementation of phase 2 emission standards for wood heaters to 2023 .

the house passed h.r .

1119 and a bill that combined the other two on march 8 , 2018 .

these and other bills would address criticism by industry groups and others that epa under previous administrations has overreached its authority .

environmental and public health groups , on the other hand , generally believe that the agency has not overreached in setting clean air act standards .

these groups often maintain that the agency's standards are not stringent enough , do not meet statutory requirements , or disregard the findings of the agency's science advisors .

the result is that epa clean air act standards generally are challenged in court both by industry and by environmental groups , with various states supporting each side .

the resulting court decisions often set epa's agenda as much as congress or the administration .

the courts will continue to play an important role , and the 115 th congress and epa itself may act to make important revisions to clean air act regulations .

in short , the caa's regulatory structure continues in a state of uncertainty in 2018 , with possible changes emanating from the executive , legislative , and judicial branches .

