throughout the nation's history , the governors of the states have filled most senate vacancies by the appointment of interim or temporary senators whose terms continued until a special election could be held .

between 1789 and 1913 , the constitution's original provisions empowered governors to "make temporary appointments until the next meeting of the [state] legislature , which shall then fill such vacancies. .

with the 1913 ratification of the seventeenth amendment , which provided for popular election of the senate , the states acquired the option of filling senate vacancies either by election or by temporary gubernatorial appointment: when vacancies happen in the representation of any state in the senate , the executive authority of such state shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies: provided , that the legislature of any state may empower the executive thereof to make temporary appointments until the people fill the vacancies by election as the legislature may direct .

gubernatorial appointment to fill senate vacancies has remained the prevailing practice from 1913 until the present day , with the executives of 45 states possessing some form of appointment authority , provided the candidate meets constitutional requirements .

of senate appointments that have occurred since 1913 , the vast majority have been filled by temporary appointments , and the practice appears to have aroused little controversy during that 96-year period .

aside from the death or resignation of individual senators , vacancies may also occur when a newly elected administration is inaugurated .

during the presidential transition following an election , incumbent senators may resign to accept appointments to executive branch positions or to assume the office of president or vice president .

in 2008-2009 , for instance , four vacancies were created following the presidential election: two in connection with the election of senators barack h. obama and joseph r. biden as president and vice president , and two more when senator hillary rodham clinton was nominated to be secretary of state and senator kenneth l. salazar of colorado was nominated to be secretary of the interior .

this report discusses the latest developments in vacancies in the senate ; identifies state provisions to appoint or elect senators to fill vacancies ; and reviews the constitutional origins of the appointments provision and its incorporation in the seventeenth amendment .

at present , five states require that vacancies can be filled only by a special election .

the remaining 45 states provide some form of appointment by their governors to fill u.s. senate vacancies .

following controversies that arose in connection with appointments to fill senate vacancies in 2008 and 2009 , particularly with respect to the illinois senate vacancy created by the election of senator barack h. obama as president , proposals to eliminate or curtail gubernatorial power to fill senate vacancies by appointment were introduced in the 111 th congress and in a number of state legislatures .

according to the national council of state legislatures , bills affecting the governor's appointment authority as provided under the seventeenth amendment were introduced in 12 states during 2009 , and in several more since that time .

as a result of these initiatives , connecticut and rhode island in 2012 , and north dakota in 2015 eliminated or limited the governor's authority to fill u.s. senate vacancies by appointment , while arkansas in 2017 confirmed the governor's appointment power and eliminated conflicting provisions between the state code and constitution .

conversely , in 2009 , massachusetts changed its requirement from filling vacancies only by election to providing for temporary appointment by the governor followed by a special election .

in addition , as noted earlier in this report , north carolina in 2013 , and maryland in 2016 , enacted legislation that required appointments to fill senate vacancies be from the same political party as the previous incumbent .

since ratification of the seventeenth amendment in 1913 , most of the states , with few exceptions and little evident controversy , have empowered their governors to fill senate vacancies by appointment until a permanent replacement can be elected .

the controversies surrounding appointments to fill senate vacancies that occurred in the context of the 2008 presidential election generated considerable interest , including media analyses and commentaries , and legislative and constitutional proposals for change on both the federal and state levels .

interest in a response on the federal level , including proposals to revise senate vacancy procedures , appears to have receded — relevant bills and constitutional amendments introduced in the 111 th congress did not progress beyond hearings , and no similar proposal has been offered since that time .

in the states , connecticut , massachusetts , north dakota , and rhode island took action between 2009 and 2015 to limit or eliminate their governors' role in filling senate vacancies , but the national conference of state legislatures reports no further legislation since then .

the only other recent changes in the states , action in maryland and north carolina to establish "same party" requirements for appointments to fill senate vacancies , were arguably taken in the context of divided party control of the legislature and governorship in both states .

beyond these developments , recent actions suggest that the traditional pattern of senate vacancies and appointments has reemerged: since 2009 , 10 vacancies in the senate have been filled by temporary appointments with little controversy as to the appointment process .

