the airport and airway trust fund ( aatf ) , sometimes referred to as the aviation trust fund , is the major funding source for federal aviation programs .

the trust fund finances federal aviation administration ( faa ) capital investments in the airport and airway system as well as supports faa research and operations costs .

in order to for avoid disruptions , both the authority to collect aviation excise taxes and to spend from the trust fund must be reauthorized periodically by congress .

the most recent reauthorization , the faa extension , safety , and security act of 2016 ( p.l .

114-190 ) , expires on september 30 , 2017 .

if faa's authorization were to expire without a reauthorization or extension , there would be lapses in aviation excise tax collection authority , and the agency would be unable to spend any revenues allocated from the trust fund .

congress established the aatf in the airport and airway revenue act of 1970 ( p.l .

91-258 ) to provide a dedicated source of federal funding for the aviation system in the united states .

annual faa expenditures have been in the range of $15 billion to $17 billion in recent years .

the faa budget is divided into four major accounts: grants - in - aid for airports ( airport improvement program , or aip ) facilities and equipment ( f&e ) research , engineering , and development ( re&d ) operations and maintenance ( o&m ) ( partly supported by the trust fund , with the remainder coming from the general fund ) the first two accounts , aip and f&e , are considered "capital" accounts or programs because they deal with the development of airport and airway infrastructure .

the aip provides federal grants for projects such as new runways and taxiways ; runway lengthening , rehabilitation , and repair ; and noise mitigation near airports .

the f&e account provides funding for the acquisition and maintenance of air traffic facilities and equipment , and for the engineering , development , testing , and evaluation of technologies related to the federal air traffic system .

it funds the technological improvements to the air traffic control system , including installation of a satellite - based air traffic control system referred to as the next generation air transportation system ( nextgen ) .

the re&d account funds research on issues related to aviation safety , mobility , and nextgen technologies , including research on improving aviation safety and operational efficiency and reducing environmental impacts of aviation operations .

only the o&m account , which funds faa operations , including the air traffic control system and safety inspections , receives monies from the general fund .

at the end of fy2016 , the aviation trust fund was projected to have a cash balance of over $14.3 billion .

the uncommitted balance — the amount of funds not yet obligated — was estimated to be approximately $5.7 billion at the end of fy2016 , reversing several years of decline .

while the financial vitality of the trust fund can be evaluated by looking at its uncommitted balance and the cash balance , there are considerable differences between the two indicators .

faa considers the committed balance of the trust fund to include the appropriated amounts from the trust fund plus obligated aip contract authority for the year .

the uncommitted balance , which is the revenue that would remain in the trust fund after subtracting the committed balance , is often used to evaluate faa's ability to enter into future commitments as provided in authorization and appropriations acts .

a low uncommitted balance means that limited funds are available to incur new obligations while still covering expenditures on existing obligations , limiting faa's ability to move forward with planned projects and programs .

the cash balance includes money required to satisfy outstanding obligations as well as funds for which no commitments have been made .

it is often used to evaluate the trust fund's ability to pay outstanding bills as they are due .

if the cash balance falls below the amount of outstanding obligations , faa will have to delay payments until it receives sufficient trust fund revenue to cover the obligations , or until congress increases contributions from the general fund .

in august , 2016 , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) projected that if current law remains in place and if appropriations grow at the rate of inflation , total annual spending by faa would increase from over $16 billion in fy2016 to $19.7 billion in fy2026 .

trust fund receipts , including aviation excise tax revenues and interest earnings , are projected to grow from over $14 billion in fy2016 to more than $20.5 billion in fy2026 .

according to cbo , the fy2016 uncommitted balance of approximately $5.7 billion is projected to grow to nearly $17 billion by the end of fy2026 .

the size of future trust fund balances , however , depends on the amount of actual revenues generated in the future by various aviation taxes and fees that are largely determined by the number of airline passengers and average airfares .

balances will also depend on how future outflows from the trust fund compare to revenue inflows , including general fund appropriations from congress .

two budgetary issues likely to have major impacts on the aatf are faa's plan for substantial investment in nextgen and possible reforms of air traffic services to incorporate direct fees on users of the air traffic control system .

nextgen refers to a multifaceted ensemble of technologies and operational procedures to modernize the national air traffic system , shifting from reliance on ground - based radar and navigation to satellite - based navigation and aircraft tracking .

work on nextgen began about 10 years ago , and currently accounts for about $1 billion in annual faa spending , mostly on activities included under faa's f&e account .

thus far , nextgen's impact on the aatf has been limited , since nextgen has been planned and funded within the framework of faa's existing funding structure ; there is no separate dedicated funding stream for nextgen .

pressure to accelerate nextgen development , however , could prompt additional annual spending that could have a more pronounced effect on aatf balances .

notably , most aircraft will be required to equip with technology compatible with the nextgen system .

the technology , called automatic dependent surveillance - broadcast ( ads - b ) , allows aircraft to be identified and tracked by air traffic facilities more precisely than is possible with existing radar technology .

this is intended to allow for better airspace utilization and greater efficiency in the form of more direct routings and closer aircraft spacing .

efficiency gains from ads - b will be realized only when faa completes and deploys complementary technologies in its facilities , not only to track aircraft with ads - b , but also to utilize various analytic tools to increase airspace efficiency .

operators of aircraft equipped with ads - b are likely to be interested in accelerating the deployment of these nextgen technologies over the next three to five years in order to benefit from their investments .

this may be an issue of particular congressional debate in the context of pending faa reauthorization legislation .

according to faa , future nextgen costs through fy2030 will total more than $14 billion in addition to the roughly $6 billion that has already been spent .

moreover , faa anticipates that annual federal spending on nextgen will accelerate over the next six years , peaking at about $1.6 billion in fy2022 before trailing off to a steady level of about $400 million annually in 2028 and beyond .

accelerating nextgen spending could take the form of shifting peak spending to an earlier fiscal year or distributing it more evenly over a number of earlier fiscal years .

accelerated spending could have the effect of reducing the total cost through 2030 by completing projects at less inflated prices and also by potentially reaping anticipated nextgen benefits earlier .

the impacts of nextgen acceleration on the aatf , however , would depend on the continued availability of uncommitted balances that can be tapped for such purposes .

moreover , accelerating nextgen funding may not be feasible if faa is unable to obligate funds for such purposes at these earlier dates because of administrative or technical constraints that could limit its ability to expedite specific nextgen projects .

to the extent that congress or faa deems acceleration of nextgen feasible and seeks to speed up nextgen activities , funding needs for nextgen projects could increase demand for aatf funds .

although dedicated funding accounts for nextgen have been proposed in the past as a means to avoid potential strain on the aatf , these proposals have proven controversial , as airspace users , particularly business and general aviation interests , have balked at proposals to impose per - flight user fees to fund nextgen .

user fees as an alternative to traditional aatf revenue sources have also been discussed in the context of funding day - to - day air traffic control operations , particularly in conjunction with proposals to reform air traffic control services by creating a stand - alone air traffic corporation separate from faa .

in the 114 th congress , the aviation innovation , reform , and reauthorization act of 2016 ( h.r .

4441 ) included language that would have created a not - for - profit government - chartered air traffic control corporation , wholly funded by user fees , to run the air traffic system .

under the proposal , a corporate board would have been able to set fees based on projected operating costs and forecast aviation activity .

this proposal was not adopted by the house , but the concept may reemerge during the likely faa reauthorization debate in the 115 th congress .

the prospect of user - fee funding for air traffic services could raise a number of issues regarding aatf revenues and expenditures .

if a user - fee scheme is created to fund air traffic services , almost $10 billion in annual expenditures that are currently funded by a combination of aatf and general fund revenues could instead be covered by user fees .

to offset user - fee collections , congress may consider options to restructure aatf revenues , such as lowering fuel , ticket , and cargo taxes .

within the context of such a debate , congress may also consider whether to continue to rely on the general fund component of faa funding — for example , to fund safety - related functions like oversight of airlines and the proposed air traffic corporation — or whether faa expenditures should be wholly funded with aatf revenue .

