the funding authorization for the federal aviation administration ( faa ) , included in the faa extension , safety , and security act of 2016 ( p.l .

114-190 ) and the subsequent disaster tax relief and airport and airway extension act of 2017 ( p.l .

115-63 ) , is now set to expire on march 31 , 2018 .

in addition to setting spending levels , faa authorization acts typically set policy on a wide range of issues related to civil aviation .

this report considers topics likely to arise as the 115 th congress continues to debate faa reauthorization .

it does not attempt to be comprehensive .

many issues debated prior to passage of the faa extension , safety , and security act of 2016 are not discussed unless further congressional consideration appears probable .

additional issues , not discussed in this report , may arise as congress moves forward .

most faa programs are financed through the airport and airway trust fund ( aatf ) , sometimes referred to as the aviation trust fund .

the aatf was established in 1970 under the airport and airway development act of 1970 ( p.l .

91-258 ) to provide for expansion of the nation's airports and air traffic system .

since fy2009 , the aatf has provided between 66.6% and 93% of faa's total annual funding , with the remainder coming from general fund appropriations .

revenue sources for the trust fund include passenger ticket taxes , segment fees , air cargo fees , and fuel taxes paid by both commercial and general aviation aircraft ( see table 1 ) .

in addition to excise taxes deposited into the trust fund , faa imposes air traffic service fees on flights that transit u.s. - controlled airspace but do not take off from or land in the united states .

these overflight fees partially fund the essential air service ( eas ) program .

in 2016 , the aatf had revenues of over $14.4 billion and maintained a cash balance of more than $14 billion .

the uncommitted balance was estimated to be approximately $5.7 billion at the end of fy2016 , reversing several years of decline following the onset of the global economic crisis in 2008 .

the trust fund balance is projected to grow in the near term , as aatf revenue continues to rise and airport capital needs are projected to decline over the next five years .

in the longer term , however , the vitality of the aatf remains a concern , as reductions in general fund appropriations to faa have increased the proportion of faa funding that is derived from the trust fund .

changes in airline business practices pose a risk to the aatf revenue structure .

trust fund revenue is largely dependent on airlines' ticket sales , and the spread of low - cost air carrier models has held down ticket prices and therefore aatf receipts .

in addition , airlines increasingly impose fees for a variety of options and amenities , such as checked bags and onboard meals , rather than including them in the base ticket price .

generally , fees not included in the base ticket price are not subject to federal excise taxes .

air carriers generated over $4.17 billion in baggage fees alone in 2016 , which would have brought about $313 million into the trust fund had they been subject to the 7.5% ticket tax .

airlines have long contended that general aviation operators , particularly corporate jets , should provide a larger share of the revenues supporting the trust fund .

general aviation interests dispute this , arguing that the air traffic system mainly supports the airlines , and that nonairline users pay a reasonable share given the relatively small incremental costs arising from their flights .

proposals in 2012 to increase the general aviation jet fuel tax were not adopted .

the clinton , george w. bush , and obama administrations all proposed per - flight user charges .

in the 110 th congress , the senate voted to impose a $25-per - flight fee on all commercial and general aviation flights ( see s. 1300 , 110 th congress ) as an additional revenue source for the aatf .

none of those proposals has been enacted into law .

the federal government supports the development of airport infrastructure in three different ways .

first , the aip provides federal grants to airports for planning and development , mainly of capital projects related to aircraft operations such as runways and taxiways .

second , congress has authorized airports to assess a local passenger facility charge ( pfc ) on each boarding passenger , subject to specific federal approval .

pfc revenues can be used for a broader range of projects than aip funds , including "landside" projects such as passenger terminals and ground access improvements .

third , federal law grants investors preferential income tax treatment on interest income from bonds issued by state and local governments for airport improvements ( subject to compliance with federal rules ) .

airports may also draw on state and local funds and on operating revenues such as lease payments and landing fees .

different airports use different combinations of aip funding , pfcs , tax - exempt bonds , state and local grants , and airport revenues to finance particular projects .

small airports are more likely to be dependent on aip grants than large or medium - sized airports .

larger airports are much more likely to issue tax - exempt bonds or finance capital projects with the proceeds of pfcs .

each of these funding sources places various legislative , regulatory , or contractual constraints on airports that use it .

the availability and conditions of one source of funding may also influence the availability and terms of other funding sources .

in a 2007 study , gao found that bonds financed 50% of airports' capital spending , aip 29% , pfcs 17% , state and local contributions 4% , and airport revenue 4% .

almost all commercial service airports in the united states are owned by local and state governments , or by public entities such as airport authorities or multipurpose port authorities .

in 1996 , congress established the airport privatization pilot program ( appp ) to explore the prospect of privatizing publicly owned airports and using private capital to improve and develop them .

in addition to reducing demand for government funds , privatization has been promoted as a way to make airports more efficient and financially viable .

participation in the appp has been limited .

two airports have completed the privatization process , and one of them later reverted to public ownership .

owners of other airports considered privatization , but eventually chose not to proceed .

the lack of interest in privatization among u.s. airports could be the result of ( 1 ) readily available financing sources for publicly owned airports ; ( 2 ) barriers or lack of incentives to privatize ; ( 3 ) the potential implications for major stakeholders ; and ( 4 ) satisfaction with the status quo .

privatization refers to the shifting of governmental functions , responsibilities , and sometimes ownership , in whole or in part , to the private sector .

with respect to airports , "privatization" can take many forms up to and including the transfer of an entire airport to private operation and / or ownership .

in the united states , most cases of airport privatization fall into the category of "partial privatization ; " full privatization , either under or outside the appp , has been rare .

section 149 of the federal aviation reauthorization act of 1996 ( 49 u.s.c .

§47134 ; p.l .

104-264 ) authorizes the faa administrator to exempt participating airports from all or part of the requirements to use airport revenue for airport - related purposes , to repay federal grants , or to return airport property acquired with federal assistance upon the lease or sale of the airport deeded by the federal government .

the law originally limited participation in the appp to no more than five airports .

the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-95 ) increased the number of airports that may participate from 5 to 10 .

only one large hub commercial airport may participate in the program , and that airport may only be leased , not sold .

only general aviation airports can be sold under the appp .

table 5 provides a comparison of the requirements and regulations governing airport privatization under and outside the appp .

noise from aircraft taking off and landing is an issue at many airports .

under the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) , faa and airport operators are required to assess environmental impacts , including noise impacts , associated with federally funded airport projects and airspace redesigns .

noise has been a contentious issue in the redesign of airspace in the new york city , new jersey , and philadelphia region .

similarly , noise concerns have been raised regarding a number of airport expansion projects , including the completion of a new runway at chicago's o'hare international airport in 2013 .

the number of residents in the united states exposed to significant amounts of aircraft noise has declined precipitously , from about 7 million in 1975 to an estimated 320,000 in 2012 .

major reductions in aircraft noise levels have been achieved over the past 30 years .

louder stage 2 airliners over 75,000 pounds were phased out in the 1990s , and a provision in the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 required that all jet airplanes , regardless of size , meet quieter stage 3 or stage 4 noise standards by the end of 2015 .

newly introduced aircraft types must meet stage 4 noise standards , and faa plans to issue rules for even more stringent stage 5 noise standards .

noise reductions have been achieved through quieter engine technologies , greater use of lightweight aircraft materials , and advances in aerodynamics .

faa , in cooperation with the national aeronautics and space administration and industry , has invested in the research and development of quiet aircraft technologies .

while reducing aircraft noise emissions has been highly successful and new aircraft are significantly quieter than their predecessors , the volume of air traffic , particularly around major airports , has increased over the past 30 years .

historically , congress has addressed airport noise concerns by setting aside 35% of discretionary funding under the aip for noise mitigation and abatement .

generally , these funds may be used only within the day night average sound level ( dnl ) 65 decibel ( db ) noise impact area around an airport .

proposals to grant faa the flexibility to routinely fund noise mitigation projects in areas with lower dnl levels would enable it to support additional abatement projects , but could divert resources from capacity and safety projects .

a related issue is whether to make the planning for noise - mitigating air traffic control procedures at individual airports eligible for aip funding .

nextgen refers to the next generation air transportation system , a large - scale modernization of air traffic technologies and procedures intended to expand national airspace system capacity to meet future demand .

nextgen is a multiyear initiative to modernize and improve the efficiency of the national airspace system , primarily by migrating to technologies and procedures using satellite - based navigation and aircraft tracking .

initiated in legislation in 2003 ( see p.l .

108-176 ) , the nextgen system targets full - scale implementation by 2025 .

with regard to air traffic management , the goals of nextgen include reduced air traffic separation ; flexible spacing and sequencing of aircraft , both in the air and on the ground ; increased utilization of airspace , airports , and runways , particularly those that are currently underutilized ; improved and tailored weather forecasts ; and reductions in environmental impacts of noise and emissions .

in 2003 , vision 100 — century of aviation reauthorization act ( p.l .

108-176 ) established an interagency joint planning and development office ( jpdo ) within faa to develop and implement an integrated plan for the next generation air transportation system ( ngats , now known as nextgen ) capable of meeting the needs associated with projected air traffic demands in 2025 .

the act also established a senior policy committee to consult with industry stakeholders and advise the secretary of transportation on goals and strategic objectives for transforming the national airspace system to meet future needs and provide policy guidance to the jpdo .

in 2004 , the jpdo released its first iteration of the integration national plan for nextgen .

the nextgen integrated plan , as envisioned , seeks to ensure that the nextgen system meets air transportation safety , security , mobility , efficiency , and capacity needs by 2025 .

it contends that if steps are not taken to alleviate air travel congestion through nextgen in concert with airport capacity expansion , the annual cost to consumers related to air traffic delays and flight cancellations could be as high as $20 billion by 2025 .

the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 refined and expanded several facets of nextgen implementation .

it established the position of chief nextgen officer within faa , and redesignated the jpdo director as associate administrator for nextgen planning and development and interagency coordination .

the act required the nextgen senior policy committee to submit annual progress reports to congress .

it also ordered a u.s. department of transportation office of inspector general ( dot oig ) review of the automated dependent surveillance ( ads - b ) ground system installation and deployment of ads - b services , and a national research council review of the enterprise architecture for nextgen .

the act directed faa to accelerate the deployment of nextgen technologies and procedures and defined specific national airspace performance metrics that faa must track .

other provisions required faa to evaluate the role of airport surveillance technologies in the implementation of nextgen airport surface operations management ; authorized the establishment of a nextgen research and development center of excellence ; and authorized public - private partnerships to leverage and maximize private - sector capital for the purpose of equipping general aviation and commercial aircraft with nextgen avionics .

faa is to report to congress on its initiatives to encourage nextgen equipage , including policies that give priority handling to ads - b - equipped aircraft .

the consolidated appropriations act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-76 ) defunded the jpdo for fy2014 and directed faa to absorb the jpdo's functions into its operations account under the nextgen and operations planning activity .

in may 2014 , faa moved the jpdo functions into a newly created nextgen interagency planning office .

faa research and development focuses on aviation system safety , efficiency , and the reduction of environmental impacts .

historically , about half of faa research funding has addressed efficiency and economic competitiveness , largely supporting modernization efforts like nextgen .

about 37% of funding has gone toward research addressing safety issues , and the remainder has funded projects addressing energy and environmental impacts .

faa receives advice and recommendations regarding its research program from industry through the research , engineering , and development advisory committee ( redac ) , which assesses research needs in five major areas: operations , airport technology , aviation safety , human factors , and environment and energy .

pursuant to 49 u.s.c .

§44501 ( c ) , the faa is required to develop an annual national aviation research plan that is to be submitted to congressional oversight committees prior to the submission of the president's budget to congress .

the plan lays out the five - year research and development goals and anticipated funding requirements .

faa's planned research funding for fy2017 totals roughly $403 million , a sizable increase from in prior year totals , which hovered around $300 million annually .

the increase is largely attributable to research related to nextgen .

p.l .

114-190 authorized the research , engineering , and development account at a specified level of $166 million annually through fy2018 .

authorization and funding for research activities in this account encompass work performed at the william j. hughes technical center in atlantic city , nj , as well as aeromedical and human factors research conducted at the civil aerospace medical institute in oklahoma city , ok. additionally , this account funds academic research through a joint university program , aviation research grants , and various air transportation centers of excellence .

p.l .

114-190 did not direct work on any specific research topics .

in addition to specific research , engineering , and development amounts , faa research activities are funded by faa's other major accounts .

as noted above , about 47% of faa research is funded through the facilities and equipment ( f&e ) account , including that related to advanced technology development and prototyping and nextgen system development .

f&e also provides funding for the center for advanced aviation system development , a research and development center managed by the mitre corporation .

some research funding , including monies for the airport cooperative research and development program ( managed by the transportation research board of the national academies ) and for the airport technology research program , is derived from the aip , which provides about 11% of all faa research funding .

the distribution of fy2017 planned funding for faa research activities across major funding accounts is provided in figure 3 .

in the 114 th congress , the federal aviation research and development reauthorization act of 2016 ( h.r .

4464 ) sought to reauthorize faa research , engineering , and development as well as research - related funding derived from other faa accounts through fy2018 .

it called for a decadal survey of faa civil aviation research and the development of a five - year strategic and integrated research plan .

it included language to direct faa to address specific research topics including cybersecurity , unmanned aircraft systems , aviation noise , airport safety , greenhouse gas emissions , and aircraft cabin air contaminants .

the bill also sought an independent assessment on the potential implications of air traffic control privatization on faa research and development activities .

h.r .

636 as passed by the senate on april 19 , 2016 , sought $166 million in fy2016 and $169 million in fy2017 for faa research , engineering , and development .

additionally , it included specific language directing faa to conduct research on remote towers , unmanned aircraft systems , in - flight fire risks posed by lithium batteries , airfield pavement technologies , and to continue to fund its center of excellence on advanced materials .

none of these proposals were enacted .

the house rules committee print of h.r .

2997 includes provisions for research , engineering , and development under the title "faa leadership in groundbreaking high - tech research and development ( flight r&d ) act. .

the title would authorize $181 million in fy2018 , $186 million in fy2019 , and $190 million in fy2020 for faa research , engineering , and development .

the bill would scale back funding to $126 million in fy2021 , $130 million in 2022 , and $132 million in 2023 , reflecting the transition of some research and development programs to the proposed air traffic services corporation .

it includes language directing faa to carry out research on uas collision avoidance , cybersecurity , air traffic surveillance over oceans and other remote areas , aviation fuels , and single - pilot commercial cargo aircraft technologies and operations .

s. 1405 would authorize annual funding of $175 million for faa research and development for fy2018 through fy2021 .

separate provisions in the bill address research and development related to uas integration and airfield pavement technologies .

the small community air service development program was established in the wendell h. ford aviation investment and reform act for the 21 st century ( air - 21 ; p.l .

106-181 ) to help small communities improve air service at small hubs or smaller airports .

the program provides grants to selected communities for implementing strategies to improve the availability and pricing of air service .

all grants require significant local financial or other participation .

since the program first received funding in fy2002 through fy2016 , dot has awarded 385 grants .

although the program was authorized at $35 million annually by the vision 100 — century of aviation reauthorization act ( p.l .

108-176 ) , appropriators have funded it at a significantly lower level in recent years .

in fy2016 , for example , it received a $5 million appropriation .

as the program has matured , the annual number of applications for new grants has dropped , although the amount of grants sought still exceeds available funding .

recent testimony by gao suggests that the results of the program have been mixed over the years , with fewer than half of the grants achieving their goals .

the metropolitan washington airports authority ( mwaa ) was established by congress to operate and manage the two major washington , dc - area airports , ronald reagan washington national airport ( reagan national , known by the code letters dca ) and washington dulles international airport ( dulles , known by the code letters iad ) .

these two airports are owned by the federal government and were transferred to mwaa under a 50-year lease authorized by the metropolitan washington airports act of 1986 .

the lease has been extended for 30 years , and is currently set to expire in 2067 .

mwaa is governed by a 17-member board of directors , with 7 members appointed by the governor of virginia , 4 by the mayor of washington , dc , 3 by the governor of maryland , and 3 by the president .

mwaa is responsible for the operation and maintenance of the two airports and the dulles toll road , a highway in virginia , as well as the construction and funding of the dulles corridor metrorail project , which , upon completion , would extend washington's metrorail public transit system to dulles airport and beyond into loudoun county , va .

since the 1960s , the federal government has restricted air traffic at reagan national to reduce congestion and to spur growth at dulles airport .

faa controls the number of "slots" available each hour for takeoffs and landings at reagan national .

that airport's growth also has been constrained by limiting the distance that flights are permitted to travel .

under faa's "perimeter rule," nonstop flights from dca could serve only airports within 1,250 miles .

two faa reauthorization acts , air - 21 in 2000 and vision 100 in 2003 , increased the number of slots and established exemptions to the perimeter rule .

these laws required the secretary of transportation to permit 44 slot - exempt operations ( 22 round trips ) per day , of which 24 ( 12 round trips ) must be used for beyond - perimeter flights .

the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 required the secretary of transportation to grant eight additional beyond - perimeter slot exemptions and to consider certain criteria when granting exemptions .

the specified criteria include the benefits of increased service outside the perimeter and of service to small communities .

the faa extension , safety , and security act of 2016 did not require dot to grant additional beyond - perimeter exemptions .

dulles airport has maintained strong performance in international traffic , but its domestic traffic , which accounts for nearly 70% of iad's passengers , has been slipping since it peaked at 22.1 million passengers in 2005 .

in 2013 , 2014 , and 2015 , iad's annual domestic passenger count remained below 15 million .

reagan national , however , has seen steady traffic growth in recent years , and surpassed 23 million total passengers in 2015 for the first time .

iad's high cost per enplanement , $26 , has been identified as making the airport less competitive than dca , which has a cost per enplanement of $14 .

in addition , dca's proximity and convenient transportation links to central washington , dc , have strengthened its position as the primary facility for domestic flights .

mwaa officials reportedly attribute the steady erosion of domestic traffic at dulles airport to "congress and its tinkering with decades - old rules that limit the number of takeoffs and landings at national as well as the distance that planes can fly. .

by and large , the rights of airline passengers are defined by congress .

congress determines the extent to which airline consumer rights are codified in law , authorizes federal agencies to enforce those rights , and directs or authorizes federal agencies to define and enforce passenger rights that are not specifically enumerated in legislation .

over the years , congress has intervened directly in numerous issues related to passengers' rights .

one example stems from a number of incidents between 2007 and 2009 in which passengers were held aboard planes that had either departed airport gates but were not allowed to take off or had landed but were not allowed to disembark passengers .

congressional hearings ensued in 2009 .

in the wake of this attention , dot issued rules on tarmac delays in 2010 , and language on this subject providing a firmer statutory footing for those rules was incorporated into the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 .

the 2016 faa reauthorization incorporated language that defined excessive tarmac delays , but also altered how the tarmac delay threshold is measured , which could afford airlines more leeway in dealing with delayed flights .

the dot office of the assistant general counsel for aviation enforcement and proceedings ( oaep ) , including its aviation consumer protection division , monitors airline compliance , investigates reported violations of dot regulations , and enforces rules and regulations .

it may negotiate consent orders with air carriers and fine violators .

in 2016 , dot issued 29 consent orders related to aviation consumer rule violations and assessed $6,355,000 in civil penalties .

oaep considers a number of factors in determining the civil penalty it would seek in an enforcement proceeding , such as the harm caused by the violations , the alleged violator's compliance disposition , the alleged violator's financial condition and ability to pay , how long the violations continued , and the strength of the case .

currently , large air carriers are subject to a maximum civil penalty of $27,500 per violation , under 49 u.s.c .

46301 and 14 c.f.r .

part 383 .

small businesses or individuals are subject to a maximum penalty of $1,100 .

notwithstanding this limit , small businesses and individuals are subject to higher maximum penalties for discrimination ( $11,000 per violation ) and for engaging in unfair or deceptive practices ( $2,500 per violation ) .

s. 1655 if oaep believes enforcement action is appropriate , it could seek a civil penalty and consent order .

a consent order typically relates the facts of the case to law and regulation , sets forth the penalty the violator has agreed to pay , and incorporates language ordering the air carrier to cease and desist from further violations .

if the air carrier refuses to settle , the case may go to an enforcement hearing before a dot administrative law judge .

dot also may request injunctive relief from a federal district court , although this is unusual .

since the economic deregulation of the domestic airline industry in 1978 , the federal government no longer has control over airlines' prices or routes .

contracts of carriage , the legally binding rules airlines post on their websites and apply to passengers , are not subject to federal review or approval .

however , a contract of carriage that conflicts with federal laws or regulations may not be enforceable by the airline .

the intense price competition of recent years has prompted airlines to respond by "unbundling" their offerings and charging separately for services that once were included in the price of a ticket .

among these charges are fees for checked baggage , early / priority boarding , and seat change on a flight .

such ancillary fees have become major causes of consumer complaints .

carriers' treatment of passengers booked on delayed or canceled flights is also a leading cause of complaints .

the faa extension , safety , and security act of 2016 ( p.l .

114-190 ) included several provisions relating to passenger rights .

some of the passenger - rights provisions put forth during congressional debate were not included in the final bill , as similar protections had meanwhile been implemented through the dot rulemaking process .

relevant passenger - rights provisions of p.l .

114-190 are summarized below .

since 1992 , the united states has reached 114 "open skies" agreements governing international air passenger and air freight services .

these agreements typically allow any airline based in either signatory jurisdiction to offer service between the two jurisdictions , and let the airlines determine their flight routes , frequencies , fares , and aircraft types according to market demand .

there are two current controversies related to open skies agreements .

one controversy involves some u.s. network airlines' and labor unions' opposition to the expansion of three fast - growing airlines based in the persian gulf region — emirates airline , etihad airways , and qatar airways .

the u.s. carriers allege the subsidies and support that these three persian gulf carriers purportedly receive from their government owners contravene fair competitive practices requirements of their home countries' open skies agreements with the united states .

the u.s. carriers have urged the administration to freeze the number of flights gulf carriers operate to the united states and to renegotiate the open skies accords with qatar and the united arab emirates .

similar protests have occurred in europe , initiated by lufthansa group and air france - klm , and by labor groups .

the other controversy concerns norwegian air international ( nai ) , an airline that is registered in ireland .

on december 2 , 2016 , dot granted approval of nai's application for a foreign air carrier permit to operate transatlantic flights to u.s. destinations .

this action is expected to lead to a substantial increase in discount airline service across the north atlantic over the next few years .

nai , based in ireland , is a subsidiary of norwegian air shuttle ( nas ) , the third - largest discount carrier in europe .

norwegian air shuttle and its intercontinental arm , norwegian long haul , hold faa - issued airline certificates under norwegian license and provide nonstop services to several u.s. destinations from several european countries , including norway .

these flights are authorized under the u.s. - eu air service agreement , which has applied to norway since 2011 ( even though norway is not an eu member state ) .

several u.s. and european network airlines and labor organizations strongly opposed nai's application , insisting that nai's business model is predicated on sidestepping norway's stricter labor laws in favor of ireland's less - strict rules .

more specifically , the opponents argued that nai's plans to operate with an irish air operator's certificate rather than a norwegian one and to source crews from asia ( possibly through a third - party company ) as well as from the united states and europe would violate article 17 bis of the u.s. - eu air service agreement .

this article stipulates that "opportunities created by the agreement are not intended to undermine labour standards or the labour - related rights and principles contained in the parties' respective laws. .

although dot decided that it had no legal basis to deny nai's application , the agency did not opine on the merits of opposing arguments or concerns .

in its decision , dot acknowledged labor - related concerns but concluded that the labor - related provision in the u.s. - eu air service agreement did not provide a basis for rejecting an applicant that was otherwise qualified to receive a permit .

dot indicated that it took the unprecedented step of consulting both the departments of justice and state before reaching its decision .

shortly after the dot decision , on january 12 , 2017 , the air line pilots association , the association of flight attendants , the transportation trades department of the afl - cio , and the allied pilots association jointly filed a petition in court challenging the dot order .

it was reported that organized labor would appeal to congress and the trump administration to reverse the dot order .

critics of the dot order may seek to use reauthorization legislation to address the controversy .

