i n january 2017 , the house and senate adopted a budget resolution for fy2017 ( s.con.res .

3 ) , which reflects an agreement between the chambers on the fy2017 budget and sets forth budgetary levels for fy2018-fy2026 .

s.con.res .

3 also includes reconciliation instructions directing specific committees to develop and report legislation that would change laws within their respective jurisdictions to reduce the deficit .

these instructions trigger the budget reconciliation process , which may allow certain legislation to be considered under expedited procedures .

the reconciliation instructions included in s.con.res .

3 direct two committees in each chamber to report legislation within their jurisdictions that would reduce the deficit by $1 billion over the period fy2017-fy2026 .

in the house , the committee on ways and means and the energy and commerce committee are directed to report .

in the senate , the committee on finance and the committee on health , education , labor , and pensions are directed to report .

on march 6 , 2017 , the committee on ways and means and the energy and commerce committee independently held markups .

each committee voted to transmit its budget reconciliation legislative recommendations to the house committee on the budget .

on march 16 , 2017 , the house committee on the budget held a markup and voted to report a reconciliation bill , h.r .

1628 , american health care act ( ahca ) of 2017 .

on march 22 , the house rules committee held a hearing on the ahca , and on march 24 , the rules committee reported h.res .

228 , providing for the consideration of the ahca .

h.res .

228 , which was agreed to by the house on march 24 , provided for four hours of debate on the ahca and automatically amended the ahca to incorporate five "manager's amendments" described as making technical and policy changes to the version of ahca as reported by the house budget committee .

after debate occurred on the bill , the speaker pro tempore postponed further consideration of the bill .

on april 6 , 2017 , the house rules committee reported h.res .

254 , which provided that should the house return to consideration of the ahca , an additional amendment would be automatically agreed to upon adoption of the resolution .

h.res .

254 was subsequently tabled , however , and as a result is no longer available to be considered by the house .

on may 3 , the house rules committee reported h.res .

308 , providing for further debate of the ahca , as amended by h.res .

228 .

h.res .

308 , which was agreed to by the house on may 4 , provided for one hour of further debate on the ahca and automatically amended the ahca ( as amended by h.res .

228 ) to incorporate three further amendments ( one of which previously had been included in h.res .

254 ) .

the house subsequently passed the ahca on may 4 , 2017 , by a vote of 217 to 213 .

this crs report includes information on the ahca as passed by the house ( which incorporates each of the eight amendments referenced in h.res .

228 and h.res .

308 , as noted above ) .

the ahca would repeal or modify several requirements for private health insurance plans established under the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) .

the bill would repeal the aca's cost - sharing subsidies for lower - income individuals who purchase health insurance through the exchanges , and it would substitute the aca's premium tax credit for a tax credit with different eligibility rules and calculation requirements .

the bill effectively would eliminate the aca's individual and employer mandates .

in addition , the ahca includes new programs and requirements that are not related to the aca .

for example , the bill would establish a late - enrollment penalty for certain individuals who do not maintain health insurance coverage , and it would create a new fund to provide funding to states for specified activities intended to improve access to health insurance and health care in the state .

the ahca also includes a number of changes to the medicaid program .

the bill would repeal some parts of the aca related to medicaid , such as the changes the aca made to presumptive eligibility and the state option to provide medicaid coverage to non - elderly individuals with income above 133% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) .

the bill would amend the enhanced matching rates for the aca medicaid expansion and the aca medicaid disproportionate share hospital ( dsh ) allotment reductions .

in addition , the ahca includes a number of new medicaid provisions that are not specific to aspects of the aca .

the most significant new provision would convert medicaid financing to a per capita cap model ( i.e. , per enrollee limits on federal payments to states ) starting in fy2020 .

one provision under the per capita cap would reduce the target amount for new york if certain local contributions to the state share are required .

also , states would have the option to receive block grant funding ( i.e. , a predetermined fixed amount of federal funding ) instead of per capita cap funding for non - elderly , nondisabled , non - expansion adults and children starting in fy2020 .

the ahca includes a provision that would permit states to require nondisabled , non - elderly , nonpregnant adults to satisfy a work requirement to receive medicaid coverage .

the ahca could restrict federal funding for the planned parenthood federation of america ( ppfa ) and its affiliated clinics for a period of one year , and it would appropriate an additional $422 million for fy2017 to the community health center fund .

the bill also would repeal all funding for the aca - established prevention and public health fund ( pphf ) .

the ahca would repeal many of the new taxes and fees established under the aca , and it includes several provisions that would modify the rules governing health savings accounts ( hsas ) .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) and the staff of the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) issued a cost estimate for the ahca , as passed by the house on may 4 , 2017 .

according to the estimate , the ahca would reduce federal deficits by $119 billion over the period fy2017-fy2026 .

with respect to effects on health insurance coverage , cbo and jct project that , in cy2018 , 14 million more people would be uninsured under the ahca than under current law , and in cy2026 , 23 million more people would be uninsured than under current law .

this report contains three tables that , together , provide an overview of the ahca provisions , as amended by the five manager's amendments and the amendment referenced in h.res .

254 .

table 1 includes provisions that apply to the private health insurance market , table 2 includes provisions that affect the medicaid program , and table 3 includes provisions related to public health and taxes .

each table contains a column identifying whether the ahca provision is related to an aca provision ( eg , whether the ahca provision repeals an aca - related provision ) .

in addition to the three tables , the report includes more detailed summaries of each ahca provision and two graphics showing the effective dates of ahca provisions .

figure 1 covers ahca provisions related to the private health insurance market , public health , and taxes .

figure 2 covers ahca provisions related to the medicaid program .

a table identifying key crs policy staff appears at the end of the report .

irc section 36b , as added by aca section 1401 , and related amendments authorized premium tax credits to help eligible individuals pay for health insurance .

the tax credits apply toward premiums for qualified health plans ( qhps ) offered in the individual market through health insurance exchanges .

qhps are allowed to be offered outside of exchanges ( off - exchange plans ) , but the premium credits may not be used toward the purchase of such plans .

the premium credit is refundable , so individuals may claim the full credit amount when filing their taxes , even if they have little or no federal income tax liability .

the credit also is advanceable , so individuals may choose to receive the credit on a monthly basis to coincide with the payment of insurance premiums .

aca section 1411 generally makes the premium tax credit available to those who do not have access to subsidized public coverage ( eg , medicaid ) or employer - sponsored coverage that meets certain standards .

the amount of the premium tax credit varies from individual to individual .

the aca specifies formulas for calculation of the premium tax credit amount and the amount that the individual ( or family ) must contribute toward the premium .

that latter amount — the required premium contribution — is calculated according to a formula that incorporates a certain percentage ( applicable percentage ) of a given individual's ( or family's ) household income ( magi ) and the premium for the standard plan ( i.e. , the second - lowest - cost silver plan ) in that individual's ( or family's ) local area .

the required premium contribution is capped according to magi , with such income measured relative to fpl .

a smaller cap applies to lower - income individuals — compared to the cap applicable to higher - income persons — meaning such individuals generally receive greater tax assistance .

aca section 1412 establishes an advance payment program , for making the credits available during the year .

the advanced amounts are reconciled when individuals file income - tax returns for the actual year in which they receive the credits .

if a tax filing unit's income decreases during the tax year , and the filer should have received a larger credit , this additional credit amount will be included in the tax refund for the year .

by contrast , any excess amount that was overpaid in credits to the filer will have to be repaid to the federal government as a tax payment .

irc section 36b ( f ) ( 2 ) ( b ) imposes limits on the excess amounts to be repaid under certain conditions .

for households with incomes below 400% of fpl , the specific limits apply to single and joint filers separately .

aca section 1414 authorizes the disclosure of taxpayer information by amending irc section 6103 ( l ) .

irc section 6055 , as added by aca section 1502 , requires every entity ( including employers , insurers , and government programs ) that provides minimum essential coverage ( including qhps ) to an individual to report that information to the irs and provide a statement to the covered individual .

section 201 would not apply irc section 36b ( f ) ( 2 ) ( b ) , relating to limits on the excess amounts to be repaid with respect to the aca premium tax credits , to taxable years beginning after december 31 , 2017 , and before january 1 , 2020 .

in other words , for tax years 2018 and 2019 , any individual who was overpaid in premium tax credits would have to repay the entire excess amount , regardless of income .

section 202 would disregard certification , plan choice , and regulatory compliance requirements applicable to qhps and the requirement for qhps to be offered through an exchange for aca premium tax credit purposes .

advance payments of the credit , however , would not be allowed for plans offered outside of exchanges .

section 202 would allow the aca credits to be applied toward the purchase of catastrophic plans but not grandfathered plans , grandmothered plans , or abortion coverage ( except if necessary to save the life of the mother or if the pregnancy is the result of rape or incest ) .

the section would allow an individual to purchase abortion - only coverage or a plan that includes abortion coverage , and would allow a health insurer to offer such coverage or plan , but would prohibit aca premium tax credits to be used to pay for either .

section 202 would amend irc section 6055 , relating to the reporting of minimum essential coverage , to require an entity that offers an off - exchange qhp to report certain specified information .

with respect to the formula for calculating required premium contributions , section 202 would specify age and income - adjusted applicable percentages for tax year 2019 .

the applicable percentages would range from 2% for those in the lowest income band to 11.5% for those in the highest income band and the oldest age band , which generally would provide greater tax assistance to lower - income individuals .

beginning in tax year 2019 , the applicable percentages would be adjusted to take into account premium growth in comparison with other specified economic measures .

section 202 would go into effect beginning tax year 2018 , unless otherwise specified .

section 45r of the irc , as added by aca section 1421 , provided for a small business health insurance tax credit .

the credit is intended to help make the premiums for small - group health insurance coverage more affordable for certain small employers .

the credit generally is available to nonprofit and for - profit employers with fewer than 25 full - time - equivalent employees with average annual wages that fall under a statutorily specified cap .

to qualify for the credit , employers must cover at least 50% of the cost of each of their employees' self - only health insurance coverage .

as of 2014 , small employers must obtain insurance through a small business health options program ( shop ) exchange to receive the credit , and the credit is available for two consecutive tax years only .

the two - year period begins with the first year an employer obtains coverage through a shop exchange .

for example , if an employer first obtains coverage through a shop exchange in 2017 , the credit will be available to the employer only in 2017 and 2018 .

beginning in tax year 2018 , section 203 would amend irc section 45r to indicate that the small business health insurance tax credit amount is to be determined based on qhps that do not include coverage for abortion , except abortions necessary to save the life of the mother or abortions for pregnancies that are a result of rape or incest .

the provision further states that an employer would not be prohibited from purchasing for its employees separate coverage for abortion , so long as no tax credit under irc section 45r is allowed with respect to employer contributions for such coverage .

section 203 would provide that the small business health insurance tax credit would not be available beginning tax year 2020 .

irc section 5000a , as added by aca section 1501 , created an individual mandate , a requirement for most individuals to maintain health insurance coverage or pay a penalty for noncompliance .

to comply with the mandate , most individuals need to obtain minimum essential coverage , which includes most types of private ( eg , employer - sponsored ) coverage and public coverage ( eg , medicare and medicaid ) .

certain individuals are exempt from the mandate and its associated penalty .

the individual mandate went into effect in 2014 .

individuals who are not exempt from the mandate are required to pay a penalty for each month of noncompliance .

the annual penalty is the greater of a percentage of income or a flat dollar amount ( but not more than the national average premium of a specified health plan ) .

the percentage of income increased from 1.0% in 2014 to 2.5% in 2016 and beyond .

the flat dollar amount increased from $95 in 2014 to $695 in 2016 and is adjusted for inflation thereafter .

section 204 would effectively eliminate the annual penalty associated with irc section 5000a , the individual mandate , by reducing the percentage of income to 0% and the flat dollar amount to $0 , retroactively beginning cy2016 .

irc section 4980h , as added by aca section 1513 , required that employers either provide health coverage or face potential employer tax penalties .

the potential employer penalties apply to all common - law employers , including government entities ( such as federal , state , local , or indian tribal government entities ) and nonprofit organizations that are exempt from federal income taxes .

the penalties are imposed on firms with at least 50 full - time - equivalent employees if one or more of their full - time employees obtain a premium tax credit through a health insurance exchange .

the total penalty for any applicable large employer is based on the employer's number of full - time employees ( averaging 30 hours or more per week ) and whether the employer offers affordable health coverage that provides minimum value .

section 205 would modify the tax penalty associated with irc section 4980h , effectively eliminating it by reducing the penalty to $0 retroactively beginning in cy2016 .

irc section 4980i , as added by aca section 9001 , created a new excise tax on high - cost employer - sponsored coverage ( the so - called cadillac tax ) .

under the aca , the tax was scheduled to take effect in 2018 ; however , the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) delayed implementation of the tax until 2020 .

when it is implemented , the tax is to be imposed at a 40% rate on the aggregate cost of employer - sponsored health coverage that exceeds a specified dollar limit .

if a tax is owed , it is levied on the entity providing the coverage ( eg , the health insurance issuer or the employer ) .

section 206 would delay implementation of irc section 4980i ( the so - called cadillac tax ) until taxable periods beginning january 1 , 2026 .

under the irc , taxpayers may use several different types of tax - advantaged health accounts to pay or be reimbursed for qualified medical expenses: health flexible spending accounts ( health fsas ) , health reimbursement accounts ( hras ) , archer medical savings accounts ( msas ) , and health savings accounts ( hsas ) .

aca section 9003 amended the relevant irc provisions ( irc sections 106 , 220 , and 223 ) to provide that , for each of these accounts , amounts paid for medicine or drugs are qualified expenses only in the case of prescribed drugs and insulin .

section 207 would repeal the language in irc sections 106 , 220 , and 223 stipulating that a medicine or drug must be a prescribed drug or insulin to be considered a qualified expense in terms of spending from a tax - advantaged health account .

the provision would be generally effective beginning tax year 2017 .

aca section 9004 imposed a 20% tax on distributions from archer msas and hsas that are used for purposes other than paying for qualified medical expenses .

prior to the aca , irc section 220 applied a 15% rate on such distributions if made from an archer msa and irc section 223 applied a 10% rate on such distributions if made from an hsa .

section 208 would amend irc sections 220 and 223 to reduce the applicable rate to 15% and 10% for archer msas and hsas , respectively .

the lower rates would apply to distributions made after december 31 , 2016 .

irc section 125 allowed employers to establish cafeteria plans , benefit plans under which employees may choose between receiving cash ( typically additional take - home pay ) and certain normally nontaxable benefits ( such as employer - paid health insurance ) without being taxed on the value of the benefits if they select the latter .

 ( a general rule of taxation is that when given a choice between taxable and nontaxable benefits , taxpayers will be taxed on whichever they choose because they are deemed to be in constructive receipt of the cash. ) .

aca section 9005 amended irc section 125 ( i ) to provide that a health fsa cannot be a nontaxable benefit under a cafeteria plan unless the cafeteria plan provides that an employee may not elect for any taxable year to have a salary reduction contribution in excess of $2,500 made to such arrangement .

also , the $2,500 limit is indexed for cost - of - living adjustments for plan years beginning after december 31 , 2013 .

section 209 would repeal irc section 125 ( i ) , the contribution limit for health fsas , effective beginning tax year 2017 .

section 1405 of the hcera created a new excise tax that is imposed on the sale of certain medical devices .

the tax is codified in irc section 4191 .

the tax is equal to 2.3% of the device's sales price and generally is imposed on the manufacturer or importer of the device .

the tax took effect on january 1 , 2013 .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) provided a two - year moratorium on the tax .

the tax does not apply to sales in the period beginning january 1 , 2016 , and ending december 31 , 2017 .

section 210 would provide that the medical device excise tax does not apply to sales after december 31 , 2016 .

employers that provide medicare - eligible retirees with prescription drug coverage that meets or exceeds set federal standards are eligible for federal subsidy payments .

the subsidies are equal to 28% of plans' actual spending for prescription drug costs in excess of $400 and not to exceed $8,250 ( for 2017 ) .

the subsidies were created as part of the medicare part d prescription drug program ( medicare modernization act of 2003 ; p.l .

108-173 ) to provide employers with an incentive to maintain drug coverage for their retirees .

employers are allowed to exclude qualified retiree prescription drug plan subsidies from gross income for the purposes of corporate income tax .

prior to implementation of the aca , employers also were allowed to claim a business deduction for their qualified retiree prescription drug expenses , even though they also received the federal subsidy to cover a portion of those expenses .

aca section 9012 amended irc section 139a , beginning in 2013 , to require employers to coordinate the subsidy and the deduction for retiree prescription drug coverage .

the amount allowable as a deduction for retiree prescription drug coverage is reduced by the amount of the federal subsidy received .

section 211 would repeal the aca change to irc section 139a and reinstate business - expense deductions for retiree prescription drug costs without reduction by the amount of any federal subsidy .

the change would be effective for taxable years beginning after december 31 , 2016 .

under irc section 213 , taxpayers who itemize their deductions may deduct qualifying medical expenses .

the medical - expense deduction may be claimed only for expenses that exceed 10% of the taxpayer's adjusted gross income ( agi ) , which was reduced for taxable years ending before january 1 , 2017 , to 7.5% if the taxpayer or spouse was aged 65 or older .

the 10% threshold was imposed by aca section 9013 .

prior to the aca , the agi threshold was 7.5% for all taxpayers .

section 212 would amend irc section 213 ( a ) to reduce the agi threshold to 5.8% for all taxpayers , effective tax year 2017 .

aca sections 9015 and 10906 imposed a medicare hospital insurance ( hi ) surtax at a rate equal to 0.9% of an employee's wages or a self - employed individual's self - employment income .

the surtax , which is found in irc sections 1401 and 3101 , applies only to taxpayers with taxable income in excess of $250,000 if married filing jointly ; $125,000 if married filing separately ; and $200,000 for all other taxpayers .

the tax is in addition to the regular federal insurance contributions act and self - employment contributions act taxes that generally apply ( i.e. , social security and medicare taxes ) .

section 213 would amend irc sections 1401 ( b ) and 3101 ( b ) to repeal the 0.9% medicare surtax , effective for remuneration received and taxable years beginning after december 31 , 2022 .

the federal tax code currently allows two credits to help eligible individuals and dependents pay for health insurance that meets specified standards .

the health coverage tax credit , codified in irc section 35 , was reauthorized under the trade preferences extension act of 2015 with a sunset date of january 1 , 2020 .

in addition , the aca authorized a premium tax credit for eligible individuals enrolled in exchange coverage , codified in irc section 36b , with no sunset date .

section 214 would amend irc section 36b by replacing the text with completely new language , effective beginning tax year 2020 .

it would establish a refundable , advanceable tax credit for health insurance purposes .

to be eligible for the tax credit , an individual would be required to be covered under a state - certified qhp ; to not be eligible for private or public coverage as specified in the section ; to be a citizen , national , or qualified alien of the united states ; and to not be incarcerated ( except incarceration pending disposition of charges ) .

for tax credit purposes , a qhp would be any coverage offered in the individual health insurance market ; such coverage would exclude grandfathered plans , grandmothered plans , abortion coverage ( except if necessary to save the life of the mother or if the pregnancy is the result of rape or incest ) , and coverage that consists substantially of either excepted benefits or short - term limited - duration insurance ( as defined under current law ) .

qualifying family members would include only the individual's spouse , any dependent of the individual , and any child ( aged 26 or younger ) of the individual who is enrolled in the same qhp as the individual ( or other parent ) .

a qualifying spouse must file a joint tax return with the eligible individual if married to that individual at the end of the tax year ( with exceptions ) .

a credit would be allowed for a dependent only by the individual who claims such a dependent for income - tax purposes .

the credit amount would be the lesser of flat credit amounts adjusted by age for an eligible individual and that individual's qualifying family members or the amounts equal to the premiums paid by an eligible individual and that individual's qualifying family members for a qhp .

the age - adjusted credit amounts for 2020 would be $2,000 for eligible individuals under the age of 30 ; $2,500 for those between 30 and 39 years of age ; $3,000 for those between 40 and 49 years of age ; $3,500 for those between 50 and 59 years of age ; and $4,000 for those who aged 60 and older .

the calculation of a given family's credit would take into account the age - adjusted credit amounts applicable to the five oldest individuals only .

the total credit amount would be reduced ( but not below zero ) by 10% of any amount that magi ( as defined in the section ) exceeds $75,000 , or $150,000 for a joint tax return ( magi limitation ) .

the maximum tax credit amount allowed for an eligible individual and qualifying family members for a given tax year ( aggregate dollar limitation ) would be $14,000 .

beginning in 2021 , the age - adjusted credit amounts , the dollar amounts under the magi limitation , and the aggregate dollar limitation would be adjusted annually by the cpi - u , as specified .

if an eligible individual or qualifying family member has a qualified small - employer health - reimbursement arrangement , the age - adjusted credit amount would be reduced ( but not below zero ) by the permitted benefit provided under such an arrangement .

for any month in which an individual elects to receive the health coverage tax credit , authorized under irc section 35 , such an individual would not be eligible to receive the tax credit authorized under irc section 36b .

the current deduction allowed for health insurance premiums paid by self - employed individuals for coverage for such individuals ( and their families ) , authorized under irc section 162 ( l ) , would be reduced ( not below zero ) by the new tax credit amounts ( including advance payments ) provided to such individuals .

an individual who makes an erroneous claim for an excessive tax credit amount would be liable for a penalty equal to 25% of the excessive amount .

section 214 would amend aca section 1412 , relating to the advance payment program , to require the hhs secretary and the treasury secretary to promulgate regulations that they deem necessary relating to protection of taxpayer information , verification of eligibility , proper and timely payments , and program integrity .

section 214 would go into effect beginning tax year 2020 .

irc section 223 provided for hsas , which are tax - exempt trusts or custodial accounts established for paying the health - related expenses of an account beneficiary .

hsas are established and owned by individuals .

eligible individuals can establish and fund hsas when they have a qualifying high - deductible health plan ( hdhp ) and no other health plan , with some exceptions .

to be hsa - qualified , the hdhp must have a minimum deductible , it must limit out - of - pocket expenditures for covered benefits to no more than a certain maximum level , and only preventive care services can be covered prior to the deductible being met .

the minimum deductible amounts and out - of - pocket limits are set by statute and adjusted for inflation .

for 2017 , the minimum deductible is $1,300 for single coverage and $2,600 for family coverage .

the out - of - pocket limit is $6,550 for single coverage and $13,100 for family coverage .

contributions to hsas are subject to an annual limit , which is adjusted for inflation .

in 2017 , the contribution limit is $3,400 for account holders enrolled in self - only coverage and $6,750 for account holders enrolled in family coverage .

hsa contributions are either deductible as an above - the - line deduction or excluded from an account holder's gross income .

section 215 would increase the hsa annual contribution limits for self - only and family coverage to match the out - of - pocket limits for hsa - qualified hdhps for self - only and family coverage .

the change would go into effect beginning in tax year 2018 .

irc section 223 established hsas , which are tax - exempt trusts or custodial accounts established for paying the health - related expenses of the account beneficiary .

eligible individuals can establish and contribute to hsas when they have a qualifying hdhp and no other health plan , with some exceptions .

contributions to hsas may be made by eligible individuals , as well as by other individuals or entities on their behalf .

thus , individuals may contribute to accounts of eligible family members , and employers may contribute to accounts of eligible employees .

hsa contributions are deductible as an above - the - line deduction if made by individuals .

contributions made by employers , including through salary - reduction agreements , are excluded from income , social security , and medicare taxes .

the aggregate contributions to hsas are subject to an annual limit , which is adjusted for inflation each year .

in 2017 , the contribution limit is $3,400 for self - only coverage and $6,750 for family coverage .

individuals aged 55 and older who are not yet eligible for medicare are allowed to contribute an additional $1,000 each year .

this "catch - up" contribution is not adjusted for inflation .

irc section 223 ( b ) ( 5 ) established contribution rules for married couples .

in the case of a married couple , if either spouse has hsa - qualified family coverage and both spouses have their own hsas , then both spouses are treated as if they have only one family plan for purposes of the hsa contribution limit .

in other words , the spouses' aggregate contributions to their respective hsas cannot be more than the annual contribution limit for family coverage .

their annual contribution limit is first reduced by any amount paid to archer msas of either spouse for the taxable year , and then the remaining contribution amount is divided equally between the spouses unless they agree on a different division .

each spouse is allowed to make catch - up contributions to his or her respective hsa , provided each spouse is eligible to do so .

section 216 would amend irc section 223 ( b ) ( 5 ) to provide that , with respect to the contribution limit to an hsa , married persons do not have to take into account whether their spouse is also covered by an hsa - qualified hdhp .

in other words , spouses' aggregate contributions to their respective hsas could be more than the annual contribution limit for family coverage .

their annual contribution limit would be reduced by any amount paid to archer msas of either spouse for the taxable year , and then the remaining contribution amount would be divided equally between the spouses unless they agreed on a different division .

if both spouses are eligible to make catch - up contributions before the close of the taxable year , then each spouse's catch - up contribution is included when dividing up the contribution amounts between the spouses .

this provision would effectively allow both spouses to make catch - up contributions to one hsa and would apply to taxable years beginning in 2018 .

in general , withdrawals from hsas are exempt from federal income taxes if used for qualified medical expenses described in irc section 213 ( d ) , except for health insurance .

however , withdrawals from hsas are not exempt from federal income taxes if used to pay qualified medical expenses incurred before the hsa was established .

section 217 would amend irc section 223 ( d ) ( 2 ) to provide a circumstance under which hsa withdrawals can be used to pay qualified medical expenses incurred before the hsa was established .

if an hsa were established within 60 days of when an individual's coverage under an hsa - qualified plan begins , then the hsa would be treated as having been established on the date the coverage begins for purposes of determining whether an hsa withdrawal is used for a qualified medical expense .

section 217 would apply to coverage beginning after december 31 , 2017 .

aca section 9008 imposed an annual tax on covered entities engaged in the business of manufacturing or importing branded prescription drugs .

in general , the tax is imposed on covered manufacturers and importers with aggregated branded prescription drug sales of more than $5 million to specified government programs or pursuant to coverage under these programs .

section 221 would amend aca section 9008 to provide that the tax would not be imposed effective calendar year 2017 .

aca section 9010 imposed an annual fee on certain health insurers beginning in 2014 .

the aca fee is based on net health care premiums written by covered issuers during the year prior to the year that payment is due .

the aggregate aca fee is set at $8.0 billion in 2014 , $11.3 billion in 2015 and in 2016 , $13.9 billion in 2017 , and $14.3 billion in 2018 .

after 2018 , the fee is indexed to the annual rate of u.s. health insurance premium growth .

each year , the irs apportions the fee among affected insurers based on ( 1 ) their net premiums written in the previous calendar year as a share of total net premiums written by all covered insurers and ( 2 ) their dollar value of business .

covered insurers are not subject to the fee on their first $25 million of net premiums written .

the fee is imposed on 50% of net premiums above $25 million and up to $50 million , and it is imposed on 100% of net premiums in excess of $50 million .

certain types of health insurers or insurance arrangements are not subject to the fee , including self - insured plans ; voluntary employees' beneficiary associations ; and federal , state , or other governmental entities , including indian tribal governments and nonprofit entities incorporated under state law that receive more than 80% of their gross revenues from government programs that target low - income , elderly , or disabled populations .

in addition , only 50% of net premiums written by tax - exempt entities are included in determining an entity's market share .

aca section 9010 ( j ) made these provisions effective for calendar years beginning after december 31 , 2013 .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) provides a one - year moratorium on the tax for calendar year 2017 .

section 222 would amend aca section 9010 to provide that the annual fee would not be imposed effective calendar year 2017 .

aca section 10907 created a new excise tax on indoor tanning services .

the tax is equal to 10% of the amount paid for such services .

the provision is codified in chapter 49 of the irc .

section 231 would repeal the tax on indoor tanning services ( irc chapter 49 ) , effective for services performed after june 30 , 2017 .

generally , employers may deduct the remuneration paid to employees as "ordinary and necessary" business expenses under irc section 162 , subject to any statutory limitations .

aca section 9014 ( b ) added a statutory limitation for certain health insurance providers .

under the provision , which is codified at irc section 162 ( m ) ( 6 ) , covered health insurance providers may not deduct the remuneration paid to an officer , director , or employee in excess of $500,000 .

section 241 would terminate irc section 162 ( m ) ( 6 ) , effective beginning tax year 2017 .

hcera section 1402 imposed a net investment tax on high - income taxpayers .

the tax , which is codified in chapter 2a of subtitle a of the irc , applies at a rate of 3.8% to certain net investment income of individuals , estates , and trusts with income above amounts specified in the statute .

section 251 would repeal the net investment tax ( chapter 2a of irc subtitle a ) , effective beginning tax year 2017 .

