prior to world war i , the territories comprising modern - day lebanon were governed as separate administrative regions of the ottoman empire .

after the war ended and the ottoman empire collapsed , the 1916 sykes - picot agreement divided the empire's arab provinces into british and french zones of influence .

the area constituting modern day lebanon was granted to france , and in 1920 , french authorities announced the creation of greater lebanon .

to form this new entity , french authorities combined the maronite christian enclave of mount lebanon — semiautonomous under ottoman rule — with the coastal cities of beirut , tripoli , sidon , and tyre and their surrounding districts .

these latter districts were ( with the exception of beirut ) primarily muslim and had been administered by the ottomans as part of the v ilay et ( province ) of syria .

these administrative divisions created the boundaries of the modern lebanese state ; historians note that "lebanon , in the frontiers defined on 1 september 1920 , had never existed before in history. .

the new muslim residents of greater lebanon — many with long - established economic links to the syrian interior — opposed the move , and some called for integration with syria as part of a broader postwar arab nationalist movement .

meanwhile , many maronite christians — some of whom also self - identified as ethnically distinct from their arab neighbors — sought a christian state under french protection .

the resulting debate over lebanese identity would shape the new country's politics for decades to come .

independence .

in 1943 , lebanon gained independence from france .

lebanese leaders agreed to an informal national pact , in which each of the country's officially recognized religious groups were to be represented in government in direct relation to their share of the population , based on the 1932 census .

the presidency was to be reserved for a maronite christian ( the largest single denomination at that time ) , the prime minister post for a sunni muslim , and the speaker of parliament for a shia .

lebanon has not held a census since 1932 , amid fears ( largely among christians ) that any demographic changes revealed by a new census — such as a christian population that was no longer the majority — would upset the status quo .

civil war .

in the decades that followed , lebanon's sectarian balance remained a point of friction between communities .

christian dominance in lebanon was challenged by a number of events , including the influx of ( primarily sunni muslim ) palestinian refugees as a result of the arab - israeli conflict , and the mobilization of lebanon's shia muslim community in the south — which had been politically and economically marginalized .

these and other factors would lead the country into a civil war that lasted from 1975 to 1990 and killed an estimated 150,000 people .

while the war pitted sectarian communities against one another , there was also significant fighting within communities .

foreign intervention .

the civil war drew in a number of external actors , including syria , israel , iran , and the united states .

syrian military forces intervened in the conflict in 1976 , and remained in lebanon for another 29 years .

israel sent military forces into lebanon in 1978 and 1982 , and conducted several subsequent airstrikes in the country .

in 1978 , the u.n. security council established the united nations interim force in lebanon ( unifil ) to supervise the withdrawal of israeli forces from southern lebanon , which was not complete until 2000 .

in the early 1980s , israel's military presence in the heavily shia area of southern lebanon began to be contested by an emerging militant group that would become hezbollah , backed by iran .

the united states deployed forces to lebanon in 1982 as part of a multinational peacekeeping force , but withdrew its forces after the 1983 marine barracks bombing in beirut , which killed 241 u.s. personnel .

taif accords .

in 1989 , the parties signed the taif accords , beginning a process that would bring the war to a close the following year .

the agreement adjusted and formalized lebanon's confessional system , further entrenching what some described as an unstable power dynamic between different sectarian groups at the national level .

the political rifts created by this system allowed syria to present itself as the arbiter between rivals , and pursue its own interests inside lebanon in the wake of the war .

the participation of syrian troops in operation desert storm to expel iraqi forces from kuwait reportedly facilitated what some viewed as the tacit acceptance by the united states of syria's continuing role in lebanon .

the taif accords also called for all lebanese militias to be dismantled , and most were reincorporated into the lebanese armed forces .

however , hezbollah refused to disarm — claiming that its militia forces were legitimately engaged in resistance to the israeli military presence in southern lebanon .

hariri assassination .

in february 2005 , former lebanese prime minister rafik hariri — a prominent anti - syria sunni politician — was assassinated in a car bombing in downtown beirut .

the attack galvanized lebanese society against the syrian military presence in the country and triggered a series of street protests known as the "cedar revolution. .

under pressure , syria withdrew its forces from lebanon in the subsequent months , although damascus continued to influence domestic lebanese politics .

while the full details of the attack are unknown , the special tribunal for lebanon ( stl ) has indicted five members of hezbollah and is conducting trials in absentia .

closing arguments in the case were concluded in september 2018 ; a verdict is expected in 2019 .

the hariri assassination reshaped lebanese politics into the two major blocks known today: march 8 and march 14 , which represented pro - syria and anti - syria segments of the political spectrum , respectively ( see figure 2 ) .

2006 hezbollah - israel war .

in july 2006 , hezbollah captured two israeli soldiers along the border , sparking a 34-day war .

the israeli air campaign and ground operation aimed at degrading hezbollah resulted in widespread damage to lebanon's civilian infrastructure , killing roughly 1,190 lebanese , and displacing a quarter of lebanon's population .

in turn , hezbollah launched thousands of rockets into israel , killing 163 israelis .

u.n. security council resolution 1701 brokered a cease - fire between the two sides .

2008 doha agreement .

in late 2006 , a move by the lebanese government to endorse the stl led hezbollah and its shia political ally amal to withdraw from the government , triggering an 18-month political crisis .

in may 2008 , a cabinet decision to shut down hezbollah's private telecommunications network — which the group reportedly viewed as critical to its ability to fight israel — led hezbollah fighters to seize control of parts of beirut .

the resulting sectarian violence raised questions regarding lebanon's risk for renewed civil war , as well as concerns about the willingness of hezbollah to deploy its militia force in response to a decision by lebanon's civilian government .

qatar helped broker a political settlement between rival lebanese factions , which was signed on may 21 , 2008 , and became known as the doha agreement .

war in syria .

in 2011 , unrest broke out in neighboring syria .

hezbollah moved to support the asad regime , eventually mobilizing to fight inside syria .

meanwhile , prominent lebanese sunni leaders sided with the sunni rebels .

as rebel forces fighting along the lebanese border were defeated by the syrian military — with hezbollah assistance — rebels fell back , some into lebanon .

syrian refugees also began to flood into the country .

beginning in 2013 , a wave of retaliatory attacks targeting shia communities and hezbollah strongholds inside lebanon threatened to destabilize the domestic political balance as each side accused the other of backing terrorism .

the lebanese armed forces ( laf ) and hezbollah have both worked to contain border attacks by syria - based groups such as the islamic state and the nusra front .

u.s. policy in lebanon has sought to limit threats posed by hezbollah both domestically and to israel , bolster lebanon's ability to protect its borders , and build state capacity to deal with the refugee influx .

iranian influence in lebanon via its ties to hezbollah , the potential for renewed armed conflict between hezbollah and israel , and lebanon's internal political dynamics complicate the provision of u.s. assistance .

lebanon continues to be an arena for conflict between regional states , as local actors aligned with syria and iran vie for power against those that seek support from saudi arabia , which backs sunni elements in lebanon , and the united states .

as congress reviews aid to lebanon , members continue to debate the best ways to meet u.s. policy objectives: weakening hezbollah and b uilding state capacity .

the united states has sought to weaken hezbollah without provoking a direct confrontation that could undermine lebanon's stability .

both obama and trump administration officials have argued that hezbollah's influence in lebanon can be addressed by strengthening lebanon's legitimate security institutions , including the laf .

however , some members have argued that hezbollah has increased cooperation with the laf , and questioned requests for continuing foreign military financing ( fmf ) assistance to lebanon .

adjacent hezbollah and laf operations along the syrian border in mid - 2017 against islamic state and al qaeda - affiliated militants raised additional questions about de - confliction and coordination between the military and hezbollah fighters .

defending lebanon's borders .

beginning in late 2012 , lebanon faced a wave of attacks from syria - based groups , some of which sought to gain a foothold in lebanon .

u.s. policymakers have sought to ensure that the lebanese armed forces have the tools they need to defend lebanon's borders against encroachment by the islamic state and other armed nonstate groups .

assisting syrian refugees .

while seeking to protect lebanon's borders from infiltration by the islamic state and other terrorist groups , the united states also has called for lebanon to keep its border open to syrian refugees fleeing violence .

the united states had , as of february 2018 , provided nearly $1.6 billion in humanitarian aid to lebanon since fy2012 , much of it designed to lessen the impact of the refugee surge on host communities .

strengthening government institutions .

u.s. economic aid to lebanon aims to strengthen lebanese institutions and their capacity to provide essential public services .

slow economic growth and high levels of public debt have limited government spending on basic public services , and this gap has been filled in part by sectarian patronage networks , including some affiliated with hezbollah .

u.s. programs to improve education , increase service provision , and foster economic growth are intended to make communities less vulnerable to recruitment by extremist groups .

lebanon is a parliamentary republic .

the confessional political system established by the 1943 national pact and formalized by the 1989 taif accords divides power among lebanon's three largest religious communities ( christian , sunni , shia ) in a manner designed to prevent any one group from dominating the others .

major decisions can only be reached through consensus , setting the stage for prolonged political deadlock .

lebanon faces numerous security challenges from a combination of internal and external sources .

some of these stem from the conflict in neighboring syria , while others are rooted in long - standing social divisions and the marginalization of some sectors of lebanese society .

the syria conflict appears to have exacerbated some of the societal cleavages .

according to the state department's 2017 country reports on terrorism ( released in september 2018 ) , lebanon remains a safe haven for certain terrorist groups: lebanon remained a safe haven for certain terrorist groups in both undergoverned and hizballah - controlled areas .

hizballah used areas under its control for terrorist training , fundraising , financing , and recruitment .

the government of lebanon did not take significant action to disarm hizballah , even though hizballah maintained its weapons in defiance of unscr 1701 .

the government was unable to limit hizballah's travel to and from iraq or syria to fight in support of the assad regime .

the lebanese government did not have complete control of all regions of the country , or fully control its borders with syria and israel .

hizballah controlled access to parts of the country and had influence over some elements within lebanon's security services .

the report also noted that in 2017 , ungoverned areas along lebanon's border with syria served as safe havens for extremists groups such as the islamic state and the al qaeda - linked syrian militants ( such as the nusra front , part of which evolved into ha'ia tahrir al sham , or hts ) .

in mid - 2017 both the laf and hezbollah carried out operations aimed at clearing the border area of islamic state and hts forces ( see " 2017 border operations ," below ) .

lebanese hezbollah , a shia islamist movement , is iran's most significant nonstate ally .

iran's support for hezbollah , including providing thousands of rockets and short - range missiles , helps iran acquire leverage against key regional adversaries such as israel and saudi arabia .

it also facilitates iran's intervention on behalf of a key ally , the asad regime in syria .

the asad regime has been pivotal to iran and hezbollah by providing iran a secure route to deliver weapons to hezbollah .

iran has supported hezbollah by providing "hundreds of millions of dollars" to the group and training "thousands" of hezbollah fighters inside iran .

in june 2018 , treasury under secretary for terrorism and financial intelligence sigal mandelker estimated that iran provides hezbollah with more than $700 million per year , significantly more than previously released u.s. government estimates .

refugees began to stream into lebanon in 2011 , following the outbreak of conflict in neighboring syria .

initially , lebanon maintained an open - border policy , permitting refugees to enter without a visa and to renew their residency for a nominal fee .

by 2014 , lebanon had the highest per capita refugee population in the world , with refugees equaling one - quarter of the resident population .

 ( see figure 4 . ) .

in may 2015 , unhcr suspended new registration of refugees in response to the government's request .

thus , while roughly 1 million syrian refugees were registered with unhcr in late 2016 , officials estimate that the actual refugee presence is closer to 1.2 million to 1.5 million ( lebanon's prewar population was about 4.3 million ) .

in addition , there are 450,000 palestinian refugees registered with the u.n .

relief and works agency for palestine refugees in the near east ( unrwa ) in lebanon , although not all of those registered reside in lebanon .

a 2017 census of palestinian refugees in lebanon found that roughly 174,422 palestinians live in 12 formal camps and 156 informal "gatherings. .

about 20,725 other refugees and asylum seekers are registered in lebanon ; 84% of these are iraqi refugees .

as the number of refugees continued to increase , it severely strained lebanon's infrastructure , which was still being rebuilt following the 2006 war between hezbollah and israel .

it also created growing resentment among lebanese residents , as housing prices increased and some felt as though an influx of cheap syrian labor was displacing lebanese from their jobs .

the influx has also affected the lebanese education system , as roughly 500,000 of the syrian refugees in lebanon are estimated to be school - age children .

the lebanese government has been unwilling to take steps that it sees as enabling syrians to become a permanent refugee population akin to the palestinians — whose militarization in the 1970s was one of the drivers of lebanon's 15-year civil war .

some christian leaders also fear that the influx of largely sunni refugees could upset the country's sectarian balance .

the government has blocked the construction of refugee camps like those built to house syrian refugees in jordan and turkey , presumably to prevent syrian refugees from settling in lebanon permanently .

as a result , most syrian refugees in lebanon have settled in urban areas , in what unchr describes as "sub - standard shelters" ( garages , worksites , unfinished buildings ) or apartments .

less than 20% live in informal tented settlements .

syrian refugees have also settled in existing palestinian refugee camps in lebanon , and in some cases outnumber the palestinian residents of those camps .

entry restrictions .

in may 2014 , the government enacted entry restrictions effectively closing the border to palestinian refugees from syria .

in january 2015 , the lebanese government began to implement new visa requirements for all syrians entering lebanon , raising concerns among u.s. officials .

under the new requirements , syrians can only be admitted if they are able to provide documentation proving that they fit into one of the seven approved categories for entry , which do not include fleeing violence .

while there is an entry category for displaced persons , the criteria specifically apply to "unaccompanied and / or separated children with a parent already registered in lebanon ; persons living with disabilities with a relative already registered in lebanon ; persons with urgent medical needs for whom treatment in syria is unavailable ; persons who will be resettled to third countries. .

legal status .

refugees registered with unhcr are required to provide a notarized pledge not to work , as a condition of renewing their residency .

nevertheless , the january 2015 regulations increased the costs of residency renewal to an annual fee of $200 per person over 15 years of age , beyond the means of the 70% of syrian refugee households living at or below the poverty line .

as a result , most syrian refugees in lebanon lost their legal status .

to survive , many sought employment in the informal labor market .

according to a human rights watch report , the loss of legal status for refugees in lebanon made them vulnerable to labor and sexual exploitation by employers .

in february 2017 , lebanese authorities lifted the $200 residency fee for syrian refugees registered with unhcr .

the waiver will not apply to the estimated 500,000 syrian refugees who arrived after the lebanese government directed unhcr to stop registering refugees in may 2015 , or to refugees who renewed their residency through a lebanese sponsor .

palestinian refugees .

palestinian refugees have been present in lebanon for at least 70 years , as a result of displacements stemming from various arab - israeli wars .

like syrian refugees , palestinian refugees and their lebanese - born children cannot obtain lebanese citizenship .

in addition , the state department notes that palestinian refugees in lebanon are prohibited from accessing public health and education services or owning land ; they were barred from employment in many fields , making refugees dependent upon unrwa as the sole provider of education , health care , and social services .

a 2010 labor law revision expanded employment rights and removed some restrictions on palestinian refugees .

this law was not fully implemented , however , and palestinians remained barred from working in most skilled professions , including almost all those that require membership in a professional association .

in august 2018 , the state department announced that the united states will not make further contributions to unrwa .

the united states contributed approximately one - third of unrwa's annual budget in 2017 .

for additional information , see crs insight in10964 , decision to stop u.s. funding of unrwa ( for palestinian refugees ) , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

the long - standing presence of palestinians in lebanon has shaped the approach of lebanese authorities to the influx of syrian refugees .

it is unclear whether lebanese authorities will take a comparable approach to the syrian population over the long term , particularly as a new generation of syrian children comes to share palestinian refugees' status as stateless persons .

some observers worry that government policies limiting nationality , mobility , and employment for refugees and their descendants risk creating a permanent underclass vulnerable to recruitment by terrorist groups .

lebanon's economy is service oriented ( 69.5% of gdp ) , and primary sectors include banking and financial services as well as tourism .

the country faces a number of economic challenges , including high unemployment and the third - highest debt - to - gdp ratio in the world ( 142% , 2017 est ) .

in october 2018 , the world bank estimated that lebanon's debt - to - gdp ratio is expected to "persist in an unsustainable path towards 155% by end - 2018. .

moody's investors service has warned that the cost of servicing lebanon's public debt could reach 58.6% of government revenue by 2021 .

the war in neighboring syria has significantly affected lebanon's traditional growth sectors — tourism , real estate , and construction .

economic growth has slowed from an average of 8% between 2007 and 2009 to 1% to 2% since the outbreak of the syrian conflict in 2011 and the resulting refugee influx .

foreign direct investment fell 68% during the first year of the syria conflict ( from $3.5 billion to $1.1 billion ) , but reached $2.5 billion in 2016 .

the lebanese government is unable to consistently provide basic services such as electricity , water , and waste treatment , and the world bank notes that the quality and availability of basic public services is significantly worse in lebanon than both regional and world averages .

as a result , citizens rely on private providers , many of whom are affiliated with political parties .

the retreat of the state from these basic functions has enabled a patronage network whereby citizens support political parties — including hezbollah — in return for basic services .

unresolved political dynamics have exacerbated lebanon's economic and fiscal struggles .

between 2014 and 2016 , when the office of the presidency remained unfilled , lebanon lost international donor funding when parliamentary boycotts prevented the body from voting on key matters , including the ratification of loan agreements .

in october 2017 , parliament voted to pass the budget — the first time since 2005 that a state budget has been approved .

lebanon's economy is also affected by fluctuations in the country's relationship to the gulf states , which are a key source of tourism , foreign investment , and aid .

in early 2016 , saudi arabia suspended $3 billion in pledged aid to lebanon's military after lebanon's foreign minister declined to endorse an otherwise unanimous arab league statement condemning attacks against saudi diplomatic missions in iran .

saudi arabia and other gulf states instituted a travel warning to lebanon and urged their citizens to leave the country — impacting lebanon's real estate and tourism sectors , which depend on spending by wealthy gulf visitors .

lebanon's relationship with saudi arabia continues to fluctuate ( see "hariri's temporary resignation" above ) .

despite these numerous challenges , the central bank of lebanon under the leadership of long - serving governor riad salameh has played a stabilizing role .

the central bank maintains more than $43 billion in foreign reserves , and the lebanese pound , which is pegged to the dollar , has remained stable .

despite sporadic violence targeting lebanese banks , salameh has supported the implementation of the hizballah international financing prevention act , which seeks to bar from the u.s. financial system any bank that knowingly engages with hezbollah .

the united states has sought to bolster forces that could serve as a counterweight to syrian and iranian influence in lebanon through a variety of military and economic assistance programs .

u.s. security assistance priorities reflect increased concern about the potential for sunni jihadist groups such as the islamic state to target lebanon , as well as long - standing u.s. concerns about hezbollah and preserving israel's qualitative military edge ( qme ) .

u.s. economic aid to lebanon is designed to promote democracy , stability , and economic growth , particularly in light of the challenges posed by the ongoing conflict in neighboring syria .

congress places several certification requirements on u.s. assistance funds for lebanon annually in an effort to prevent their misuse or the transfer of u.s. equipment to hezbollah or other designated terrorists .

hezbollah's participation in the syria conflict on behalf of the asad government is presumed to have strengthened the group's military capabilities and has increased concern among some in congress over the continuation of u.s. assistance to the laf .

the momentum that drove the passage of a new electoral law in june 2017 and the holding of long - delayed elections in may 2018 appears to have stalled amid the challenges of government formation .

with lebanon's government in caretaker status pending the selection of a new cabinet , disputes among various political factions threaten to generate renewed paralysis .

this in turn limits the government's ability to take up key issues — including economic reforms whose implementation has been described by international donors as a condition of the funds pledged for lebanon's capital investment plan ( cip ) .

regional tensions remain another potentially destabilizing force .

as the united states and its allies seek to curb iranian activities in the region , lebanon remains vulnerable as an arena for iran ( via hezbollah ) to assert its influence .

despite pressure by the united states and others , lebanese leaders appear reluctant to risk civil conflict by confronting hezbollah directly .

prime minister hariri has argued that hezbollah is a regional , rather than purely lebanese , phenomenon , and that the resolution of this issue should not fall to lebanon alone .

meanwhile , tensions between israel and iran in neighboring syria continue to escalate , risking spillover into lebanon .

lebanon's bilateral relationship with syria is likely to evolve over the coming year , as the conflict there shifts militarily in the syrian government's favor .

lebanese leaders face pressure to normalize relations with syria , in part to access primary overland trade routes via border crossings recently recaptured by the syrian government .

lebanese leaders also must determine how to balance policies favoring refugee return to syria with the safety concerns expressed by international humanitarian organizations .

