the financial services and general government ( fsgg ) appropriations bill includes funding for more than two dozen independent agencies in title v. these agencies perform a wide range of functions , including the management of federal real property , the regulation of financial institutions and markets , and mail delivery .

this report focuses on funding for those independent agencies in title v of the fsgg appropriations bill .

it also addresses general provisions that apply government - wide , which appear in title vii , and provisions on cuba sanctions , which often appear in title i .

in addition , the fsgg bill funds the department of the treasury ( title i ) , the executive office of the president ( eop , title ii ) , the judiciary ( title iii ) , the district of columbia ( title iv ) , and it typically funds mandatory retirement accounts in title vi , which also contains general provisions applying to the fsgg agencies .

the fsgg bill has existed in its current form since the 2007 reorganization of the house and senate committees on appropriations .

the house and senate fsgg bills fund the same agencies , with one exception .

the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) is funded through the agriculture appropriations bill in the house and the fsgg bill in the senate .

although financial services are a major focus of the bills , fsgg appropriations bills do not include many financial regulatory agencies , which are instead funded outside of the appropriations process .

on february 9 , 2016 , president obama submitted his fy2017 budget request .

the request included a total of approximately $3.19 billion for the independent agencies funded through the fsgg appropriations bill , including $330 million for the cftc .

on june 15 , 2016 , the house committee on appropriations reported the financial services and general government appropriations act , 2017 ( h.r .

5485 , h.rept .

114-624 ) .

the bill was amended on the house floor and passed on july 7 , 2016 .

total fy2017 funding for the fsgg independent agencies in the house - passed bill would have been approximately $1.65 billion , with another $250 million for the cftc included in the agriculture appropriations bill ( h.r .

5054 , h.rept .

114-531 ) .

the combined total of approximately $1.9 billion would have been about $1.3 billion below president obama's fy2017 request for the fsgg independent agencies .

after a number of amendments on the floor , the house of representatives passed h.r .

5485 on july 7 , 2016 .

most of the difference between the request and h.r .

5485 is in the general services administration ( gsa ) account , though substantial differences are also present in a number of other agencies .

on june 16 , 2016 , the senate committee on appropriations reported the financial services and general government appropriations act , 2017 ( s. 3067 , s.rept .

114-280 ) .

s. 3067 would have appropriated approximately $2.08 billion for the fsgg independent agencies , about $1.11 billion below president obama's request .

as with the house bill , most of this difference is due to the gsa .

with the end of fy2016 approaching and no permanent fsgg appropriations bill enacted , congress passed h.r .

5325 , and president obama signed it into law as p.l .

114-223 .

division c of this act provided for continuing appropriations through december 9 , 2016 , generally termed a continuing resolution ( cr ) .

the cr provides funding for most fsgg agencies at the fy2016 funding rate subject to an across - the - board decrease of 0.496% ( pursuant to section 101 ( b ) of division c ) .

the cr included some anoma lies , specific changes from the fy2016 funding amounts .

for the fsgg independent agencies , the anomalies provided for the presidential inauguration and transition in sections 125 and 128 of division c. these sections provided funding at a rate for operations of $9.5 million for the gsa and $4.9 million for the national archives and records administration ( nara ) .

section 129 of the cr authorized the apportionment of appropriations of up to the rate that is necessary to allow the small business administration ( sba ) to continue issuing general business loans under the 7 ( a ) loan guaranty program if "increased demand for commitments" should exceed the program's fiscal year authorization ceiling , which was $26.5 billion .

two further crs were enacted without specific fsgg anomalies: p.l .

114-254 provided funding through april 28 , 2017 , and a third , p.l .

115-30 , provided funding through may 5 , 2017 .

the fsgg appropriations bill provides funding for more than two dozen independent agencies , performing a wide range of functions .

these functions include the management of federal real property ( gsa ) , the regulation of financial institutions and markets ( sec and cftc ) , and mail delivery ( usps ) .

table 3 details the fsgg independent agencies' fy2016-enacted amounts , president obama's fy2017 request , and the fy2017 amount from the house , senate , and final bills .

the fsgg appropriations bills include general provisions applying government - wide .

most of the provisions continue language that has appeared under the general provisions title for several years because congress has decided to reiterate the language rather than making the provisions permanent .

an administration's proposed government - wide general provisions for a fiscal year are generally included in the budget appendix .

among the new provisions proposed for fy2017 were the following ( whether the provision was included in the budget proposal , h.r .

5485 as passed by the house , or s. 3067 as reported is noted ) .

if new budget authority provided in fy2017 appropriations acts exceeds the discretionary spending limit for any category set forth in section 251 ( c ) of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 because of estimating differences with the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , the omb director will make an adjustment to the fy2017 discretionary spending limit in such category in the amount of the excess .

the total of all such adjustments will not exceed 0.2% of the sum of the adjusted fy2017 discretionary spending limits for all categories .

 ( ยง739 , fy2017 budget proposal ; ยง748 , s. 3067 ) section 605a of the fair credit reporting act would be amended to strengthen credit protections for active duty military members .

the bureau of consumer financial protection would prescribe regulations to define what constitutes appropriate proof of identity for purposes of the provision .

the provision would become effective on october 1 , 2018 .

 ( ยง749 , s. 3067 ) p.l .

115-31 does not include either provision .

h.r .

5485 as passed by the house and s. 3067 as reported included provisions that would have respectively tightened and eased u.s. economic sanctions on cuba , but none of these provisions were included in p.l .

115-31 .

the house bill had four provisions that would have blocked aspects of the obama administration policy of engagement with cuba that included easing economic sanctions .

in contrast , the senate bill had four provisions that would have advanced the obama administration's policy by lifting several u.s. sanctions on cuba .

the obama administration's statement of policy on the house bill expressed strong objections to the four provisions tightening sanctions , maintaining that they "would severely undermine the president's policy on cuba that aims to improve the lives of the cuban people and advance u.s. interests through expanded travel , commerce , and the free flow of information. .

in the house bill , the four provisions would have tightened department of the treasury sanctions related to travel , commerce , and trademarks .

section 132 would have prohibited funds in the bill from being used to allow people - to - people educational travel to cuba .

section 133 would have prohibited funding in the bill to allow the use , purchase , trafficking , or import of property confiscated by the cuban government .

section 134 would have prohibited funding in the bill to allow any financial transaction with an entity owned or controlled , in whole or in part , by the cuban military or intelligence service or with any officer of the cuban military or intelligence service ( or an immediate family member ) , but the restrictions would not have applied to financial transactions with respect to authorized u.s. agricultural exports .

section 135 would have prohibited funds in the bill to authorize or approve a treasury department license with respect to a mark , trade name , or commercial name that is the same as or substantially similar to a mark , trade name , or commercial name used in connection with a business or assets that were confiscated unless the original owner has expressly consented .

the provision , which would have prohibited the treasury department from licensing the payment of trademark registration fees , relates to a long - standing dispute between a cuban company and the bermuda - based bacardi limited over the havana club trademark .

in january 2016 , the office of foreign asset control ( ofac ) issued a specific license for the cuban company to make payments related to the renewal of the havana club trademark , and the u.s. patent and trademark office subsequently renewed the havana club trademark until 2026 .

in the senate bill , the four cuba provisions would have eased sanctions related to u.s. agricultural exports , travel , telecommunications services , and services for foreign air carriers flying to and from cuba .

section 634 would have amended the trade sanctions reform and export enhancement act of 2000 to allow for the financing of agricultural exports to cuba .

it would also have amended the cuban democracy act of 1992 to eliminate the prohibition against a seaborne vessel's entry into the united states if it has been involved in trade with cuba within the previous 180 days , except pursuant to a treasury department license .

 ( in october 2016 , ofac amended the cuban assets control regulations by adding a general license that essentially waived the 180-day rule restriction. ) .

section 635 would have prohibited any funding to restrict travel to or from cuba by any citizen or legal resident of the united states .

section 636 would have prohibited funding in the bill from restricting the export of consumer communication devices or the provision of telecommunications services to cuba and related transactions .

section 637 would have prohibited any funding from restricting , with some exceptions , the provision of technical services in the united states for an aircraft of a foreign carrier that is en route to or from cuba .

 ( in july 2016 , ofac granted a license to bangor international airport in maine to provide refueling and services for foreign air carriers making flights to and from cuba. ) .

