the obama administration built its foreign assistance programming around the priorities and practices it identified in the 2010 presidential policy directive ( ppd ) on global development .

the ppd was the first of its kind and sought to elevate global development as a pillar of american foreign policy , alongside defense and diplomacy .

it identified broad - based economic growth and democratic governance as overarching u.s. development priorities and focused on three key initiatives as a means to support those priorities: the global health initiative ( ghi ) , the global climate change initiative , and the global food security initiative ( feed the future ) .

while built on the foundation of existing programs , each initiative was intended to bring new focus , improve coordination , and boost funding to the aid sectors it supports .

the obama administration followed a particularly active era in u.s. support for global development .

under the george w. bush administration , foreign assistance levels more than doubled , a new foreign aid agency was created ( the millennium challenge corporation , mcc ) , and the bush administration established , with strong congressional support and involvement , one of the largest foreign aid programs in history — the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) .

the obama administration built upon these efforts , although within the context of an increasingly constrained budget and political environment .

within months of the ppd's release in 2010 , the republican party won majority control in the house of representatives , with priorities often at odds with the democratic administration .

concerns about the budget deficit and enactment of the budget control act the next year reduced spending levels across the federal government , thereby reducing prospects for new investments in development assistance programs .

perhaps as a result of this political dynamic , the obama administration did not establish new aid programs , with the arguable exception of power africa , but rather sought to reconfigure and refocus existing programs .

some analysts suggest that the administration was effectively limited after 2010 to efforts that were budget neutral and required little or no support from congress .

specific funding for the global health , climate change , and food security initiatives was first requested in the fy2011 international affairs budget , but support through ongoing program funds was provided in fy2010 appropriations .

congress has generally not used the initiatives as funding frameworks but has supported the activities they encompass to varying degrees .

the portion of u.s. bilateral development assistance obligated for global health , agricultural development , and environment programs — more than one - third of total economic aid from fy2012 to fy2015 — has increased under the obama administration , continuing a trend begun under the bush administration ( figure 1 ) .

while each of the obama administration initiatives is distinct , several common threads run through them , reflecting the obama administration's general global development strategy and priorities , as outlined in the ppd: focus on host country capacity .

the policy sought to improve aid effectiveness by focusing efforts on partner countries and regions where the conditions seem most amenable to sustained progress .

this took the form of "fast track" countries in the global health initiative and "focus countries" in feed the future .

one aspect of this focus on building partner capacity was an attempt to shift away from a pattern of emergency response aid toward a preventive posture ( eg , agricultural development aid instead of emergency food aid , or increasing capacity of governments to predict floods and other climate change impacts rather than providing post - disaster response ) .

this selective approach is challenged by diplomatic pressure to spread aid broadly , potential conflict between u.s. priorities in a country or region , and concern that aid may be most needed in places with the least government and institutional capacity .

investment in innovation and research .

the obama administration sought to foster development - focused research as a means to incentivize and identify "game - changing" innovations such as new vaccines , weather - resistant crop varieties , and clean energy technology .

the u.s .

global development lab within usaid is perhaps the most significant manifestation of this pdd priority , but there are initiative specific components as well .

for example , a food security innovation center ( fsic ) was established at usaid as part of feed the future , which oversees numerous collaborative research programs , many of which predate the initiative .

whole of g overnment .

each initiative , as described in its roll - out and strategy documents , involves several u.s. government agencies beyond the primary international development actors ( the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , the state department , and the mcc ) .

the obama administration emphasized that this "whole of government" approach was intended to bring the full range of u.s. expertise and resources to the challenges addressed by the initiatives , as well as to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of existing , but often uncoordinated , international activities .

the whole of government approach may also be a way to identify a broader range of ongoing u.s. government funding that can be attributed to these objectives and related international commitments .

in practice , this approach has faced coordination challenges , caused in part by varying congressional committee jurisdictions and lack of legislative or executive authority to compel cross - agency coordination and cooperation .

the fractured oversight and lack of coordinating authority has also presented challenges for tracking initiative spending .

results - oriented .

the ppd emphasized the use of metrics by which to measure development progress and the accountability of recipients for achieving results .

the initiatives were established with specific goals and , except for the global climate change initiative ( perhaps due to the longer time frames required to return accurate environmental assessments ) , specific performance indicators .

this was not a new concept , but reaffirmed an ongoing whole - of - government effort stemming from the government performance and results act ( gpra ) of 1993 , updated in 2010 , which established unprecedented statutory requirements for all u.s. government agencies regarding the establishment of goals , performance measurement indicators , and submission of related plans and reports to congress .

the obama administration emphasized tracking results and impacts of foreign aid generally , updating the evaluation policies of usaid , state and mcc between 2010 and 2012 to require more frequent and methodologically rigorous evaluation of aid programs .

congress supported this effort as well , passing legislation in 2016 , the foreign aid transparency and accountability act , that codified many of the new evaluation and reporting requirements .

nevertheless , measuring outcomes that can be attributed to u.s. aid interventions remains a significant challenge .

much of the results information reported for the initiatives is selective and is not the product of evaluations using control groups to identify impact .

global partnership .

all of the initiatives sprang from multilateral efforts such as the g8 food security summit or the u.n framework convention on climate change , and all have multilateral components , including the global fund to fight aids , tuberculosis and malaria , the global agriculture and food security fund , and the green climate fund , among others .

furthermore , each initiative emphasizes working with private sector partners to bring greater resources and expertise to development challenges , a foreign assistance trend that predated the obama administration .

the obama administration made efforts to expand the multilateral aspects of the initiatives , arguing that u.s. resources can be leveraged for greater impact through partnership with other donors and entities , including private sector actors .

congress has generally been less supportive of the multilateral aspects of the initiatives , citing oversight and governance concerns , among other things .

cross - s ectoral .

one theme of the obama development approach detailed in the ppd was the need to work across sectors and avoid the "stovepipe" approach for which foreign assistance , and particularly health aid , has sometimes been criticized .

the global health initiative , for example , recognized that nutrition , clean water , and women's empowerment may be as important to healthy communities as vaccines and antiretroviral drugs .

agricultural development activities to promote food security also affect community resilience to climate change .

the three initiatives all overlap to some degree in their objectives , creating opportunities for synergies but also confusion over the attribution of funding to one initiative or the other .

this report provides a brief overview of these initiatives as they were introduced , how they have evolved over the years , funding trends , reported results , and other areas of particular congressional interest and activity .

u.s. investments in global health increased significantly under the george w. bush administration , primarily as a result of the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) .

rather than create a new global health program aimed at a particular disease , president obama emphasized the integration and coordination of ongoing global health efforts through an initiative he called the global health initiative ( ghi ) .

the administration launched the ghi in may 2009 , calling on congress to provide $63 billion over five years to "improve health outcomes through strengthened health systems , increased and integrated investments in maternal and child health , family planning , nutrition and infectious diseases including hiv / aids , tuberculosis , malaria and neglected tropical diseases , and through a particular focus on improving the health of women , newborns and children. .

the approach was sometimes described as treating patients , not diseases , in contrast to the hiv - specific focus of pepfar .

while ghi became the framework for all u.s. global health programs , the administration identified eight "fast - track" countries ( bangladesh , ethiopia , guatemala , kenya , malawi , mali , nepal , and rwanda ) in which to focus additional technical and management support to enable quick implementation and learning from the new approach .

the administration established a small ghi coordinating office within the state department , put together ghi country teams in 42 countries , and established ghi country strategies , all with the purpose of streamlining efforts across agencies and program silos .

the 2010 quadrennial diplomacy and development review ( qddr ) outlined a plan by which leadership of ghi would shift to usaid when certain conditions were met .

this transition never happened , however , and over the course of the obama administration the ghi as a distinct structure or strategy faded away .

the "fast - track" country designation was no longer used .

the ghi office closed in 2012 , and its activities were integrated into the state department's office of global health diplomacy .

the administration reportedly described this change as an elevation and cited the successful integration of ghi principles into country development plans .

others have commented that the office was ineffective and incapable of resolving interagency conflict , largely because it lacked the authority and designated funding to compel the cooperation of other federal entities .

most agency reports on global health stopped mentioning ghi after 2012 , though annual congressional justifications for the international affairs budget continue to frame the global health request in the context of ghi .

the obama administration's global food security initiative was the u.s. response to the g8 summit in l'aquila , italy , which was held in june 2009 to address the 2007-2008 global food price crisis .

the proportion and absolute number of hungry people worldwide had risen to historic levels .

at the summit , president obama pledged u.s. investments of $3.5 billion over three years ( fy2010 to fy2012 ) to a global hunger and food security initiative to address hunger and poverty worldwide .

the u.s. commitment was part of a global pledge by the g20 countries and others of more than $20 billion .

this represented a return to the u.s. and global development policy agenda of the 1960s and 1970s , which emphasized agricultural and rural development .

the united states and other donors channeled a significantly smaller portion of aid funds to agricultural development activities in the 1990s and first decade of the 2000s .

in may 2010 , the administration officially launched the feed the future initiative and , in november 2010 , established a bureau for food security within usaid to lead implementation of the initiative .

also in 2010 , a multidonor trust fund called the global agriculture and food security program ( gafsp ) , administered by the world bank , was established as the multilateral funding mechanism to fulfill the g8 summit commitments .

feed the future emphasizes accelerating inclusive growth ( affecting a broad range of participants , including small - scale farmers and women ) in the agriculture sector of partner countries and improving nutritional status , particularly of women and girls .

the initiative was built around five principles for sustainable food security first articulated at l'aquila and endorsed at the 2009 world summit on food security in rome: supporting comprehensive strategies ; investing through country - owned plans ; improving stronger coordination among donors ; leveraging effective multilateral institutions ; and delivering on sustained and accountable commitments .

the initiative was also a means of focusing and coordinating previously existing u.s. agricultural development policies .

assistance was to be provided primarily to focus countries , of which there are currently 19 , which usaid has identified as having the greatest needs , strongest host - country commitment and resources , potantial for agricultural led growth , and opportunities for regional synergies .

for more detailed background information on feed the future , see crs report r44216 , the obama administration's feed the future initiative , by marian l. lawson , randy schnepf , and nicolas cook .

as with the other initiatives , the global climate change initiative ( gcci ) built on existing climate related efforts , adapted and scaled up to reflect evolving global efforts .

under the clinton and george w. bush administrations , usaid was already pursuing environmental protection and adaptation activities , and the united states was already contributing to several multilateral climate investment funds , consistent with u.s. commitments stemming from the 1992 u.n .

framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) and subsequent related international agreements .

the cggi ramped up u.s. climate - related aid to developing countries , reflecting a proposal made jointly by developed countries under the december 2009 copenhagen accord , in which the administration committed to working with other donors to provide "fast start" climate financing collectively approaching $30 billion during the period 2010-2012 ( both public and private investment ) .

documents accompanying the 2010 ppd describe the initiative as focused on three key objectives: investing in clean e nergy : the initiative sought to accelerate the deployment of clean energy technologies , policies , and practices as a means of reducing greenhouse gas emissions for energy generation and use .

much of the funding for this pillar was anticipated to be channeled through the world bank's multilateral climate investment funds ( cifs ) , which include the strategic climate fund and the clean technology fund , to take advantage of large - scale greenhouse gas reduction opportunities .

bilateral aid was focused on shaping policy and regulatory environments to ensure long - term sustainability .

promoting sustainable landscapes : as part of the "fast start financing" in the copenhagen accord , the obama administration committed $1 billion from 2010 to 2012 to support country plans to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from deforestation and forest degradation ( redd+ ) .

the administration described this pillar as a cost - effective way to reduce greenhouse gas emissions while providing sustainable development benefits .

supporting climate change resilience and adaptation : this pillar focused on helping the most vulnerable low - income countries to reduce the social , environmental , and economic impacts of climate change .

a key aspect of this effort was integrating climate change considerations and solutions into development activities in all relevant sectors .

aside from the focus areas , the administration identified several ways in which the gcci promoted the administration's broader development policy , including promoting country ownership , promoting climate solutions that spur economic growth , ensuring sustainability of economic growth gains through actions that protect investments , strengthening governance and inclusive planning processes , and investing in potentially game - changing science and technology .

to implement the initiative , an office of the special envoy for climate change was established within the state department in 2009 .

at usaid , gcci activities were coordinated through the environment and science policy office , which was in 2012 renamed the office for global climate change .

the obama administration's global development initiatives sustained bush administration efforts on global health and climate change , and brought new attention to food security and agricultural development .

the full potential of these initiatives was perhaps blunted to varying degrees by budget pressures , agency coordination issues , partner country issues , and , in the case of climate change , lack of congressional support .

the lasting legacy of the obama administration on global development , some say , may be more about the "how" than the "what" of development .

the principles emphasized in the ppd — elevation of development , partnership and accountability , innovation , evaluation , local procurement , data driven development policy , and interagency cooperation — may be the obama administration's unique global development legacy , more than choice of development sector priorities .

the "why" aspect of the initiatives , which the ppd clearly frames in terms of promoting u.s. national security , could be reexamined by the new administration and the 115 th congress together with the "what" and the "how" aspects .

nevertheless , sustained congressional interest in global health and food security , and the coordinated global efforts around climate change , may keep these issues prominent in global development policy discussions beyond the end of the obama administration .

