o n september 9 , 2016 , representative john kline , chairman of the house committee on education and the workforce in the 114 th congress , issued a discussion draft of a bill that would autho rize a new multiemployer pension plan called a composite plan .

a composite plan would contain features of two types of existing pension plans: ( 1 ) defined benefit ( db ) , in which participants receive regular monthly benefit payments in retirement ( which some refer to as a "traditional" pension ) , and ( 2 ) defined contribution ( dc ) plans ( of which the 401 ( k ) plan is the most common ) , in which participants have individual accounts that are the basis of income in retirement .

since composite plans would be neither db nor dc plans , authorizing legislation is necessary to implement the proposal .

this report provides background on multiemployer pension plans ; summarizes the discussion draft authorizing composite plans and explains the main features of these proposed plans ; and explores various policy discussions surrounding composite plans , including their potential benefits and drawbacks for employers and employees , their possible implications for the pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) , and their potential effects on the broader retirement system .

in addition to being classified as db or dc plans , pension plans are also classified by whether they are sponsored by one employer ( single - employer plans ) or by more than one employer ( multiemployer and multiple employer plans ) .

multiemployer pension plans are sponsored by employers in the same industry and maintained as part of a collective bargaining agreement .

in 2013 , there were 1,435 multiemployer db pension plans that covered 10.4 million participants .

these plans had $422.9 billion in assets and owed participants $1.0 trillion in benefits for a total amount of underfunding of $610.8 billion .

multiemployer plans that meet specified financial criteria are required to report to the internal revenue service ( irs ) their financial condition as being in one of several categories .

the categories are ( 1 ) endangered ( or a subcategory called seriously endangered ) ( both are sometimes called "yellow zone" ) , ( 2 ) critical ( sometimes called "red zone" ) , and ( 3 ) critical and declining .

plans that do not meet the criteria for any of these categories are sometimes referred to as being in the "green zone" .

in 2014 , pbgc reported that 164 plans were in endangered or seriously endangered status , 323 plans were in critical status , and 779 in green zone status .

congress approved changes to multiemployer db pension funding rules in the multiemployer pension reform act of 2014 ( mpra , enacted as division o in the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ; p.l .

113-235 ) .

among other provisions , plans in critical and declining status may be eligible to apply to the department of the treasury to reduce benefits .

mpra did not address new pension plan structures , such as composite plans .

some members of congress have indicated that the proposal for composite plans is a continuation of the work done in mpra .

as a result of the challenges facing multiemployer db pension plans , stakeholders have sought alternative pension plan designs that could alleviate some of the concerns but retain some of the beneficial features .

these alternative plan designs would need to be authorized in erisa .

the canadian government and several provinces in canada have been considering or implementing the regulatory changes needed for employers to more widely adopt alternative plan structures , which are referred to as target benefit plans in canada .

the proposal for composite plans for plan sponsors in the united states was included in solutions not bailouts , a 2013 report by a coalition of labor and management groups organized by the national coordinating committee for multiemployer plans ( nccmp ) , an organization of multiemployer pension and health plans .

if the provisions of the discussion draft were to be enacted , the following are some possible concerns that have been raised .

stakeholders such as policymakers , members of congress , employers and unions that participate in multiemployer plans , and groups representing retirees have identified a number of benefits and drawbacks in the proposal for composite plans .

among other issues , these include benefits for employers , risks for participants , possible effects on pbgc , and funding for legacy and composite plans .

the policy considerations for some of these stakeholders are summarized in table 1 .

employer concerns with existing multiemployer plans include ( 1 ) uncertainty over future contribution increases and ( 2 ) withdrawal liability .

these concerns may cause employers in multiemployer db plans to consider leaving their db plans and establishing dc plans .

in addition , these concerns make it difficult for existing multiemployer db plans to attract new employers to the plan .

the composite plan proposal addresses these concerns .

an employer's future contributions to a db pension plan may unexpectedly increase as a result of investment losses or other decreases in a pension plan's funding ratio .

the composite plan proposal does not include mandatory employer contribution increases in the event of decreases to a plan's funding ratio .

employer contributions could remain fixed , which could be an attractive feature to prospective employers that might consider joining the plan .

investment losses and other changes that negatively affect a plan's funding ratio would be addressed by the realignment program which includes proposed but not mandatory contribution increases and mandatory benefit decreases .

concerns about withdrawal liability might be a factor that deters employers from joining an existing multiemployer db plan .

when a plan has insufficient assets from which to pay 100% of promised benefits , employers that leave the plan are assessed an amount equal to their share of unfunded benefits .

withdrawal liability raises several concerns among employers: ( 1 ) the amount of the withdrawal liability can sometimes be very large , which might place a burden on the employers in the plan ; and ( 2 ) the disclosure of withdrawal liability might prompt concerns among lenders and other creditors to a company , even for companies that have no intention of withdrawing from a plan .

employers would likely find the absence of withdrawal liability an attractive feature of composite plans .

plan sponsors that adopt composite plans would not pay per participant annual premiums to pbgc .

in a composite plan , participants would ( 1 ) not be subject to the longevity risk associated with dc plans , ( 2 ) be exposed to investment risk if the value of plan assets decreases , and ( 3 ) be exposed to other risks that might increase the value of plan liabilities .

one of the concerns with dc plans is that participants could spend all of their assets while alive and thus not have their dc account as a source of income for some of their retirement .

an april 2013 survey indicated that about 43% of u.s. investors were concerned with outliving their retirement savings .

although participants in dc plans have options to purchase annuities ( either in their plan , if that is an option , or separately from an insurance company ) , a june 2016 survey by tiaa ( a large provider of annuities ) found that only about 14% of individuals had purchased an annuity .

the composite plan proposal would provide monthly income in retirement for the life of the participant ( and spouse , if married ) .

participants' benefits in composite plans would not be insured by pbgc .

if the plan were to become insolvent and unable to pay benefits , pbgc would not provide financial assistance and participants would not receive their benefits .

certain risks could negatively affect the value of plan liabilities , which would cause a plan's funding ratio to decrease .

these risks include risks from investment losses and changes to the assumptions used to value plan liabilities .

in most db plans , the plan sponsors must increase their contributions to make up for investment and other losses that cause the plan's funding ratio to fall below 100% .

in dc plans , plan participants bear investment losses through smaller account balances .

participants in dc plans could increase their contributions if their contributions are below the annual contribution limit , which in 2016 and 2017 is $18,000 per year ( $24,000 if 50 years of age or older ) .

in composite plans , investment losses would be made up by a combination of proposed contribution increases and decreases in promised benefits .

unlike db plans , there is no obligation for plan sponsors to increase contributions in the event of investment losses , and unlike dc plans , plan participants would be unable to make contributions to composite plans .

plan liabilities ( and a plan's funding ratio ) would decrease under the following circumstances: ( 1 ) if plan participants were to live longer and mortality tables were revised to reflect an increase in life expectancy , then a plan's funding ratio would decrease ; ( 2 ) if there were changes to the actuarial assumptions used by the plan , or ( 3 ) employers were to withdraw from the legacy plan .

for example , if the discount rate that plans use to calculate the present value of future benefit obligations were to decrease , then the value of future benefit obligations would increase .

a composite plan might have to address these , or similar , changes to the value of plan liabilities with the realignment program , which could include proposed contribution increases and potentially mandatory benefit reductions .

if the composite plan proposal were enacted , over time , pbgc would likely see its premium revenue decline .

because composite plans would not be covered by pbgc insurance , the plans would not pay premiums to pbgc .

pbgc would not have any liability for benefits in a composite plan .

in addition , a composite plan would not become insolvent , because a plan in financial difficulty would be able to reduce participants' benefits to $0 .

although legacy plans would still be pay premiums to pbgc , pbgc's premium base would shrink .

over time , the number of participants in legacy plans would decline because ( 1 ) plan participants would die and ( 2 ) no new participants would receive benefits in the legacy plan .

lower premium revenue would leave pbgc with fewer resources from which to provide financial assistance to multiemployer plans .

