in an attempt to expand the scope of data used to verify that payments are being made to eligible recipients and for the correct amount , congress passed the improper payments elimination and recovery audit improvement act of 2012 ( iperia ; p.l .

112-248 ) .

iperia was subsequently amended by the bipartisan budget act of 2013 ( p.l .

113-67 ) , and the federal improper payments coordination act of 2015 ( fipca , p.l .

114-109 ) .

the following section discusses the requirements of iperia , as amended .

omb's guidance to agencies for implementing improper payments legislation is generally found in appendix c of omb circular a - 123 , management's responsibility for internal control .

agencies have had 14 years to implement improper payment legislation , beginning with the enactment of ipia in 2002 , which established the core requirements of improper payments reduction .

ipera and iperia , while enacted more recently , reinforced ipia's core requirements and expanded agencies' responsibilities to prevent and recover improper payments .

the data show that over time , while individual programs have reduced their improper payment rates and amounts , there has been no sustained progress on a government - wide basis , and several programs with billions of dollars in annual improper payments have seen no substantial improvement .

the fraud reduction and data analytics act of 2015 ( frdaa , s. 2133 ) passed the senate on april 12 , 2016 .

companion legislation ( h.r .

4180 ) was reported by the house committee on oversight and government reform on february 9 , 2016 .

the frdaa became p.l .

114-186 on june 30 , 2016 .

the frdaa requires omb , in consultation with the comptroller general , to establish guidelines for agencies to establish financial and administrative controls for ( 1 ) identifying and assessing fraud risks , and ( 2 ) designing and implementing control activities in order to prevent , detect , and respond to fraud , including improper payments .

the act requires that the guidelines include the leading practices identified in a report published by gao on fraud risk management .

the financial and administrative controls required to be included are conducting an evaluation of fraud risks and using a risk - based approach to design and implement control activities ; collecting and analyzing data to monitor fraud trends and using that data to continuously improve fraud prevention controls ; and using the results of monitoring , evaluation , audits , and investigations to improve fraud prevention , detection , and response .

agencies are required to include in their annual financial reports a discussion of their progress in implementing fraud risk guidance and controls , identifying risks and vulnerabilities to fraud , and establishing strategies and procedures to combat fraud .

the reporting requirement applies for the first three fiscal years following the enactment .

the frdaa also requires omb to establish a working group to develop strategies to improve the sharing of ( 1 ) best practices for detecting , preventing and responding to fraud ; and ( 2 ) data analytics techniques .

the working group is to submit a plan to congress for establishing an interagency library of data analytics and data sets , which could be used by federal agencies and igs to facilitate the detection , prevention , and recovery of fraud , including improper payments .

the working group is to be composed of the omb controller , who would serve as chairperson , the chief financial officer of each agency , and any other party determined to be appropriate by the omb director .

the working group also is required to consult with agency igs , and other experts on fraud risk assessments .

