s ection 1332 of the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) allows states to apply for waivers of specified provisions of the aca .

under a state innovation waiver , a state is expected to implement a plan ( in place of the waived provisions ) that meets certain minimum requirements .

the centers for medicare & medicaid services' ( cms's ) initial interpretation of these requirements was published in guidance released in 2015 but has since been superseded , as with other aspects of the waiver process , in updated guidance released by the agency on october 24 , 2018 .

under current guidance , the state's plan must provide health insurance coverage to as many state residents as would be covered absent the waiver and must make available to a comparable number of residents coverage that is both as affordable and as comprehensive as it would be absent the waiver .

however , applications do not need to demonstrate that the affordable and comprehensive health insurance coverage will be purchased by a comparable number of state residents .

additionally , the state's plan cannot increase the federal deficit .

this report answers frequently asked questions about how states can use and apply for state innovation waivers .

it also addresses recent changes to the section 1332 waiver process , as made by the 2018 cms guidance .

a state may apply to waive any or all of the aca provisions listed below for plan years beginning on or after january 1 , 2017 .

part i of s ubtitle d of the aca : part i of subtitle d comprises sections 1301-1304 .

in general , the provisions in part i relate to the establishment of qualified health plans ( qhps ) .

part ii of s ubtitle d of the aca : part ii of subtitle d comprises sections 1311-1313 , which largely include provisions related to the establishment of health insurance exchanges and related activities .

section 1402 of the aca : this section includes the provision of cost - sharing reductions to eligible individuals who purchase individual market coverage through a health insurance exchange .

section 36b of the internal revenue code ( irc ) : this section includes the provision of premium tax credits to eligible individuals who purchase individual market coverage through a health insurance exchange .

section 4980h of the irc: this section includes the shared responsibility requirement for large employers ( often called the employer mandate ) .

section 5000a of the irc: this section includes the requirement for individuals to maintain health insurance coverage ( often called the individual mandate ) .

each part noted above is comprised of many provisions , which makes the scope of the provisions that can be waived under a state innovation waiver quite broad .

for example , part i of subtitle d of the aca includes provisions that outline requirements for health plans to be certified as qhps .

it defines the essential health benefits ( ehb ) package that each qhp must offer , places limitations on the enrollee cost sharing that qhps may impose , and requires that qhps provide coverage meeting a minimum level of actuarial value .

additionally , part i of subtitle d establishes requirements for catastrophic health plans and determines eligibility for such plans .

the secretary of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) is to review and grant waiver requests for provisions not included in the irc ; the secretary of the treasury is to review and grant requests to waive provisions in the irc ( the availability of premium tax credits and the application of the employer and individual mandates ) .

the secretary of hhs or the treasury is to assess a waiver application to determine whether the state's plan meets the requirements related to coverage , affordability , comprehensiveness , and federal - deficit neutrality outlined in statute and further described in guidance .

these requirements are described in table 1 .

the secretary or secretaries ( as appropriate ) may grant a request for a state innovation waiver if a state's application meets the requirements .

in making this determination , the secretaries will "consider favorably" any waiver that incorporates some or all of the following principles: provide increased access to affordable private market coverage , encourage sustainable spending growth , foster state innovation , support and empower those in need , and promote consumer - driven health care .

in guidance , hhs and the treasury note that their assessment of a state's waiver application considers changes to the state's health care system that are contingent only upon approval of the waiver .

their assessment does not consider policy changes that are dependent on further state action or other federal determinations .

for example , the secretary's or secretaries' ( as appropriate ) assessment of a state innovation waiver application would not consider changes to medicaid or the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) that require approval outside of the state innovation waiver process , and savings accrued as a result of changes to medicaid or chip would not be considered when determining whether the state innovation waiver meets the deficit - neutrality requirement .

hhs and the treasury indicate that this is the case regardless of whether a state's application for a state innovation waiver is submitted alone or in coordination with another waiver application .

 ( for more information about the coordinated waiver process , see " may states submit state innovation waiver applications in coordination with other federal waiver applications ? " ) .

although not possible initially , hhs and the treasury indicated in the updated guidance released in october 2018 that technical enhancements have made it feasible for cms to support some federally facilitated health insurance exchange ( ffe ) variation .

for example , waivers that would require a state to create its own website to replace the consumer - facing aspects of healthcare.gov also can incorporate cms's enrollment functionalities ( eg , account creation , application , enrollment and coverage maintenance experience for consumers ) .

states are asked to work with hhs early in the waiver application process to determine whether specific modifications can be accommodated .

states are responsible for funding all ffe modifications and associated operational support .

therefore , these costs are not considered when determining whether a waiver application satisfies the deficit neutrality requirement ; however , any other changes to cms administrative processes are taken into account .

in guidance issued in october 2018 , hhs and the treasury describe some federal operational considerations that may limit the scope of the waivers .

specifically , the internal revenue service ( irs ) generally is not able to accommodate any state - specific changes to tax rules .

the irs may be able to accommodate small changes to the administration of federal tax provisions , in particular when such changes overlap with the irs's current capabilities .

for example , waivers that would require the irs to expand premium tax credit eligibility to individuals with household income under 100% of the federal poverty level may be feasible , because it incorporates a similar special rule that the irs currently administers .

states are responsible for funding all changes to irs administrative processes associated with wavier implementation .

these costs are incorporated into the assessment of whether a waiver application satisfies the deficit neutrality requirement .

a state seeking a state innovation waiver must enact a law that allows the state to carry out the actions under the waiver prior to submitting an application for a waiver .

in certain circumstances , a state can be considered to have enacted such a law by coupling a state law that enforces aca provisions and / or the state plan with administrative or executive actions .

prior to submitting an application , a state must provide a public notice and comment period and conduct public hearings regarding the state's application .

upon conclusion of these activities , a state may submit its application to the secretary of hhs .

the secretary of hhs is to transmit any application seeking to waive requirements in the irc to the secretary of the treasury for review .

the secretary or secretaries ( as appropriate ) are to review a state's application to determine whether it is complete .

a state's application is not considered complete unless it includes the materials identified in regulations .

the materials include , but are not limited to , information about the enacted state legislation allowing the state to carry out the actions under the waiver , a description of the plan or program the state expects to implement in place of the waived provisions , and analyses showing that the state's plan or program meets the requirements for granting a waiver .

if a state's application is not complete , the state is to be notified about the missing elements and given an opportunity to submit them .

once the secretary or secretaries ( as appropriate ) make a preliminary determination that a state's application is complete , the entire application is to be made available to the public for review and comment .

the final decision of the secretary or secretaries on a state's application must be issued no later than 180 days after the determination that the secretary of hhs received a complete application from a state .

it is possible for a state to receive federal funding under an approved waiver .

a state's receipt of a state innovation waiver could result in the residents of the state not receiving the "premium tax credits , cost - sharing reductions , or small business credits under sections 36b of the internal revenue code of 1986 or under part i of subtitle e for which they would otherwise be eligible. .

if this occurs , the state is to receive the aggregate amount of subsidies that would have been available to the state's residents had the state not received a state innovation waiver — this is referred to as pass - through funding .

the amount of pass - through funding is to be determined annually by the appropriate secretary and may be updated at any time to account for changes in state or federal law .

the state is to use the pass - through funding for purposes of implementing the plan or program established under the waiver .

state innovation waivers cannot extend longer than five years unless a state requests continuation and such request is not denied by the appropriate secretary .

requests for continuation are to be deemed granted if they are not denied by the appropriate secretary within 90 days of submission .

the secretaries are required to develop a process for coordinating applications for state innovation waivers and applications for other existing waivers under federal law relating to the provision of health care , including waivers available under medicare , medicaid , and chip .

under the coordinated process , a state must be able to submit a single application for a state innovation waiver and any other applicable waivers available under federal law .

the single application must comply with the procedures described for state innovation waiver applications and the procedures in any other applicable federal law under which the state seeks a waiver .

as discussed in the answer to the question " what are the minimum requirements for a successful application ? .

," hhs and the treasury have indicated that an application for a state innovation waiver will be assessed on its own terms and that assessment of the state innovation waiver will not consider the impact of changes that require separate federal approval .

this is the case even if the state submits a single application for multiple waivers .

as of the date of this report , 14 states have submitted applications for state innovation waivers — alaska , california , hawaii , iowa , maine , maryland , massachusetts , minnesota , new jersey , ohio , oklahoma , oregon , vermont , and wisconsin .

hhs and the treasury have approved eight applications , from alaska , hawaii , maine , maryland , minnesota , new jersey , oregon , and wisconsin .

all of these waivers were considered and approved under the initial state innovation waiver guidance , and all but one of the approved waivers implement a variant of a statewide individual market reinsurance program .

massachusetts , ohio , and vermont received notification from hhs and the treasury that their applications were incomplete , and it does not appear that any of these states has modified its application in response to the notification .

if one of these three states does take action , any further review of its waiver application would be under the updated state innovation waiver guidance .

california , iowa , and oklahoma have withdrawn their applications .

see table 2 for more details .

