the united states , canada , and mexico in many ways comprise one large , integrated market for energy commodities .

canada , for example , is the single largest foreign supplier of crude oil to the united states , and the united states is canada's sole crude oil customer .

both mexico and canada are major buyers of petroleum products refined in the united states .

a growing trade in natural gas produced in the united states is also increasingly important to the energy relationship among the three countries .

trade in the other energy commodities — electricity , natural gas liquids ( ngls ) , and coal — is comparatively small , but regionally important .

altogether , the value of the energy trade between the united states and its north american neighbors exceeded $140 billion in 2015 , with $100 billion in u.s. energy imports and over $40 billion in exports ( figure 1 ) .

the energy trade of the united states with canada and mexico has helped to promote general economic growth and energy industry job creation on both sides of the u.s. border , although it has also prompted debate about the environmental impacts of energy resource development , the expansion of energy infrastructure , effects on domestic energy prices , and other market issues .

increased energy trade between the united states , canada , and mexico — stable , friendly neighbors — is also viewed by many as a major contributor to u.s. energy independence and security .

these energy trade relationships are increasingly complex , however , and have been undergoing fundamental change in recent years , largely due to technological advancements in the petroleum and natural gas sectors creating new competition for energy supplies and new market interconnections .

consequently , while energy policies in one country have inevitably affected the others , their cross - cutting effects in the future are difficult to predict .

to date , the judgment of congress has favored a growing north american energy partnership — but ensuring that this partnership continues to be as mutually beneficial as possible will likely remain a key oversight challenge for the next decades .

congress has been facing important policy questions in the u.s. - canada and u.s. - mexico energy contexts on several fronts , including the siting of major cross - border pipelines , increasing petroleum supplies from canadian oil sands , exporting natural gas production from north american shales , and meeting commitments to increase renewable energy supplies and reduce atmospheric emissions of greenhouse gases .

legislative proposals in the 115 th congress could directly influence these developments .

this report provides an overview of the united states' energy trade with canada and mexico .

for the principal energy commodities , it summarizes estimates of the resource potential for the three countries , recent energy production , and expectations for future production .

the report quantifies current trends in u.s. energy trade across the fuel categories , the potential for future trade , and key factors that may affect that potential — especially energy transportation infrastructure .

the report is organized by energy commodity .

crs has incorporated the most recent data available at the time of this analysis .

however , data from the numerous sources we cite are often time - lagged and subject to frequent revision and updates .

therefore , our analysis should be viewed as an estimate of the u.s. cross - border trade relationships over the last 18 months , but not necessarily a precise accounting of trade .

although the subject of this report is linked to a number of related energy policy considerations — such as environmental policy , infrastructure regulation , trade agreements , and economic growth — examination of those issues is outside its scope .

crude oil is a key resource linking the canadian , mexican , and u.s. economies .

the oil markets of both the united states and canada are characterized by free enterprise , while constitutional restrictions historically have limited access by private firms to the mexican industry .

recent reforms in mexico may lead to an opening of the mexican oil industry to private firms , however , potentially expanding north american oil market linkages .

while no single north american country is likely to become independent of the world oil market , the emerging north american market is likely to provide increased opportunity for cross - border trade and greater energy independence for the continent .

natural gas trade in north america is in a state of rapid transformation and growth .

together , the united states , mexico , and canada account for just under 7% of the world's natural gas reserves , with the united states comprising the bulk of those reserves — over 80% of north america's contribution .

however , the region makes up almost 30% of the world's natural gas production , with the united states , again , contributing the most .

despite the limited reserve estimates in canada and ( especially ) mexico today , the two countries have great potential for future production based on estimates of undiscovered , technically recoverable resources from the energy information administration ( eia ) as shown in figure 9 .

natural gas liquids ( ngls ) have taken on a new prominence in the united states' energy trade as shale gas production has increased and natural gas prices have fallen .

"ngl" is a general term for a class of liquid products separated from natural gas at a gas field processing plant , including ethane , propane , butane , and pentanes .

when ngls are present with methane — the primary component of natural gas — the natural gas is referred to as either "hot" or "wet" gas .

once the ngls are separated from the methane the natural gas is referred to as "dry" gas , which is what most consumers use .

each type of ngl has its own market and its own value depending upon the application in which it is consumed , such as for heating or as a chemical feedstock .

when the price for dry gas has dropped due to changes in the supply - demand balance ( eg , during the warm winter of 2011 when gas demand dropped for heating ) , the natural gas industry has turned its attention to producing more wet gas in order to bolster the value it receives for a given level of methane production .

furthermore , because individual ngl products ( except ethane ) historically have been priced against oil , the period of high global oil prices through mid - 2014 also drove growth in u.s. wet gas production .

this growth , in turn , has increased the availability of ngls for export to canada and mexico .

the electric power system of the united states is physically interconnected with the power systems of both canada and mexico , although it is much more integrated with the former .

the u.s. and canadian systems operate at synchronous ( i.e. , compatible ) frequencies , with over 30 major transmission connections between the two countries .

conversely , there are only a handful of cross - border interconnections with mexico — and only the connections with california are fully synchronized with the u.s. grid ( as discussed below ) .

the degree of grid integration has been a key determinant of historical electricity trade and prospects for future trade between the united states and its neighbors .

the changing nature of the generation portfolios among the united states , canada , and mexico has also been a factor affecting electricity trade and may represent an opportunity for increased trade in line with their pursuit of economic and environmental goals .

notably , in 2016 , the united states signed an agreement with canada and mexico pledging to increase carbon - free sources of electricity , with a north american total goal of at least 50% of electric energy from "wind , solar , and other carbon - free sources of electricity. .

the growing role of renewable resources for domestic power production and potential export is , therefore , a topic of particular interest .

the united states has the largest coal reserves and resources in the world .

the eia estimates there are about 255 billion tons of recoverable domestic coal reserves in the united states .

in the united states , the total demonstrated resource base is estimated at about 477 billion tons .

eia statistics show that 55% of u.s. coal reserves are located in the west , of which montana and wyoming together account for 43% .

the eia reports canada's recoverable coal reserves at 5 billion tons and mexico's at less than 3.6 billion tons .

u.s. coal production reached its highest level in 2008 ( 1.17 billion tons ) before falling precipitously in 2015 — a record decline of over 10% when compared to 2014 production levels ( table 4 ) .

eia short - term projections show coal production under 800 million tons in both 2016 and 2017 .

as discussed above , the softening of demand for coal has been attributed to utilities opting for low - cost natural gas , declining costs for renewable energy options , and increasing regulatory cost associated with coal - fired power plants .

a warmer than usual winter heating season in 2015 ( resulting in high coal inventories ) and lower demand for u.s. coal exports have also been factors .

canada consistently produced over 70 million tons of coal over the past 10 years ( except for 2015 ) , reaching a high point of 76 million tons in 2007 and near 76 million tons in 2013 .

canada has accounted for around 1% - 1.5% of world coal production since 2006 .

most of canada's coal production occurs in the western provinces of alberta and british columbia .

mexico's coal production has fluctuated between 11 million tons and 18 million tons since 2006 .

as a result of limited data availability , this section provides intra - north american coal trade data only for the recent past .

relative to coal traded globally , there is a small amount of coal traded among the three north american countries .

the estimated value of u.s. coal exports to canada in 2015 was approximately $490 million , while coal imports from canada were approximately $137 million .

exports of u.s. coal to mexico in 2015 had an estimated value of approximately $298 million ; there were negligible u.s. imports of mexican coal .

overall , u.s. coal exports peaked at 125.7 million tons in 2012 then declined to about 74 million tons in 2015 .

the eia projects u.s. coal exports to be around 57 million tons in 2016 — more than a 50% drop in four years .

in 2013 ( when total u.s. coal exports were 117.7 million tons ) , u.s. coal exports to canada and mexico accounted for 5.5% and 4.8% of the total , respectively .

for the first three quarters of 2015 coal exports to canada and mexico were at 7.5% and 5.4% of the total , respectively .

as u.s. coal exports have fallen , their relative share to canada and mexico has increased slightly .

in the first three quarters of 2016 , the share of coal exports to canada and mexico increased again to 8.2% and 6% of u.s. total coal exports , respectively .

for the first three quarters of 2015 and 2016 , the united states received about 10% of its coal imports from canada and under 1,000 tons from mexico .

the united states has averaged about 11 million tons of coal imports annually over the past five years .

by contrast , canada has maintained over 40% of its coal production as exports , reaching over 50% from 2011 to 2013 .

in 2015 , canada exported about 33 million tons of coal , the majority ( about two - thirds ) of which went to asia ( south korea , japan , and china ) and 4% ( equal to about 1.2 million tons ) to the united states .

the u.s. coal export market has been heavily oriented toward europe , as the canadian market has been toward asia .

also in 2015 , canada imported 8 million tons of coal , 75% ( about 6 million tons ) of which came from the united states .

canadian coal imports have fallen from over 20 million tons in 2006 to about 8 million tons in 2015 .

mexico's coal exports in general rose from nearly zero in 2006 to 267,000 tons in 2011 , or about 1.5% of mexico's coal production .

according to the eia , mexico is a net importer of coal , supplying 80% of its coal demand .

the limited coal trade within north america is not likely to require any new infrastructure , although canada has planned port expansion for exports to asia and has invested $1.4 billion ( cad ) in infrastructure projects .

canada's coal rail transport network and export facilities are well established , with sufficient capacity for the current coal export market .

there are three coal export terminals in british columbia , one at thunder bay , ontario , and another in nova scotia .

in 2013 , the canadian government invested over $1 billion ( cad ) in the export facilities to improve their efficiency .

the canadian and u.s. rail system is well situated to move coal north and south between the two countries as well as into mexico .

any additional port capacity in the united states or canada would likely be centered on shipping coal to the asian market .

the key issue regarding coal use and trade in north america is centered on reducing carbon emissions and pursuing low - cost alternative energy sources .

as discussed in the previous section , coal consumption in canada and mexico is already in decline .

canada projects further decline of coal consumption ( which has seen coal consumption decline from 60 million tons in 2005 to 41 million tons in 2014 — a 42% decline ) .

some of its provinces have decided to phase out coal completely .

for example , ontario completely phased out coal power in 2014 and manitoba expects to phase out coal use for home space heating by 2017 .

alberta ( canada's province using the most coal , with 18 coal - fired power plants ) plans to phase coal power out by 2030 .

while the united states may continue to meet the majority of canadian coal import needs , the amount of coal imported from the united states will likely continue to decline .

mexico has made substantial investments in renewable energy projects over the past few years , particularly hydropower ( $4 billion in 2015 , $2 billion in 2014 ) , and has planned huge investments in nuclear power , projecting three new nuclear power plants over the next 12 years .

additionally , natural gas consumption has risen significantly relative to coal consumption , and electricity generation from fuel oil has declined by about 50% since 2012 .

in mexico , coal demand may grow slightly as the use of fuel oil for electricity generation declines and the country adopts other energy sources to meet its needs .

there may be some room for incremental u.s. coal exports to mexico in the short run , but it is not likely to be a destination for increased u.s. coal exports in the long run .

