rockets , satellites , and the services they provide , once the domain of governments , are increasingly launched and managed by privately owned companies .

until 1982 , the u.s. government launched all civil and commercial payloads into orbit , and u.s. launch vehicle manufacturers produced vehicles only under contract to the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) or the department of defense ( dod ) .

most of the satellites they carried into orbit were owned by u.s. or foreign government agencies .

now , commercial payloads are generally launched by private providers , and the payloads themselves are increasingly likely to be owned by private entities: of the 576 u.s. - owned satellites currently in orbit , 286 were launched for commercial reasons and another 12 on behalf of academic users .

the growth of the commercial space sector is a result of a deliberate shift in federal policy .

the commercial space launch act of 1984 states the following: [t]he united states should encourage private sector launches , reentries , and associated services and , only to the extent necessary , regulate those launches , reentries , and services to ensure compliance with international obligations of the united states and to protect the public health and safety , safety of property , and national security and foreign policy interests of the united states .

that law was amended in 2004 to provide that "the regulatory standards governing human space flight ... evolve as the industry matures so that regulations neither stifle technology development nor expose crew or space flight participants to avoidable risks as the public comes to expect greater safety for crew and space flight participants from the industry. .

national security agencies have emphasized the importance of the commercial space industry , in particular the space industrial base .

to foster its growth , the commercial space industry has purposely been insulated from some types of federal regulation often applied to other industries .

for example , the commercial space launch act directs the secretary of transportation to issue regulations affecting the design and operation of launch vehicles only to protect the safety of crew , thereby giving launch vehicle manufacturers and operators wide leeway in developing new rockets .

an initial eight - year "learning period" for this limited regulation has been twice extended , most recently until 2023 .

global spending on space activity reached an estimated $323 billion in 2015 .

of this amount , nearly 40% was generated by commercial space products and services and 37% by commercial infrastructure and support industries .

the u.s. government — including military and national security agencies and nasa — accounted for about 14% of global spending , and government spending by other countries the remaining 10% .

the commercial space industry has distinct subsectors .

most commercial payloads are placed in orbits around earth by launch vehicles that have the thrust to escape earth's gravity .

typically , the firms that provide commercial launch services also design and assemble the rockets they launch .

the payloads , such as satellites and manned space capsules , are manufactured by other firms .

service providers ( such as television broadcasters ) may design and build their own satellites , or purchase them from third - party manufacturers .

the ground stations that control and communicate with the payloads , which form an integral part of the spacecraft operations , may be operated by the launch services , the payload owners , or entirely separate entities .

space launches are risky: three of the 86 commercial launches attempted in the united states in 2015 failed , resulting in the destruction of launch vehicles and costly payloads .

given the potential losses , insurance coverage is likely to play an important role in the development of a commercial space industry .

worldwide space insurance premiums were more than $700 million in 2015 , and insured losses exceeded $600 million in 2014 .

major insurers such as american international group , munich re , and allianz compete in the market .

nonetheless , insurance on space - related risks appears to have limitations .

in september 2016 , a rocket owned by spacex exploded while on the launchpad at cape canaveral , florida , destroying the satellite it was preparing to launch .

the falcon 9 rocket was reportedly not insured .

the owner of the satellite it was attempting to launch held $300 million of coverage .

however , the policy may not be applicable because the rocket explosion took place during a prelaunch test and not during the actual launch .

three developments are changing the shape of the commercial space industry: a shift in government space activities toward the use of commercial services , an increase in private financing , and an increase in the launch of small satellites .

these changes are supporting the development of new entrants with new launch products .

the space industry workforce includes employees in private - sector firms as well as those working at nasa , dod , and other government agencies .

the increasing public attention given to the commercial space industry belies a dichotomy: the commercial and civil space workforces are declining , while national security workforces remain steady .

commercial employment in the space industry peaked in 2006 at about 267,000 employees and has declined steadily since then .

the termination of nasa's space shuttle program in 2011 resulted in the loss of many private - sector jobs .

other major reasons for the decline in space industry employment may be many skilled workers reaching retirement age and difficulties in recruiting young talent .

jobs in this industry generally require advanced skills , such as engineering , differentiating them from the average u.s. manufacturing or service - industry job .

the space foundation has identified six industry sectors that collectively approximate the space industry .

bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) data show that employment in these six sectors dropped by 16% in the 10 years from 2005 to 2015 ( t a ble 2 ) .

these data do not show the full scope of the space industry workforce .

the categories listed in table 2 include both space and nonspace activity , while employees in other sectors who are working on space - related tasks are excluded because most of the employment in the sector is not related to space .

an alternative approach to assessing the size and breadth of the space industry workforce is the 2012 space industry report by the u.s. department of commerce ( doc ) , based on a survey of 3,780 respondents in 16 different manufacturing and service segments of the space economy , including spacecraft and launch vehicles , communications systems , ground systems , electronic equipment , and software .

this survey , conducted once and covering the years from 2009 to 2012 , shows a somewhat larger workforce of 254,179 employees in 611 commercial companies that viewed themselves as dependent on federal space programs .

in addition to commercial employment , doc identified 13,897 space - related jobs in the u.s. government , 19,630 in nonprofit organizations , and 60,533 at universities , for a total of 348,239 workers dependent on space - related programs .

the report shows shrinkage of nearly 7% in employment at companies dependent on commercial space programs from 2009 to 2012 .

wages in the commercial space industry are higher than average u.s. wages .

the average space industry salary of $111,000 ( in 2014 ) is double what the average private - sector employee receives .

average salaries vary within the six industry categories cited in table 2 , from about $92,000 in missile and vehicle propulsion ( naics 336415 ) to more than $124,000 in missile and vehicle manufacturing ( naics 336414 ) .

three overarching issues will affect the development of commercial space in the future: how the industry is regulated by diverse federal agencies , the effects of new export control laws and regulations that seek to increase u.s. space industry competitiveness , and the allocation of spectrum for satellite use .

the commercial space industry is governed by federal agencies with diverse regulatory interests .

the major federal agencies with commercial space policy responsibilities are as follows: faa 's office of commercial s pace transportation regulates launches and reentries of space vehicles , as well as the u.s. launch and reentry sites , including rerouting aircraft that may interfere with a nearby rocket launch .

the department of commerce has two major space industry interests .

the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) licenses commercial imaging satellites and utilizes commercial space capabilities for improved weather forecasting and environmental data collection , and also oversees the office of space commerce , which promotes the u.s. commercial space industry's economic growth and technological advancement .

doc's bureau of industry and security ( bis ) administers export controls and licensing for strategic technologies , including space industry components .

nasa provides infrastructure and operations support and encourages private - sector investment in its launches and other activities through its commercial crew and cargo programs .

department of defense utilizes commercial space systems and technologies for national security purposes .

through the air force , it provides infrastructure , operations support , and safety oversight for government and commercial launches at its launch sites .

additionally , through the defense technology security administration ( dtsa ) , it reviews and comments on applications for export licenses , in conjunction with department of state review .

department of state ( dos ) is responsible for the export and temporary import of defense articles and services — including some commercial space components — through the international traffic in arms regulations ( itar ) .

federal communications commission licenses commercial satellite radio frequencies and determines placement of satellites in geostationary orbit .

the current regulatory and management structure may require changes if the commercial space indus try grows .

private firms may take on more responsibilities for launching government satellites ( including military satellites ) , offer space flights for tourists , undertake mining operations on asteroids and the moon , and attempt to explore and even settle mars .

this could lead to greater commercial demand for faa to process licenses , permits , and safety reviews .

congress may need to set additional legal parameters to establish a legal basis for regulation of passenger safety in space tourism and space traffic management .

in addition , the current legal provision for liability risk - sharing between launch companies and the u.s. government may require changes as the industry matures and more private individuals become passengers or crew .

a better system for integrating commercial space launches into the air traffic control system is a particular concern for faa .

currently , when a launch or reentry is planned , faa closes airspace near the site because equipment onboard aircraft often cannot track rockets and spacecraft moving at very high speeds .

since launch times may vary from initial plans , faa may close the airspace for a long period , causing both commercial and military aircraft to be delayed or rerouted .

the faa alert system utilizes email and phone calls to commercial and military airspace users .

as the number of rocket launches increases , faa may face pressure to reduce the length of air space closures .

the agency plans to use an automated system to deliver alerts to aircraft pilots to minimize air traffic impact .

in the 114 th congress , h.r .

4945 has been proposed to change federal oversight of commercial space .

in addition to making organizational changes within dod , the legislation would direct nasa to develop a 20-year plan to land astronauts on mars , and would require the department of transportation to establish an office of commercial space transportation and an office of spaceports and also to designate a lead government agency for space traffic management .

doc would be directed to develop a plan to coordinate space - related economic and regulatory activities , and dos would be required to begin developing an international traffic management regime .

spacecraft , ground stations , and some unique components are regulated by the u.s. export control system .

they are considered dual - use items , as even those developed primarily for commercial or civil purposes have possible military applications .

during the cold war era , these space industry products were regulated exclusively by dos and were considered munitions , as many of them were then designed specifically for military purposes .

although the regulation of these dual - use space products was transferred to doc in the 1990s , congress returned regulatory authority to dos in 1998 after some satellite designs were improperly transferred to china .

dos's administration of export controls came under strong criticism from manufacturers of space - related equipment .

the satellite industry asserted that the long licensing process led to a loss of sales abroad , and the aerospace industries association ( aia ) claimed that the u.s. share of the global commercial satellite market fell from 63% before export controls were transferred to dos to 30% .

a doc survey of manufacturers found that many believed that the dos export controls "eroded u.s. competitiveness in the international space market. .

in 2013 , congress transferred export control responsibilities for 80% of satellites and related items back to doc regulation for sales to most countries .

aia and others are calling for controls on some commercial items that are still under dos , such as apertures on electro - optical satellites used for remote sensing , integrated propulsion systems , and plasma thrusters , to be transferred to doc .

aia also has raised concerns about the launch vehicle restrictions in the international missile technology control regime ( mtcr ) , which regulates missile proliferation .

as space tourism becomes a possibility , some mtcr rules — as incorporated into u.s. export controls — could affect the development of this commercial activity , including limitations on the type of rocket that could be used to boost space tourists into suborbital space .

in addition , a space tourism rocket that is launched in one country and descends in another country could be considered a missile export subject to strict mtcr controls .

the satellite industry is concerned that sharing of certain bands for future wireless 5g use — some of which are currently used solely for satellite transmissions — could jeopardize the reliability and cost - effectiveness of their service .

for decades , satellites have communicated on dedicated frequency bands assigned by the international telecommunications union ( itu ) .

the specific band used by a satellite depends on its purpose .

for example , lower frequencies — the l - , s - , and c - bands — are not affected by heavy rainfall and are therefore used in tropical regions ; they can also simultaneously serve large areas of the globe .

the ku and ka bands are used for television broadcasting and data services .

satellites are built to transmit a specific frequency and cannot be reprogrammed after launch .

the obama administration directed the fcc to identify spectrum that could be used to expand wi - fi services in the future .

to address that goal , fcc and the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) collaborated in identifying 500 mhz of spectrum suitable for wireless broadband use , including future domestic 5g terrestrial mobile providers .

some of this spectrum was obtained by sharing frequencies in the 28 ghz band previously dedicated to satellite transmissions .

the satellite industry expressed concern over sharing spectrum , particularly the 28 ghz band , contending that current satellite services could be undermined without a deeper understanding of how future 5g services will be used: [s]atellites are providing vital services to all americans using spectrum bands above 24 ghz .

satellites "distribute point - to - multipoint video and other high bandwidth services more efficiently and more cost effectively than any other technology. .

in addition , high - throughput satellites are bringing competitive broadband services to all of the united states .

satellites also provide advanced services to ships , aircrafts and motor vehicles... .

consideration of repurposing spectrum access from existing users with a supporting record would result in the loss of critical services to u.s. consumers , and to vital enterprise users such as first responders and the u.s. military .

the fcc contends that its approach in its july 2016 ruling struck a balance between wireless services and satellite operations and that the spectrum sharing provided in the decision would "ensure that diverse users — including federal and non - federal , satellite and terrestrial , and fixed and mobile — can co - exist and expand. .

the fcc also noted that there had been "dueling studies" from affected industries and said it would continue to study the issue and make adjustments if necessary .

there has been congressional interest in the fcc's activities with regard to satellite spectrum .

h.r .

4945 ( 114 th congress ) would direct the fcc to preserve primary electromagnetic access in the 27.5-28.35 ghz band for satellite operators .

the fcc is also evaluating a proposal by ligado networks , a satellite - communications company developing a network to support 5g service , for sharing the 1675-1680 band with noaa .

doc , the air force , and the aerospace industries association have expressed concern that this sharing arrangement might interfere with gps signals and the emergency response , homeland security , and aviation safety sectors that rely on them .

appendix a .

satellite size compariso .

