congress uses an annual appropriations process to fund discretionary spending , which supports the projects and activities of most federal government agencies .

this process anticipates the enactment of 12 regular appropriations bills each fiscal year .

if regular appropriations are not enacted prior to the start of the fiscal year ( october 1 ) , continuing appropriations may be used to provide temporary funding until the annual appropriations process can be concluded .

continuing appropriations acts are often referred to as "continuing resolutions" or "crs," because they are typically enacted in the form of a joint resolution .

crs may be enacted for a period of days , weeks , or months .

if any of the 12 regular appropriations bills are not enacted by the time the first cr for a fiscal year expires , further extensions of that cr might be enacted until all regular appropriations bills have been completed or the fiscal year ends .

none of the fy2017 regular appropriations bills was enacted prior to the enactment of the first cr for fy2017 ( h.r .

5325 ) .

as enacted , division c of that measure provides continuing appropriations for projects and activities covered by 11 of the 12 regular appropriations bills for the period covering the beginning of the fiscal year , october 1 , 2016 , through december 9 , 2016 .

it also provided appropriations covering the military construction and veterans affairs appropriations act for all of fy2017 ( division a ) , as well as emergency funds to combat the zika virus and provide relief for flood victims in louisiana and other affected states ( division b ) .

h.r .

5325 was passed by the senate and house on september 28 , 2016 , and signed into law by the president on september 29 ( p.l .

114-223 ) .

in december 2016 , the house and senate passed a measure providing further continuing appropriations for fy2017 ( h.r .

2028 ) for projects and activities covered by the 11 regular appropriations that were covered by the previous cr , p.l .

114-223 , but extending the period of availability through april 28 , 2017 ( division a ) and adding additional provisions to be added to the text of p.l .

114-223 following section 145 of division c. in addition , funding was provided for overseas contingency operations for the entire fiscal year ( division b , entitled the security assistance act , 2017 ) .

the purpose of this report is to provide an analysis of the additional provisions in division a concerning continuing appropriations added to those from division c of p.l .

114-223 ( sections 145-201 ) , including the provision establishing an expedited procedure for senate consideration of a waiver concerning the nomination of james n. mattis to be secretary of defense .

the first two sections summarize the overall funding provided ( "coverage , duration , and rate" ) and budget enforcement issues associated with the statutory discretionary spending limits ( "the cr and the statutory discretionary spending limits" ) .

the third section of this report provides short summaries of the provisions in this cr that are agency - , account - , or program - specific .

these summaries are organized by appropriations act title .

in some instances , additional information about those appropriations and how they operate under a cr is provided .

for general information on the content of crs and historical data on crs enacted between fy1977 and fy2016 , see crs report r42647 , continuing resolutions: overview of components and recent practices , by james v. saturno and jessica tollestrup .

this section of the report discusses the three components of a cr that generally establish the purpose , duration , and amount of funds provided by the act: a cr's "coverage" relates to the purposes for which funds are provided .

the projects and activities funded by a cr are typically specified with reference to regular ( and , occasionally , supplemental ) appropriations acts from the previous fiscal year .

when a cr refers to one of those appropriations acts and provides funds for the projects and activities included in such an act , the cr is often referred to as "covering" that act .

the "duration" of a cr refers to the period of time for which budget authority is provided for covered activities .

crs usually fund projects and activities using a "rate for operations" or "funding rate" to provide budget authority at a restricted level but do not prescribe a specified dollar amount .

the funding rate for a project or activity is based on the total amount of budget authority that would be available annually for that project or activity under the referenced appropriations acts and is pro - rated based on the fraction of a year for which the cr is in effect .

in addition to the general provisions that establish the coverage , duration , and rate , crs typically include provisions that are specific to certain agencies , accounts , or programs .

these provisions are generally of two types .

first , certain provisions designate exceptions to the formula and purpose for which any referenced funding is extended .

these are often referred to as "anomalies. .

the purpose of anomalies is to preserve congress's constitutional prerogative to provide appropriations in the manner it sees fit , even in instances when only short - term funding is provided .

second , certain provisions may have the effect of creating new law or changing existing law .

most typically , these provisions are used to renew expiring provisions of law or extend the scope of certain existing statutory requirements to the funds provided in the cr .

substantive provisions that establish major new policies have also been included on occasion .

unless otherwise indicated , such provisions are temporary in nature and expire when the cr sunsets .

these anomalies and provisions that change law may be included at the request of the president .

congress may accept , reject , or modify these proposals in the course of drafting and considering appropriations measures that provide continuing appropriations .

in addition , members may identify or initiate any other anomalies and provisions changing law that they wish to be included in the cr .

this section of the report summarizes provisions in this cr that are agency - , account - , or program - specific , alphabetically organized by appropriations act title for 10 of the 11 regular appropriations acts covered in section 101 .

 ( there are no anomalies concerning items funded in the state foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act. ) .

the summaries generally provide brief explanations of the provisions .

in some cases they include additional information , such as whether a provision was requested by the president or included in prior year crs .

for additional information on specific provisions in the cr , contact the crs appropriations experts listed in table 2 at the end of the report .

in addition to the agency - , account - , and program - specific provisions discussed above , sections 167 and 179 of p.l .

114-254 establish other authorities that are not directly related to any of the 12 appropriations acts .

these are summarized below .

this provision expands eligibility in calendar year 2017 for an existing multiemployer health care plan for united mine workers of america retirees .

the newly eligible retirees are those whose employers were part of a bituminous coal industry wage agreement and whose health benefits would be reduced or eliminated as a result of a bankruptcy that commenced in 2012 or 2015 .

the health care plan has two sources of funds: ( 1 ) contributions from employers and ( 2 ) transfers from the federal government if the contributions from employers are insufficient to cover benefits .

the provision transfers funds from the federal government from january 1 , 2017 , to april 30 , 2017 , for both existing and the newly eligible participants in the plan .

in addition , the provision requires the transfers of funds from a voluntary employee beneficiary association that covers the newly eligible workers to the multiemployer health plan .

this provision establishes expedited parliamentary procedures governing senate consideration of legislation that would waive a legal restriction related to the prior military service of the secretary of defense .

section 113 ( a ) of title 10 of the u.s. code establishes that an individual "may not be appointed as secretary of defense within seven years after relief from active duty as a commissioned officer of a regular component of an armed force. .

unless waived , this restriction would bar retired marine corp general james n. mattis , who has been selected by president - elect donald j. trump to be secretary of defense , from serving in that capacity .

general mattis retired from active duty in 2013 .

in order to qualify for the expedited procedures , waiver legislation must be introduced during a 30-calendar day period that begins on the date that the 115 th congress convenes .

the legislation may be introduced by the senate majority leader , the minority leader , or their respective designees or by the chair or ranking minority member of the committee on armed services .

both the title of the legislation and the matter after the enacting ( or resolving ) clause are stipulated .

once introduced , the legislation is to be referred to the senate committee on armed services .

if the committee has not reported the waiver legislation within five session days after the date of its referral , it is automatically discharged of further consideration of the measure .

once pending on the senate calendar of business ( either by being reported or by the committee being discharged ) , it is in order to make a non - debatable motion to proceed to consider the legislation .

this motion may be repeated if it has previously been disagreed to .

all points of order against the waiver legislation and its consideration are waived .

if the senate adopts the motion to proceed , the waiver legislation would be pending and the senate would consider the measure until it has disposed of it .

there would be up to 10 hours of debate , divided and controlled by the party floor leaders or their designees .

a non - debatable motion to further limit debate is in order .

amendments and potentially dilatory motions are barred .

at the conclusion of debate , and after an optional quorum call , the senate would automatically vote on passage of the waiver legislation .

passage of the waiver legislation in the senate requires an affirmative vote of three - fifths of members chosen and sworn — 60 votes if there are no vacancies in the senate — the same threshold required for cloture on most legislation .

should waiver legislation be subsequently vetoed , senate consideration of a veto message would be limited to up to 10 hours .

because these "fast track" procedures are enacted as a senate rule in law , the senate could adjust the provisions described above in whole or in part by unanimous consent .

section 179 does not establish any expedited procedures providing for house consideration of waiver legislation .

presumably such legislation would come to the house floor under the terms of a special rule reported by the house committee on rules or , depending on its level of support , under the suspension of the rules procedure .

