the 115 th congress is likely to face numerous water resource issues as it conducts oversight and deliberates on authorizations and appropriations legislation related to water resource development , management , and protection .

these issues may include how to make investment decisions in the face of fiscal constraints ; how to maintain and reinvest in an aging portfolio of federal infrastructure ( eg , dams , locks , and levees ) ; how to effectively respond to and prepare for floods and droughts ; and how to distribute investment between activities to meet new demands for water supplies , navigation , flood management , and aquatic ecosystem restoration and protection .

water resource issues often arise at the regional level but have a federal connection .

the crux of many of these challenges is how to balance competing demands for water and river ecosystem management .

these include how to cope with the budget limitations and the effects of federal project operations on the environment , such as impacts on threatened and endangered species .

these operations often become particularly contentious during droughts and floods .

this report first discusses recent congressional activity and possible issues for the 115 th congress .

next , it provides an overview of the federal role in water resource , including a discussion of the two major federal water resource agencies — the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) and the bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) — and related legislation .

the report then provides an overview of broad policy issues , including financing investments in water resource infrastructure , changing federal partnerships , funding and authorizing projects and earmark policies , restoring aquatic ecosystems , and improving drought and flood preparedness and response .

this report does not address municipal water systems , municipal wastewater infrastructure , or environmental protections , such as water quality and wetlands regulations .

in the water resource area , legislative activity often is specific to the federal water resource management agencies or to water use by particular sectors , including energy , agriculture , navigation , recreation , and municipal and industrial use .

occasionally , congress takes up broader water resource policy issues , such as coordination of federal water resource activities and programs .

the federal government has long been involved in efforts to facilitate navigation , expand irrigation , and reduce flood and drought losses .

for example , nearly every large river basin in the country — from the columbia , sacramento , and colorado rivers in the west to the missouri , mississippi , and delaware rivers — contains one or more federal dam or navigation project .

these projects have largely been constructed by the corps and reclamation .

more recently , federal involvement has expanded to include municipal water supply development and efforts to protect water - related resources , such as fish and wildlife , and to support recreation .

increasing pressures on the quality and quantity of available water supplies have resulted in heightened local and regional water - use conflicts throughout the country , particularly in the west and southeast .

pressures include population growth ; environmental regulation ; in - stream species and ecosystem needs ; water source contamination ; agricultural and energy water demands ; climate change and variability ; and changing public interests , such as heightened demand for in - stream recreation .

congress historically has played a role in water resources through authorization of and appropriations for regional and site - specific projects and activities ; however , numerous water resource responsibilities are split or shared with state , local , and tribal governments , particularly those related to water allocation and resource planning and management .

congress establishes the policies that define the federal role in planning for federal water resource projects and provides direction and funding for construction , maintenance , repairs , and rehabilitation .

congress makes these decisions within the context of multiple and often conflicting objectives , competing legal decisions , long - established institutional mechanisms ( eg , century - old water rights and contractual obligations ) , and in response to events such as floods , droughts , and structural failures .

the number of federal water resource construction activities decreased during the last decades of the 20 th century , marking the end of earlier expansionist policies that had supported large federal up - front investments in dams and hydropower facilities , navigation locks and channels , irrigation diversions , and flood - control levees , as well as basin - wide planning and development efforts .

fiscal constraints , changes in national priorities and local needs , few remaining prime construction locations , and environmental and species impacts of the construction and operation of federal projects all contributed to this shift .

although these forces are still active , recent drought , flood , and development pressures have contributed to increased proposals for renewed federal financial and technical assistance for new works and for reinvestment in the aging stock of existing water resource infrastructure .

most of the large dams and water diversion structures in the united states were built by , or with the assistance of , reclamation or the corps .

historically , reclamation projects were designed principally to provide reliable supplies of water for irrigation and some municipal and industrial uses .

corps projects are planned primarily to improve navigation and reduce flood damages , while power generation , water supply , and recreation often are included as secondary or incidental benefits .

reclamation currently manages hundreds of dams and reservoirs in 17 western states .

these projects provide water to approximately 10 million acres of farmland and 31 million people .

reclamation also operates 58 power plants capable of producing 40 billion kilowatt - hours of electricity annually ( enough for approximately 3.5 million homes ) , which generate more than $1 billion in revenues annually .

the corps operates nationwide , and its activities are diverse .

the corps has constructed thousands of flood damage reduction and navigation projects throughout the country , involving nearly 12,000 miles of commercially active waterways and nearly 1,000 harbors and including 702 dam and reservoir projects ( with 75 hydroelectric plants generating 68 billion kilowatt - hours annually ) .

the corps is responsible for maintaining these projects .

additionally , the corps constructed , usually with nonfederal participation , roughly 9,000 miles of the estimated 100,000 miles of the nation's levees , but the agency operates and maintains only 900 miles .

the remaining levees are operated by nonfederal entities , often local governments or special districts .

the natural resources conservation service in the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) also facilitates water resources development , primarily for flood control in small watersheds and for soil and water conservation purposes .

for more information on usda conservation programs and policies , see crs report r40763 , agricultural conservation: a guide to programs , by megan stubbs .

many other federal agencies have water - related programs ( eg , epa , the u.s. geological survey , the national oceanographic and atmospheric administration , national aeronautics and space administration , federal emergency management agency [fema] , and energy - related agencies such as the federal energy regulatory commission and power marketing administrations ) .

however , the remainder of this report focuses on the projects , programs , and policies of the corps and reclamation .

for more information on federal water projects and programs — including types of financing and financial assistance — see crs report rl30478 , federally supported water supply and wastewater treatment programs , coordinated by claudia copeland .

for more information on other federal water activities , see crs report r42653 , selected federal water activities: agencies , authorities , and congressional committees , by betsy a. cody et al .

in addition to issues related to federal projects , the 115 th congress faces a number of broad water resource policy issues , including financing investment in new and aging water resource infrastructure ; changing federal partnerships ; funding and authorizing projects and earmark policies ; restoring aquatic ecosystems ; and improving drought and flood preparedness and response .

u.s. water infrastructure is aging ; the majority of the nation's dams , locks , and levees are more than 50 years old .

failure of these structures could have significant effects on local communities as well as regional and national impacts .

major capital investments in these structures have been limited in recent years , and repairing these facilities would cost billions of dollars .

congressional funding largely has been at the project level and has remained essentially flat , while funding needs have increased over time .

to date , no comprehensive federal funding solutions have been enacted .

some propose funding mechanisms that might be more conducive to major capital investments in these projects , such as the authorization or modification of loan programs for some infrastructure types or the inclusion of water resource infrastructure among the eligible recipients of funding from an infrastructure bank .

others have proposed using revenues from project beneficiaries ( eg , hydropower revenues , increased user fees ) to fund project repairs and upgrades or even de - authorizing and / or transferring projects to nonfederal entities , such as state or local governments .

still others think that congress requires more uniform information on the extent of this issue before it considers major funding solutions .

in the 114 th congress , the senate held a hearing on this topic and passed legislation that would have required increased reporting by reclamation on its aging infrastructure backlog ( s. 593 ) .

 ( see also discussion below on " changing federal partnerships ." ) .

in addition to support for new traditional water infrastructure investments , some argue for expanded authorities and increased funding to augment water supplies through alternative technologies ( eg , water recycling and reuse , aquifer storage and recovery , and desalination ) and nonstructural approaches ( i.e. , flood control projects that use natural features , such as wetlands , natural dunes , or artificial reefs rather than hard coastal defenses , such as seawalls and groins ) .

some stakeholders have expressed frustration with the pace of authorization and federal funding of water resource projects , which has resulted in some local sponsors pursuing projects with limited federal partnership or support or with expectations of future federal reimbursement or credit .

language authorizing increased nonfederal contributions to reclamation project costs ( as well as federal contributions to nonfederal projects ) was most recently enacted in the wiin act .

other corps authorizing legislation — the water resources reform and development act of 2014 ( wrrda 2014 ; p.l .

113-121 ) — previously had expanded the ability for nonfederal entities to use their funds to advance corps projects .

such new partnership models raise the question of whether the federal government has the ability to fund projects at previous levels while maintaining its existing administrative processes and discretion .

other related questions include what the appropriate federal amount of investment and use of these new authorities should be , whether some local sponsors can or should finance their own projects , and whether the nonfederal sponsors with available financing will determine which projects get funded and reimbursed from limited federal water resource infrastructure funds .

another approach was initiated in the 113 th congress through its authorization of title x of wrrda 2014 , the water infrastructure finance and innovation act ( wifia ) .

the title authorized a pilot program , to be administered by the corps and epa , for loans and loan guarantees for certain flood damage reduction , public water supply , and wastewater projects .

wifia was modeled after a similar program that assists transportation projects , the transportation infrastructure finance and innovation act , or tifia , program .

to date , the epa portion of the program has been funded , but the obama administration did not request or receive funds to implement the corps portion of wifia .

in the 114 th congress , the wiin act amended the existing wifia authority to expand the epa program's authorities to address other projects , including those to mitigate the effects of drought .

the corps' wifia program was unchanged and remains unfunded .

water resource project funding is often part of the debate on congressionally directed spending , or earmarks .

although water resource project development historically has been directed by congress , the site - specific nature of the authorizations and appropriations process resulted in projects being subject to earmark disclosure rules and earmark moratoria beginning in the 112 th congress .

earmark moratoria appear to be altering the makeup of corps and reclamation appropriations , particularly by reducing the congressional additions of specific projects to the budget and by congress funding broad categories of activities rather than specific projects .

as a result , some projects that historically have benefitted from congressional support have received less ( or zero ) funding in recently enacted appropriations bills .

in addition to funding impacts , earmark moratoria also have influenced consideration of site - specific authorizations of water resource projects .

some in congress have proposed exempting corps and / or reclamation projects from earmark moratoria , and many have advocated for additional funding for those categories of projects that historically have been reliant on congressional support in this form .

congress has authorized restoration activities in the everglades , great lakes , gulf coast , and elsewhere .

the 115 th congress may consider the status and priority of federal efforts to restore large - scale aquatic ecosystems that have been altered or impaired by development , habitat loss , and federal water resource projects .

other restoration efforts that may receive attention include california bay - delta , chesapeake bay , salton sea , klamath basin , and elsewhere .

a number of issues pertaining to these ecosystems have emerged .

for example , congress might consider legislation to authorize a framework for governance and a comprehensive restoration plan for the salton sea and may conduct oversight over the implementation of restoration activities in the everglades and gulf coast region .

further , congress might consider policies that could streamline authorizations to allow more projects to be implemented as part of ecosystem restoration initiatives and to allow for greater use of public - private partnerships .

funding for existing and newly authorized restoration initiatives might generate controversy and could face challenges in the 115 th congress as decisionmakers evaluate investment priorities .

congress might focus on evaluating existing initiatives to determine how efficiently funds are being spent and whether restoration efforts are reaching their objectives .

ecosystem restoration initiatives also might be evaluated for how well they balance demands for water resources and species' conservation needs .

congress is often faced with reacting to natural disasters , such as droughts and floods .

local and regional drought conditions , including widespread drought in california since 2012 , have left many areas vulnerable to drought - induced impacts , such as water supply and use limitations , reduced agricultural and power production , and degraded fish and wildlife habitat , among other issues .

responsibilities for drought planning and response are split among various levels of government and involve many different federal agencies .

although congress has enacted legislation to coordinate drought information through the national integrated drought information system , no overarching national drought policy exists .

in light of drought effects on water supply , the 115 th congress may address drought planning and preparedness through oversight hearings or drought policy legislation .

for more information on drought impacts and congressional response , see crs in focus if10196 , drought policy , response , and preparedness , by nicole t. carter and betsy a. cody ; crs report rs21212 , agricultural disaster assistance , by megan stubbs ; and crs report r42854 , emergency assistance for agricultural land rehabilitation , by megan stubbs .

periodic but intense flooding also garners attention from congress .

although the corps is the principal flood - fighting agency , other agencies also play a role in flood response and mitigation , such as fema's disaster assistance , flood insurance , and pre - disaster mitigation programs .

additionally , responsibilities for flood damage reduction are spread among federal , state , local , and tribal governments .

state and local governments in many ways play a primary role in floodplain management because of their jurisdiction over land - use decisions and local zoning ordinances — deciding where and how development may occur .

given the magnitude of the nation's coastal and riverine flood risk , the 115 th congress may consider additional ways to reduce flood risk .

potential approaches may include improving infrastructure and protecting natural flood mitigation , removing federal disincentives to improved floodplain management , or promoting more pre - disaster recovery plans for highly vulnerable areas .

