science and technology ( s&t ) play an increasingly important role in our society .

advances in science and technology can help drive economic growth , improve human health , increase agricultural productivity , and meet national priorities .

federal policies affect scientific and technological advancement on several levels .

the federal government directly funds research and development ( r&d ) activities to achieve national goals or support national priorities , such as funding basic life science research through the national institutes of health ( nih ) or developing new weapons systems in the department of defense ( dod ) .

the federal government establishes and maintains the legal and regulatory framework that affects s&t activities in the private sector .

federal tax , trade , intellectual property , regulatory , and education policies can have effects on private sector s&t activity .

this report serves as a brief introduction to many of the science and technology policy issues that may come before the 115 th congress .

each issue section provides background information and outlines selected policy issues that may be considered .

each issue includes a heading entitled "for further information" that provides the author's name and the titles of relevant crs reports containing more detailed policy analysis and information .

a table at the end of the report includes each author's contact information .

several issues of potential congressional interest apply to federal science and technology policy in general .

this section begins with a brief introduction to the roles each branch of the federal government plays in s&t policymaking , then discusses overall federal funding of research and development .

additional sections address issues related to the america competes act ; oversight of federally supported academic research ; technology transfer ; the adequacy of the science and engineering workforce ; science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) education ; and innovation - related tax policy .

the federal government supports billions of dollars of agricultural research annually .

the 115 th congress is likely to face issues related to funding this research and specific issues arising from advances in agricultural biotechnology and the use of antibiotics in food - producing animals .

advances in science and technology related to biomedical research and development underpin improvements in medications and treatments .

some of the biomedical r&d issues that the 115 th congress may face include those related to the budget and oversight of the national institutes of health , the role the food and drug administration in approving new medicines and laboratory tests , and advances in precision medicine and genomic editing .

science and technology play an important role in national defense .

the department of defense ( dod ) relies on a robust research and development effort to develop new military systems and improve existing systems .

issues that may come before the 115 th congress regarding the dod's s&t activities include budgetary concerns and the effectiveness of programs to transition r&d results into fielded products .

energy - related science and technology issues that may come before the 115 th congress include those related to reprocessing spent nuclear fuel , advances in nuclear energy technology , the development of biofuels and ocean energy technology , and international fusion research .

science and technology play an increasingly large role in environmental issues .

science - and technology - related environmental issues that may come before the 115 th congress include climate change science , carbon sequestration , and water science .

the federal government spends billions of dollars supporting research and development to protect the homeland .

some of the issues that the 115 th congress may consider include how the department of homeland security performs research and development and federal efforts to develop and procure new medical countermeasures against chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear agents .

the rapid pace of advancements in information technology presents several issues for congressional policymakers , including those related to cybersecurity , artificial intelligence , broadband deployment , access to broadband networks and net neutrality , public safety networks , emergency alerting , the internet of things , cryptography and law - enforcement challenges , and federal networking r&d .

some of the policy issues in the physical and material sciences that the 115 th congress may address include funding and oversight of the national science foundation and the multiagency initiative supporting research and development in the emerging field of nanotechnology .

congress has historically had a strong interest in space policy issues .

space topics that may come before the 115 th congress include the funding and oversight of the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) and issues related to the commercialization of space and to earth - observing satellites .

spaceflight has attracted strong congressional interest since the establishment of nasa in 1958 .

issues include the goals and strategy of nasa's human spaceflight program , the impact of constrained budgets on nasa's other missions , and the future of nasa's earth science program .

in its first session , the 115 th congress enacted the nasa transition authorization act of 2017 ( p.l .

115-10 ) .

in the second session , it is continuing to address nasa reauthorization legislation .

with the end of the space shuttle program in july 2011 , the united states lost the capability to launch astronauts into space .

since that time , nasa has relied on russian spacecraft for crew transport to the international space station ( iss ) .

for iss cargo transport , nasa - contracted u.s. commercial flights have been delivering payloads of supplies and equipment since october 2012 .

as directed by the nasa authorization act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-267 ) , nasa is pursuing a two - track strategy for human spaceflight .

first , for transport to low earth orbit , including the iss , nasa is supporting commercial development of a crew transport capability like the commercial cargo capability achieved in 2012 .

commercial crew transportation services are likely to become operational in 2019 .

second , for human exploration beyond earth orbit , nasa is developing a new crew capsule called orion and a new heavy - lift rocket called the space launch system ( sls ) .

the first crewed test flight of orion and the sls is scheduled for 2023 .

most details of the subsequent exploration missions of orion and the sls remain to be determined .

in february 2018 , nasa announced plans for a lunar orbital platform – gateway ( lop - g ) in lunar orbit , to be accessed via orion and the sls , that would serve as a platform for deep - space human exploration .

rapid developments in the commercial space sector may change the relationship between nasa and industry .

for example , spacex has announced plans for commercial flights carrying passengers around the moon and back as well as , in the longer term , to mars .

some observers see this sort of development as potentially competing with nasa's human spaceflight plans .

more broadly , the emergence of new commercial capabilities in space may present nasa with new opportunities for public - private partnerships or may shift its r&d priorities .

for example , nasa has announced plans to end direct funding for the international space station by 2025 , instead relying on a combination of public - private partnerships and commercial service contracts .

the 2010 authorization act authorized funding increases for nasa that were not subsequently appropriated .

in considering reauthorization , the 115 th congress may examine whether reduced budget expectations require corresponding changes to planned programs .

one common concern is that the cost of planned human spaceflight activities may mean less funding for other nasa missions , such as unmanned science satellites , aeronautics research , and space technology development .

nasa's earth science program , in which climate research is a major focus , is of particular congressional interest .

some in congress have argued that other nasa activities should have higher priority or that some or all of nasa's earth science responsibilities should be transferred to other agencies .

supporters counter that space - based earth observations are an integral part of nasa's science mission .

for further information [author name scrubbed] , specialist in science and technology policy crs report r43419 , nasa appropriations and authorizations: a fact sheet , by [author name scrubbed] crs in focus if10016 , space exploration , by [author name scrubbed] crs in focus if10828 , the international space station ( iss ) and the administration's proposal to end direct nasa funding by 2025 , by [author name scrubbed .

a survey by the department of commerce found that u.s. companies had $62.9 billion in space - related sales in 2012 .

while u.s. government purchases provided much of this market , about one quarter of sales were within the commercial sector .

although the commercial space industry has existed for several decades , some observers have identified an emerging "new space" sector of relatively new companies focused on private spaceflight at low cost .

one factor driving this trend is nasa's reliance on commercial providers for access to the iss , but "new space" companies are also focused on other markets .

these include the launch of national security satellites for the department of defense , the launch of commercial satellites for u.s. and foreign companies , and even space tourism .

the federal aviation administration ( faa ) licenses commercial space launch and reentry , including commercial spaceports .

as part of the faa licensing process , the federal government indemnifies launch providers against certain third - party liabilities .

the u.s. commercial space launch competitiveness act ( p.l .

114-90 ) extended this indemnification policy ( for the ninth time since 1988 ) through september 2025 .

the act also extended through september 2023 a statutory moratorium that restricts the faa's authority to regulate the safety of crewed spaceflight .

the status of human spaceflight safety regulations has been a focus of recent congressional interest because of nasa's plans for commercial crewed flights to the iss .

several other federal agencies are also involved in the commercial space industry .

the national oceanographic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) licenses commercial remote sensing satellites .

the federal communications commission licenses the use of radio frequencies by commercial satellites and assigns locations for satellites in geostationary orbits .

the national transportation safety board investigates certain spacecraft accidents .

the department of commerce office of space commerce supports and promotes u.s. space commerce .

oversight of export controls on most aspects of commercial satellites shifted from the department of state to the department of commerce in 2014 .

in february 2018 , the national space council made recommendations for regulatory reforms at multiple agencies .

some of those recommendations are likely to result in legislative proposals from the administration in 2018 and 2019 .

in response or on its own initiative , the 115 th congress is likely to continue to address the commercial space regulatory and oversight framework .

for more information [author name scrubbed] , specialist in science and technology policy crs report r44708 , commercial space industry launches a new phase , by [author name scrubbed] crs in focus if10016 , space exploration , by [author name scrubbed .

the constellation of earth - observing satellites launched and operated by the united states government performs a wide range of observational and data collecting activities , such as measuring the change in mass of polar ice sheets , wind speeds over the oceans , land cover change , as well as the more familiar daily measurements of key atmospheric parameters that enable modern weather forecasts and storm prediction .

satellite observations of the earth's oceans and land surface help with short - term seasonal forecasts of el niño and la niña conditions , which are valuable to u.s. agriculture and commodity interests ; identification of the location and size of wildfires , which can assist firefighting crews and mitigation activities ; as well as long - term observational data of the global climate , which are used in predictive models that help assess the degree and magnitude of current and future climate change .

congress continues to be interested in the performance of nasa , noaa , and the u.s. geological survey in building and operating u.s. earth - observing satellites .

congress has been particularly interested in the agencies meeting budgets and time schedules so that critical space - based observations are not missed due to delays and cost overruns .

concerns have been raised in the past by congress about the possibility of a "data gap" in the polar - orbiting weather satellite coverage .

the successful launch of the first joint polar satellite system satellite jpss - 1 ( now noaa - 20 ) on november 18 , 2017 , has alleviated those concerns for the near - term .

congress provided full funding , about $776 million for the second polar - orbiting satellite , jpss - 2 , in the fy2018 enacted appropriations .

noaa's program for future polar - orbiting weather satellites , the polar follow - on mission , is likely to be more controversial both within congress and in the trump administration .

on november 19 , 2016 , the goes - r ( geostationary operational environmental satellite - r ) weather satellite launched and was placed into orbit .

renamed goes - 16 , it is an advanced weather satellite with sensors that should help improve hurricane tracking and intensity forecasts , prediction and warning of severe weather events , and rainfall estimates that will lead to better flood warnings .

goes - 16 also carries the first operational lightning mapper in geostationary orbit , and will better monitor space weather — perturbations to the earth's magnetic field caused by intense bursts of energy from the sun .

on march 1 , 2017 , goes - s successfully launched carrying the same suite of instruments as its predecessor .

both satellites represent the first two in a series of four earth - orbiting weather satellites planned by noaa through 2036 .

for further information [author name scrubbed] , specialist in energy and natural resources policy crs report r44335 , minding the data gap: noaa's polar - orbiting weather satellites and strategies for data continuity , by [author name scrubbed .

