on january 18 , 2017 , the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) published a final rule that amends the federal regulations responsible for safeguarding the privacy of patient records maintained by substance use disorder treatment programs across the country .

these regulations , known simply as part 2 after their location in the code of federal regulations , were first promulgated in 1975 and had not been revised substantively since 1987 .

according to the hhs substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) , which administers part 2 , the changes in the final rule are intended "to better align [part 2] with advances in the u.s. health care delivery system while retaining important privacy protections. .

the part 2 law and implementing regulations were written at a time when treatment for substance use disorders was offered primarily by specialty providers .

some individuals with substance use disorders , however , were reluctant to seek treatment because they feared that disclosure of information about their condition might lead to prosecution , discrimination by health insurers , or loss of employment , housing , or child custody .

the aim of part 2 was to encourage these individuals to get the treatment they needed by establishing strong privacy protections .

today , the health care system is embracing new models for delivering services — including accountable care organizations ( acos ) and patient - centered health homes — that rely on sharing patient information to coordinate and integrate care .

there is also a focus on measuring performance and patient outcomes .

these efforts , in turn , depend on use of electronic health records ( ehrs ) and the development of a health information technology ( hit ) infrastructure to support the exchange and use of digital health information .

under part 2 , the disclosure of substance use disorder treatment records requires a patient's written consent , unless the type of disclosure falls under one of a handful of specific statutory exceptions .

for example , part 2 generally requires consent to release information about a patient's substance use disorder history and treatment regimens to clinicians at another facility , except in the case of a medical emergency .

this contrasts with the health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) privacy rule , which permits clinicians to share patient information for treatment and payment purposes .

health care providers have become increasingly frustrated with the restrictions that part 2 places on their ability to share the medical records of patients with substance use disorders .

they argue that part 2 makes it difficult for addiction treatment providers and general medicine providers to exchange information and coordinate patient care .

consider a patient who receives counseling and medications at an alcohol or drug treatment program .

the records for this care are protected under part 2 .

if the patient also receives treatment ( including addiction treatment ) at a primary care facility , the records for the care at that location are hipaa - protected .

whereas the primary care facility is permitted under hipaa to share the patient's information with the part 2-covered alcohol and drug treatment program and any other health care facility providing care , the alcohol and drug treatment program generally needs the patient's consent under part 2 to release information to another health care facility .

integrated health systems that handle patient records from multiple providers must separate part 2 data from other medical information and manage patient consent preferences for its use and disclosure .

some health information exchanges ( hies ) exclude part 2 data altogether because of the difficulty and expense of segregating the data and managing consent .

researchers , too , have expressed concern about access to part 2 data .

they were especially critical of a decision by the hhs centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) in late 2013 to begin withholding from research data sets any medicare or medicaid reimbursement claim that included a substance use disorder diagnosis or procedure code .

cms took this action to comply with part 2 .

while the regulations permit disclosures for research purposes , subject to certain conditions , only substance use disorder program directors are allowed to authorize such disclosures .

third - party payers that receive part 2 data , including cms , are subject to the general prohibition on redisclosing the information .

researchers complained that they were losing access to an important data source at a particularly challenging time , as the nation expands its efforts to combat the abuse of prescription opioids and heroin .

samhsa launched its effort to revise part 2 in response to these concerns .

its stated goal in developing the final rule was to ensure that individuals with substance use disorders are able to participate in , and benefit from , the new systems of care without compromising their privacy .

this report summarizes the changes that the final rule made to the part 2 regulations and describes stakeholders' reactions to these revisions .

the report begins with an overview and comparison of part 2 and the hipaa privacy rule .

it concludes with some discussion of new hit standards and applications for data segmentation and consent management that support the exchange of part 2 data .

part 2 is much narrower in scope than the more familiar hipaa privacy rule , which provides a baseline of privacy protections for health information maintained by payers and providers of health care — including substance use disorder treatment programs subject to part 2 — across the entire health care system .

part 2 also permits significantly fewer uses and disclosures of patient information without consent .

table 1 compares key provisions of the privacy rule and part 2 .

the hipaa privacy rule applies to identifiable health information maintained by health plans , health care clearinghouses , and health care providers .

it also applies to the business associates of these hipaa - covered entities , with whom such protected health information ( phi ) is shared .

business associates provide specific services ( eg , claims processing , data management ) for covered entities to help them operate as businesses and meet their responsibilities to patients and beneficiaries .

the privacy rule describes multiple circumstances under which covered entities may use or disclose phi .

for example , phi may be used or disclosed for the purposes of treatment , payment , and other routine health care operations — including case management , care coordination , and outcomes evaluation — with few restrictions .

the rule also permits the use or disclosure of phi for other specified purposes not directly connected to the treatment of the individual , such as public health and research .

covered entities must obtain a patient's written authorization for any use or disclosure that is not expressly permitted or required under the privacy rule .

by comparison , part 2 applies specifically to federally assisted substance use disorder treatment programs .

most of the nation's alcohol and drug treatment programs are covered , comprising more than 12,000 hospitals , outpatient treatment centers , and residential treatment facilities .

while part 2 does not apply to general medical facilities or practices , it does cover specialized substance use disorder treatment units ( and staff ) within such facilities .

part 2 restricts the use or disclosure of any patient information that directly identifies a patient as an alcohol or drug abuser , or that links the patient to an alcohol or drug treatment program .

medical information that does not link the patient to current or past substance abuse , or identify the patient as a participant of a part 2 program , is not subject to the part 2 requirements .

while such information is not afforded part 2 protection , it remains covered under the hipaa privacy rule .

under part 2 , patient - identifying information may not be disclosed without a patient's written consent except pursuant to certain specified conditions in the following circumstances: ( 1 ) medical emergencies , ( 2 ) research , ( 3 ) program audits and evaluations , and ( 4 ) pursuant to a court order authorizing disclosure .

any information disclosed with the patient's consent must include a statement that prohibits further disclosure of identifying information unless the consent expressly permits such redisclosure , or it is permitted by part 2 .

substance use disorder treatment programs typically are subject to both sets of regulations — part 2 and the hipaa privacy rule — unless there is a conflict between the two .

in that case , the program must comply with the regulations that are more protective of patient privacy , which generally means following the requirements under part 2 .

the major provisions in the final rule are summarized below .

although samhsa's primary goal was to modify part 2 to facilitate the sharing of patients' part 2 data with other providers participating in clinically integrated health care networks , the agency's rulemaking options were constrained by the underlying statutory language .

the part 2 law is prescriptive , which limits samhsa's ability to make significant changes through rulemaking .

the law defines the types of entities and information subject to its protections .

it requires patient consent to disclose protected information , except in a handful of specified circumstances , and it establishes a strict prohibition on redisclosure .

by contrast , the hhs secretary was given broad discretionary authority under hipaa to develop — and periodically amend — the privacy rule .

hipaa instructed the secretary to submit to congress detailed recommendations on the privacy of individually identifiable health information , and to promulgate privacy standards based on the recommendations .

the law provided few details on the scope of the recommendations other than specifying that they must address ( 1 ) patient rights , ( 2 ) procedures for exercising such rights , and ( 3 ) the uses and disclosures of patient information that should be permitted or required .

samhsa also published a supplemental final rule in january 2018 that makes additional changes to part 2 to permit third parties in lawful possession of part 2 data to disclose the information to their contractors , subcontractors , and legal representatives .

the agency finalized two sets of circumstances under which such disclosures would be permissible .

first , if a patient consents to disclosure of his or her part 2 records for payment and / or health care operations activities , the recipient of the information ( i.e. , lawful holder ) is able to further disclose the information to its contractors , subcontractors , or legal representatives to carry out such activities on its behalf .

any entity that receives data from a lawful holder in this way would itself become a lawful holder and be subject to the part 2 requirements .

samhsa includes a list of permissible payment and health care operations activities , which is similar to the hipaa privacy rule's definition of these terms , in the preamble of the rule to provide illustrative examples of these types of activities .

second , the final rule allows an individual and entity to whom part 2 data are disclosed for a medicare , medicaid , or state children's health insurance program ( chip ) audit or evaluation to further disclose the information to its contractors , subcontractors , or legal representatives to carry out the audit or evaluation .

groups that advocate for the privacy of individuals with substance use disorders generally are satisfied with the final rule because it retains part 2's confidentiality protections .

but organizations that represent payers and providers of health care have criticized the final rule , claiming that on balance it does little to improve information sharing .

the legal action center , a nonprofit law and policy organization representing people with substance use disorders , hiv / aids , or criminal records , notes that while the final rule has introduced flexibility to the consent process by providing more options for designating the types of individuals and entities permitted to receive protected information , the core consent requirements under part 2 remain intact and in other respects have been strengthened .

the center applauds the new provision that allows patients to indicate on the consent form the specific types of information that may be disclosed .

it also credits samhsa for not attempting to loosen the prohibition on redisclosure or to create any new exceptions to the consent requirement .

the partnership to amend 42 c.f.r .

part 2 ( the partnership ) — a coalition of national organizations representing health care payers and providers committed to aligning part 2 with the hipaa privacy rule — has been critical of the final rule .

though the partnership acknowledges samhsa's efforts to broaden the consent options in an attempt to facilitate the use and disclosure of part 2 data for research , population health management , and care coordination , it believes more needs to be done to enable part 2 data to be shared .

the partnership recognizes , however , that samhsa's rulemaking options are limited by the underlying statute — as discussed earlier — and thus more fundamental changes to part 2 may require new legislation to amend the law .

representatives of the behavioral health provider and medical informatics communities support the final rule's general consent provisions that permit disclosure of part 2 data to intermediaries such as hies and acos .

but they are critical of the language that will require such intermediaries to have the it capability to ( 1 ) limit access to part 2 data to providers involved in the patient's care ( i.e. , those with a "treating provider relationship" ) and ( 2 ) be able to track which providers have received part 2 data so that an accounting of such disclosures within the past two years can be provided to the patient upon request .

they argue that these requirements are administratively and technologically burdensome and provide little if any additional privacy protections .

a provision in the 21 st century cures act requires the hhs secretary , not later than one year after first finalizing regulations to update part 2 , to convene stakeholders to determine the final rule's effects on patient care , health outcomes , and patient privacy .

on january 31 , 2018 , samhsa held a listening session to implement this requirement .

in tandem with its part 2 rulemaking activities , samhsa has worked closely with federal and nonfederal partners to develop hit standards and applications that support the use and disclosure of information protected by part 2 .

these efforts are briefly described below .

to facilitate the electronic exchange of part 2 data , each patient's consent preferences specifying the type of information that may be shared , and the individuals or entities with whom the information may be shared , must be carefully managed .

patient consent has to travel with the data in order to control access .

in addition , a mechanism is required for segregating the data in a medical record to capture a patient's preferences .

data segmentation allows a patient's record to be broken down into multiple categories , allowing certain protected data elements to be removed ( redacted ) if a patient has not consented to their disclosure .

in recent years , samhsa has worked with the hhs office of the national coordinator for health information technology ( onc ) on its data segmentation for privacy ( ds4p ) initiative .

through ds4p , federal and nonfederal stakeholders developed internationally accepted standards and guidelines for segmenting medical data and managing patient consent .

based on the ds4p standards , samhsa designed consent2share , an open - source online tool for data segmentation and consent management .

consent2share integrates with existing ehr systems and hie networks to manage the exchange of health information among providers .

consent2share provides a patient portal where individuals can learn about and manage their consent options .

they can complete and electronically sign consent forms if they wish to permit the disclosure of protected information , whether it is protected under part 2 or applicable state health privacy laws .

using consent2share , patients can indicate the individuals and / or entities with whom they want to share information and select from a list of protected information the specific types of data that are allowed to be disclosed .

prior to the exchange of patient information , consent2share receives a patient's record from an ehr or hie , confirms that the patient has consented to share information with the intended recipient , and applies the patient's consent choices — for example , redacting some or all of the part 2 data unless the patient has consented to its disclosure — before sending the modified record to the recipient .

in 2015 , samhsa launched the otp service continuity pilot ( scp ) project to implement electronic health information exchange among otps in a way that is compliant with part 2 and state law and minimizes disruptions in treatment .

it is critical that individuals receiving behavioral therapy and medications — methadone or buprenorphine — for their opioid addiction at an otp have consistent , uninterrupted access to treatment .

however , otp patients may experience treatment disruptions when natural disasters or other unanticipated events temporarily close the otp and force them to seek treatment at another facility .

patients also may have difficulty maintaining treatment continuity during vacations and business travel , or when they relocate .

samhsa selected arizona health - e connection ( azhec ) , which operates the statewide hie , to run the scp project .

azhec is working with three arizona - based behavioral health organizations , each of which operates otps connected to the hie .

under the scp , azhec has successfully integrated consent2share with the arizona hie .

this enables consent2share to apply patient consent preferences to clinical documents handled by the hie .

each time a patient receives counseling and medication treatment at an otp , the facility records dosing and other treatment information in the patient's electronic medical record and sends an updated clinical summary document to the hie .

if the patient visits a different otp , he or she can log into consent2share and modify the consent settings , giving the facility access to treatment information .

when the facility contacts the hie to request a copy of the patient's clinical summary document , consent2share applies the patient's consent preferences to the document and redacts any data that the requesting provider is not allowed to see .

