the electric power industry is in the process of transformation .

the electricity infrastructure of the united states is aging , and uncertainty exists around how to modernize the electric grid , and what technologies and fuels will be used to produce electricity in the future .

questions about transmission expansion and grid reliability are arising from potential cyber and physical security threats , and continuing interest in harnessing renewable energy and other low carbon sources of electricity .

concerns about reliability and electricity prices are being affected by new environmental regulations , and the rising availability of natural gas for the production of electric power .

the federal power act ( fpa ) has been the primary vehicle that congress has used to modify national policies affecting the u.s. electricity industry .

it will be the most likely vehicle for congress to consider in initiating new policies for the modernization of this industry .

on september 7 , 2016 , the house energy and commerce committee's energy and power subcommittee ( e&p subcommittee ) made efforts to reevaluate the relevance of the fpa in the context of a changing electricity industry , with a hearing on historical perspectives of the act .

some questions from subcommittee members in the hearing were largely focused on wholesale power market concerns , while other questions delved into issues of state vs. federal jurisdiction ( such as state policies viewed as promoting the integration of customer - owned generation into wholesale markets ) .

this report reviews the history of the federal power act , and focuses on current electricity market issues and their connection to the act .

in 1920 , congress enacted the federal water power act ( fwpa ) to provide federal oversight of hydropower development on navigable waters in the united states .

the act created the federal power commission ( fpc ) to regulate the construction and operation of nonfederal hydropower projects .

in subsequent years , many companies began to enter the electric power industry .

large companies began to form and consolidate the industry , as economies of scale began to dominate the production of electric power .

many of these individual companies fell under the organizational control of even larger "holding companies. .

this was likely an effort to evade state regulation because states did not have jurisdiction over interstate transmission or rates charged for electricity , and federal regulations did not exist for such interstate activities .

in 1935 , congress passed the public utility act ( pua ) which sought to end the abuses of market power at that time .

title i of the pua , the public utility holding company act of 1935 ( puhca ; p.l .

74-333 ) , was created to address the lack of oversight over holding companies .

among other actions , puhca gave the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) authority over many holding company transactions , and it limited power industry mergers and acquisitions to contiguous areas .

electricity today is widely viewed as a commodity , and as a commodity , electricity is bought and sold in electricity markets .

electricity can be measured as power ( kilowatts or megawatts ) and energy ( kilowatt - hours or megawatt - hours ) , and these attributes can be traded in electricity markets .

regional transmission organizations ( rtos ) manage electric power systems across the united states by which much of the wholesale electricity is transported .

figure 1 shows a map of rto regions .

in rto regions , electricity utilities were restructured , moving power generation from a rate - regulated to a competitive regime , with transmission of power regulated by ferc , and distribution systems remaining largely under state regulation .

in most regions .

of the country without rtos , vertically integrated companies under state public utility commission ( puc ) regulation provide electricity services .

congress's introduction of competition in the electricity industry eventually led ferc to establish rtos ( as discussed in the following sections ) .

congress has followed the development of electricity markets , and gave ferc additional authority to ensure market transparency with the passage of the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact05 ; p.l .

109-58 ) .

the efficient functioning of rto electricity markets may be an issue for congress to consider in the context of the fpa and ferc's regulatory authority .

in 2009 , rtos managed 60% of the power supplied to load - serving entities ( lses ) .

the history of rto development under ferc is discussed in the sections that follow .

in epact05 , congress established an interagency task force to study competitive markets , since "under competitive markets , prices are expected to guide consumption and investment decisions , leading to more economically efficient investments and lower prices than under traditional cost of service monopoly regulation. .

the supreme court has recently examined the scope and reach of ferc's jurisdiction under the fpa .

in two cases , the court was tasked with reconciling ferc's role in regulating wholesale interstate electricity transactions with state regulatory efforts to address companies and rates under their jurisdiction .

congress may want to consider whether ferc's authority under the fpa is , or is not , adequate to ensure the economic and reliable functioning of electricity markets , without unduly infringing on the authority of states over retail electricity markets , and the ability of lses to economically serve end - use customers .

competitive electricity market services have arisen to provide transaction flexibility , and to manage ( or hedge ) the risks of various transactions .

rto markets have enabled a variety of products and services including derivatives and hedges for market participants , ostensibly to reduce risks from volatile prices .

financial instruments were added to rto markets essentially to increase liquidity .

however , the addition of financial instruments encourages speculation in the electricity markets .

some purchasers of electricity as a commodity do so solely for financial gain .

the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact05 ; p.l .

109-58 ) attempted to address some of the concerns associated with these derivative products and speculative trading by prohibiting "any entity" from using "manipulative or deceptive device or contrivance" in connection with the purchase or sale of natural gas or electric energy ( or the purchase or sale of related transportation or transmission services ) in transactions subject to ferc jurisdiction .

the 2000-2001 western energy crisis showed that electricity markets were ( and are still ) susceptible to market manipulation .

ferc's staff investigation of the western energy crisis concluded that specifically enron ( and several other companies ) had engaged in market manipulation .

ferc views market manipulation as a "significant threat" to energy markets since energy consumers are likely to bear the burden of losses from such activity .

with the passage of epact05 , congress gave ferc new authority to prevent manipulation in natural gas and electricity markets .

additionally , the noncompetitive activity can result in a loss of market transparency or otherwise impair the efficiency of energy markets , and thus ferc seeks to prevent fraud or market manipulation .

ten recent cases ( brought by ferc in the 2012 to 2014 period ) alleging energy market manipulation concluded in settlements with $448 million in civil penalties , and total "disgorgements" ( i.e. , refunds to rate payers ) ordered of $243 million .

the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank , p.l .

111-203 ) was passed largely as a response to the recent u.s. financial crisis .

dodd - frank initiated a number of reforms intended to strengthen oversight of the u.s. financial sector .

dodd - frank addresses issues related to market manipulation from fraud , stating that "specific intent" or "recklessness" would trigger a rules violation .

ferc for its part indicates that its focus is on anticompetitive "conduct that threatens market transparency. .

some observers argue that the electric power industry is in the process of change due to regulatory and market pressures , resulting in industry mergers and acquisitions , and new market entrants .

other changes are being driven by state policies which drive new technologies and practices affecting wholesale markets .

given that the impetus for change is coming from drivers both inside and outside the industry , it is possible that further amendments to the federal power act may be considered .

prior to its september 2016 hearing , the e&p subcommittee sent a letter to the ferc chairman inquiring as to his perspectives on the current and future state of the organized markets , to which the ferc chairman responded with a summary of ferc's efforts "to promote greater efficiency , competition , and transparency in the wholesale markets. .

innovation in electric power led to the development of technologies able to harness renewable resources .

technological development is further enabling customer choice , giving electricity consumers a greater the ability to generate their own electricity , and may potentially lead to a distributed generation future for customers , supported by utility base load generation and infrastructure .

congress began to address the move of the electricity utility industry away from the regulatory compact concept by introducing competitive providers to the electric utility industry with purpa , and reinforced competition as federal policy with epact .

congress may want to consider further amendments to the fpa in this competitive era , to ensure that customer choice can continue to develop as an option as new technologies are developed .

net metering is an enabling regime for customer choice , allowing customers who generate their own electricity ( usually from a renewable source like solar photovoltaic power ) to offset that generated power against power purchased from an electric utility in a billing period .

however , the electric utility industry has raised specific concerns about state programs for net metering , especially in areas with growing penetration of residential solar pv installations .

net metering is one of several "states must consider" standards added to purpa by epact05 .

section 1251 of epact05 directed electric utilities to consider making net metering available as a service to customers wishing to generate at least a portion of their own electricity needs .

most net metering retail customers rely on purpa's mandatory purchase requirement to compel local utilities to purchase their energy , since the fpa does not obligate utilities to purchase energy at wholesale prices .

utilities have expressed concerns that their current investment in power generation infrastructure to serve today's customers may not be fully recovered if growing numbers of these customers opt for distributed generation .

state net metering programs are intended to encourage customers to employ distributed generation by allowing them to reduce their bills based on any power they may generate locally .

the issue is one of cost of net metering programs for electric utilities .

net metering requirements are intended to compensate consumers for specific types of self - generation identified by states , or to promote self - generation .

for electric customers who generate their own electricity , net metering allows for the flow of electricity both to and from the customer — typically through a single , bi - directional meter .

in some states , during times when a customer's generation exceeds the customer's on - site use , electricity from the customer flows back to the grid , offsetting electricity consumed by the customer at a different time .

in other states , the customer is paid for power generated at either the utility's full retail rate or at the utility's avoided cost price .

the full retail rate can be higher than the market price of wholesale electricity: as noted above , the average residential price of electricity ( the average bundled rate ) is currently around 12.5 cents per kwh... .

according to published data as of november 2013 , the market price of energy from grid - connected generators is averaging , in most locations , between 2 and 3 cents per kwh during off - peak periods and between 4 and 5 cents per kwh during on - peak periods .

recent sales of grid - connected renewable energy have been priced near or below 3 cents per kwh .

therefore , net metering allows the owners of distributed generation to effectively sell their energy at prices between two and six times the market price for energy .

on october 23 , 2015 , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) released the final version of regulations to reduce greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions from existing fossil - fueled power plants dubbed the clean power plan ( cpp ) .

under the cpp , states must prepare plans that reduce either total co 2 emissions or emission rates from existing ( mostly coal - fired ) power plants .

some observers have posited situations in which implementation of the cpp could result in situations whereby reliability of the grid could be impacted , as some power plants may possibly be closed or have generation curtailed if they cannot satisfy the requirements of the cpp , and new infrastructure may take several years to build .

however , the trump administration has reportedly indicated its intent to either change or not enforce the cpp .

under section 207 of the fpa , ferc is allowed to act to remedy an instance of insufficient interstate service , upon a complaint by a state utility regulatory commission .

also , under section 202 ( c ) of the fpa , when an emergency exists by reason of a sudden increase in the demand for electric energy , or of a shortage of electric energy , facilities for the generation or transmission of electric energy , or the fuel or water for generating facilities , or other causes , ferc is authorized to temporarily order connections of facilities , and generation , delivery , interchange , or transmission of electricity as determined to best meet the emergency and serve the public interest .

because some generators and rtos serve customers in more than one state , some have had concern over the effectiveness of fpa regulations to ensure the reliable generation and transmission of electricity .

furthermore , the north american electric reliability corporation ( nerc ) has stated that the final cpp rule could result in a transformative shift in resource use , and lead to the need for transmission and gas infrastructure , requiring "additional time beyond currently proposed targets [in the cpp]. .

states will have to coordinate decisions on cpp compliance with other states , power generators , and electric utilities .

fpa section 207 provisions may require formal hearings and determinations , and these may have to be in concert with state utility commission proceedings since ferc has "no authority to compel the enlargement of generating facilities for such purposes , nor to compel the public utility to sell or exchange energy when to do so would impair its ability to render adequate service to its customers. .

congress acted to specifically address conflicts between ferc emergency reliability orders and utility compliance with environmental laws in the "fixing america's surface transportation act" ( fast ; p.l .

114-94 ) .

power plant operators had been concerned that they could be in violation of either an emergency order from ferc or an environmental regulation , if a grid emergency were to arise .

section 61002 of the fast act amended fpa section 202 ( c ) to clarify that an emergency order issued by ferc will override federal , state , and local environmental laws .

epa recognizes that renewable energy and nuclear generating capacity , as sources of lower - or zero - co 2 emission power , can potentially replace more carbon - intensive generation from existing fossil - fueled power plants .

therefore , epa had originally considered including nuclear generation ( from nuclear units under construction ) in the cpp , and considered incentives to help existing nuclear generation that may be at risk of early retirement due to electricity market prices .

but in the final cpp , epa chose not to include generation from units under construction in its "best system of emissions reduction" ( bser ) because such generation does not actually reduce existing levels of co 2 emissions from affected power plants .

epa also chose not to include a bser component in the final cpp for existing nuclear generation .

several nuclear power plants operating in regions with competitive energy markets are threatened with the prospect of closure .

low prices for natural gas have dropped market prices for electricity as more natural gas - fired power plants have been dispatched .

the nuclear plants at risk may not be able to generate power competitively over the long term .

since nuclear power is the largest zero carbon emitting power source in the united states , several proposals have been suggested to provide support or incentives to the plants and protect the jobs and related economic activity they represent .

two proposals with the potential to affect price formation in the electricity markets are discussed below .

in new york , state regulators approved a subsidy for three nuclear plants to establish a credit for a "backwards carbon price - based floor" as part of the state's 50% renewable and nuclear energy goal by 2030 .

the subsidy will be based on the social cost of carbon under new york's zero emissions c redit program: in an effort to keep fitzpatrick and ginna operating , along with exelon's two - unit nine mile point plant next to fitzpatrick , the state of new york public service commission approved a system of zero emission credits ( zecs ) that would provide additional revenue for the four reactors .

the zec program would require exelon to purchase fitzpatrick from entergy and operate all four of the upstate new york reactors through 2029 .

exelon has agreed to the purchase and to keep the four reactors running if the program is implemented as planned .

this zec funding is being provided in the wake of more than 10 years of experience with a market price on carbon in new york state through the regional greenhouse gas initiative ( rggi ) .

given the stated economics of the fitzpatrick and ginna plants , this price advantage under the market price set through rggi ( approximately $5 / ton of carbon dioxide or $2.70 per mwh ) for low - carbon power units has not been sufficient to make these plants profitable .

however , such state programs to recognize the carbon - free aspect of nuclear power must be structured to avoid the constraints of the federal / state jurisdictional divide highlighted by hughes v. talen energy mktg , llc , discussed above .

other proposals to maintain at - risk nuclear power plants consider capacity market reforms to recognize the carbon - free or reliability aspects of these plants .

for example , the pjm rto has restructured its capacity market to ensure that generators perform and are available when needed .

this restructuring benefits nuclear power plants .

generators must meet performance obligations or be faced with penalties .

conversely , pricing incentives have also been instituted to ensure that generating resources deliver power when required .

however , such incentives may raise energy costs .

[pjm] expects the changes to raise capacity costs by $5 billion a year in 2018 / 19 but to reduce energy costs $2.4 billion a year by increasing supply during peak periods .

this works out to about 0.2 [cents per kilowatt - hour ( cents / kwh ) ] or $2 to $3 per month per household.... others think the effect could be much greater .

former illinois power agency director mark pruitt thinks the capacity performance reforms could raise capacity prices to $272 / mw - day , 118% higher than today's prices .

in an analysis for crain's chicago business , pruitt estimated the changes "will funnel more than $560 million in additional revenue [in 2020] to five of exelon's six illinois nuclear stations. .

 ( note that this sort of capacity market change is what exelon has been saying it needs to keep its nuclear units economic. ) .

energy prices paid by comed customers would climb 1.4 cents / kwh , or 19% , from today's 7.4 cents / kwh , he thinks .

ubs market analyst julien dumoulin - smith sees a similar impact , with capacity prices rising from $120 / mw - day in the most recent auction ( for delivery in 2017 / 18 ) to $204 / mw - day the following year .

some are concerned that such "out - of - market" constructs may distort price signals and lead to an unsustainable future , with subsidies propping up uneconomic generation .

the subsidies , regardless of oft - mentioned environmental or reliability goals , could potentially discourage investment and innovation in electricity markets .

the u.s. bulk electric power system has mandatory and enforceable standards for cybersecurity .

epact05 gave ferc authority over the reliability of the grid , with the power to approve mandatory cybersecurity standards proposed by the electric reliability organization ( ero ) .

currently , nerc serves as the ero .

nerc therefore proposes reliability standards for critical infrastructure protection , which are updated considering the status of reliability and cybersecurity concerns for the grid .

ferc has authority over wholesale power sales and the transmission of electricity in interstate commerce , while states have authority over retail sales by electric distribution systems .

ferc acknowledged that epact05 excluded local distribution systems from its reliability mandate under section 215 of the federal power act , because they are not part of the bulk power system .

ferc views grid security as a high priority .

the commission has established the office of energy infrastructure security ( oeis ) to deal with cyber and physical security .

oeis has a mission to provide expertise to the commission to "identify , communicate and seek comprehensive solutions to potential risks to ferc - jurisdictional facilities from cyberattacks and such physical threats as electromagnetic pulses. .

however , ferc still asserts that it does not have the authority to act quickly in the event of a major cyber event .

in january 2017 , the department of energy ( doe ) issued its quadrennial energy review ( qer ) report focusing in the electricity grid , including grid security as one issue .

doe discussed the fpa's statutory basis for the separate roles of nerc in proposing mandatory and enforceable standards for cyber and physical security and ferc's approval or rejection of such standards , finding that the resulting federal oversight might be inadequate in a national emergency .

in the qer , doe made several recommendations to address u.s. grid security concerns , chief of which was to amend the fpa giving more authority to both doe and ferc to act in such an emergency: amend federal power act authorities to reflect the national security importance of the nation's electric grid .

grid security is a national security concern — the clear and exclusive purview of the federal government .

the federal power act , as amended by the fast act [p.l .

114-94] , should be further amended by congress to clarify and affirm the department of energy's ( doe's ) authority to develop preparation and response capabilities that will ensure it is able to issue a grid - security emergency order to protect critical electric infrastructure from cyber attacks , physical incidents , emps , or geomagnetic storms .

in this regard , federal authorities should include the ability to address two - way flows that create vulnerabilities across the entire system .

doe should be supported in its development of exercises and its facilitation of the penetration testing necessary to fulfill fast act emergency authorities .

in the area of cybersecurity , congress should provide ferc with authority to modify nerc - proposed reliability standards — or to promulgate new standards directly — if it finds that expeditious action is needed to protect national security in the face of fast - developing new threats to the grid .

this narrow expansion of ferc's authority would complement doe's national security authorities related to grid - security emergencies affecting critical electric infrastructure and defense - critical electricity infrastructure .

this approach would maintain the productive nerc - ferc structure for developing and enforcing reliability standards , but would ensure that the federal government could act directly if necessary to address national security issues .

the federal power act has been amended by congress numerous times to reflect changes in technology , industry circumstance and practices , and federal policies .

former ferc chairman norman bay has stated his opinion that the fpa "is flexible and thus well - suited to respond to changing circumstances and [the responses herein show] how the commission continually assesses its markets to ensure that they can adapt to the challenges presented by changes happening in the energy space. .

this report discussed several policy issues and technical challenges in the electric power industry , with a focus on electricity markets .

ferc continues to refine its approach to these and other wholesale electricity market issues .

but the emergence and of new technologies and energy conservation schemes will likely bring new pressures to change how the electricity industry operates .

as electricity markets continue to evolve , congress may examine whether changes to the fpa are necessary to ensure the economic and reliable operation of the u.s. electricity markets .

