a ccording to press reports , the trump administration may reestablish the national space council , a coordinating body in the executive office of the president that was last active in 1993 .

this report summarizes the history and statutory status of the national space council , its predecessor the national aeronautics and space council , and other white house bodies that have been responsible for coordinating space policy .

it then discusses previous proposals to reestablish the national space council and identifies some issues for congressional consideration .

the national space council was authorized in november 1988 , near the end of the reagan administration , by section 501 of the national aeronautics and space administration authorization act , fiscal year 1989 ( p.l .

100-685 ) .

the newly established council came into being in february 1989 , shortly after the inauguration of president george h.w .

bush .

in april 1989 , president bush issued an executive order establishing the council "in order to provide a coordinated process for developing a national space policy and strategy and for monitoring its implementation. .

the executive order stated that the council would be chaired by the vice president ( dan quayle ) and would include the secretaries of state , treasury , defense , commerce , and transportation , the director of the office of management and budget , the president's chief of staff , the assistant to the president for national security affairs , the assistant to the president for science and technology , the director of central intelligence , and the administrator of the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) .

the following year , congress passed three acts affecting the operation of the council .

the national space council authorization act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-328 ) made several provisions regarding staff and funding and requested a review of u.s. space launch policy .

section 104 of the global change research act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-606 ) directed that certain aspects of the national global change research plan shall be developed "in consultation when appropriate with the national space council. .

section 121 of the national aeronautics and space administration authorization act , fiscal year 1991 ( p.l .

101-611 ) directed the council to establish a users' advisory group of "non - federal representatives of industries and other persons involved in aeronautical and space activities. .

it is unclear whether the users' advisory group was ever established , but the april 1989 executive order had provided for the council to have an advisory committee , the space policy advisory board , consisting of private citizens appointed by the vice president .

the space policy advisory board was activated in mid - 1992 and issued three policy reports later that year: the future of u.s. space launch capability , the future of the u.s. space industrial base , and a post cold war assessment of u.s. space policy .

the national space council and the space policy advisory board ceased to operate soon after president clinton took office in january 1993 .

some observers view the national space council as a recreation of the national aeronautics and space council ( nasc ) , which was established decades earlier by the national aeronautics and space act of 1958 , the same act that established nasa .

the nasc's statutory function was to advise the president on the interagency coordination of aeronautics and space activities , including "effective cooperation between the national aeronautics and space administration and the department of defense. .

the nasc was initially chaired by the president .

it was a smaller group than its successor , the national space council .

its membership initially consisted of the secretaries of state and defense , the administrator of nasa , the chairman of the atomic energy commission , not more than one additional federal official , and not more than three members from the private sector .

president eisenhower did not use the nasc extensively , and in 1960 he recommended the nasc's abolition , having rejected the idea of "a single program embracing military as well as non - military space activities" because "in actual practice , a single civil - military program does not exist and in fact is unattainable. .

incoming president kennedy , however , retained the nasc under the chairmanship of the vice president ( lyndon johnson ) and without nonfederal members .

these membership changes were authorized by congress in p.l .

87-26 , which also amended the council's statutory function to be "to advise and assist the president , as he may request " ( emphasis added ) , on topics that included "effective cooperation among all departments and agencies" rather than just nasa and the department of defense .

in 1961 , following the soviet union's launch of the first human into space , the council prepared an influential memorandum calling for an acceleration of u.s. space efforts and the establishment of a manned lunar landing as a national goal .

after this , however , "the council never again was the primary source of space policy advice to the president , who relied on those with whom he had a personal relationship ... for counsel on space matters. .

by 1969 , when president nixon took office , the nasc was without a dedicated staff .

a review of the national space program was assigned instead to a space task group supported by the white house office of science and technology .

the nasc was disbanded in 1973 as part of a government - wide reorganization .

between the nasc era and the establishment of the national space council , and during the period since the national space council ceased operation , several other coordinating bodies within the executive office of the president have had space policy responsibilities .

chief among these are the office of science and technology policy , the national security council , and the national science and technology council .

proposals to reestablish the national space council began not long after the council was disbanded in 1993 .

for example , in march 1994 , the house committee on science , space , and technology marked up the national science and technology policy , organization , and priorities act of 1994 ( h.r .

3476 , 103 rd congress ) .

it voted to delete a provision in the introduced bill that would have repealed the council's statutory authority .

the committee's report ( h.rept .

103-473 ) explained as follows: the committee believes that the council has been an effective mechanism for providing interagency coordination on space policy and that it should be preserved .

the committee has preserved the authority for the national space council and urges the president to restore the council as a coordinating agency on space policy within the executive office of the president .

in 1999 , congress established a commission to assess united states national security space management and organization , known as the rumsfeld commission .

some space advocates hoped that the rumsfeld commission would recommend reactivation of the national space council .

instead , its january 2001 report recommended a return to the sig - space model used in the reagan administration , together with the creation of a presidential space advisory group of high - level outside advisors ( possibly similar to the vice president's space policy advisory board associated with the national space council ) .

the rumsfeld commission report did not explain why it rejected the national space council model in favor of sig - space .

some members of the commission reportedly thought that the national space council had been overly bureaucratic .

in 2006 , congress directed the department of defense to establish another commission , known as the allard commission , to conduct "an independent review and assessment of the organization and management of the department of defense for national security in space. .

one of the allard commission's recommendations , published in 2008 , was to reestablish the national space council under the chairmanship of the president's national security advisor ( formally known as the assistant to the president for national security affairs ) .

the stated purpose of reestablishing the council was to implement and coordinate a national space strategy across the department of defense , the intelligence community , the national oceanographic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) , nasa , and other responsible agencies .

according to the commission's report , the resuscitated council would provide "a standing forum for assigning responsibilities , setting priorities , and breaking the roadblocks to cooperation that have stymied progress on key space programs. .

the report did not explicitly state why the council should be chaired by the national security advisor rather than the vice president .

one subsequent analysis argued that this change would "unambiguously signal an attempt to move space policy closer to the inner circle of presidential advisors and to someone with a strong position in the security communities .

until that happens , space issues will be considered as subsets of multiple other policy areas , rising to , falling from , and most often never reaching beyond the level of bureaucratic , staff importance. .

the national aeronautics and space administration authorization act of 2008 ( s. 3270 , 110 th congress ) was introduced in the same month as the publication of the allard commission report .

it would have expressed the sense of congress that "the president should appoint members to the national space council in accordance with" the existing statutory authority .

the enacted version of this bill ( h.r .

6063 , p.l .

110-422 ) had less prescriptive language: it is the sense of congress that the president should elevate the importance of space and aeronautics within the executive office of the president by organizing the interagency focus on space and aeronautics matters in as effective a manner as possible , such as by means of the national space council authorized by [the existing statutory authority] or other appropriate mechanisms .

as a candidate in 2008 , president obama also supported the reestablishment of the national space council .

his science advisor , john holdren , testified in february 2009 that "the president remains committed to that pledge ... we are in discussion about the best way to do it , but i have no doubt that it is going to happen. .

in the end , however , the obama administration did not reestablish the council .

the administration's 2010 national space policy simply stated that "departments and agencies shall improve their partnerships through cooperation , collaboration , information sharing , and / or alignment of common pursuits. .

according to the website of the department of commerce , the space ipc met the intent of the national space council proposal: during his presidential campaign , president obama pledged to establish a national space council in some form .

the purpose , as described by president obama , was to oversee and coordinate commercial , civilian , and national security space activities .

in practice , the administration found that a strengthened interagency process , led by the national security council and the office of science and technology policy , met the intent of president obama's promise and achieved the goals he described during his campaign .

the 2010 national space policy is a manifestation of the interagency coordination through the space ipc .

many observers expect the trump administration to reestablish the national space council .

the executive secretary of the national space council in the george h.w .

bush administration , mark j. albrecht , is a member of the trump transition team .

in october 2016 , a widely cited op - ed by authors described as senior policy advisors to the trump campaign stated as follows: despite its importance in our economic and security calculations , space policy is uncoordinated within the federal government .

a trump administration would end the lack of proper coordination by reinstituting a national space policy council headed by the vice president .

the mission of this council would be to assure that each space sector is playing its proper role in advancing u.s. interests .

key goals would be to ... lower costs through greater efficiencies .

as just one example , a trump administration will insist that space products developed for one sector , but applicable to another , be fully shared .

because the original statutory authority for the national space council remains in effect , congressional action would not be necessary for its reestablishment .

congress could choose to play a role , however , either by amending the existing authority or by conducting oversight .

among the topics congress might wish to consider are the goals of the council ; who would chair it ; whether it should have an advisory committee ; and whether any aspects of the existing statutory authority require changes .

interagency coordination is a persistent challenge for the federal government in many areas .

an analysis by the government accountability office in 2012 identified at least 12 different mechanisms the federal government has used to address this challenge .

it seems likely that no single approach is best for every circumstance .

in the case of space policy , the national space council and its predecessor , the national aeronautics and space council , were sometimes seen as effective and sometimes not .

if the national space council is reestablished in the trump administration , its effectiveness may depend not only on the details of its statutory mandate , but also on its leadership and staff and their relationships with the president , the leaders of executive departments and agencies , and stakeholders in congress .

