article i , section 8 of the constitution charges congress to "raise and support armies. .

on an annual basis , congress authorizes and appropriates funds for the army to , among other things , modernize its fleet of ground combat systems .

as part of this process , congressional defense committees annually hold dedicated hearings on the army's budget request for the upcoming fiscal year and a hearing specifically on army modernization .

congressional defense committees also , on occasion , hold hearings on specific army ground combat systems .

many nations maintain armies whose ultimate responsibility is to defeat other nations' combat formations on the battlefield .

in order to accomplish this , nations indigenously develop , maintain , and improve a variety of ground combat systems or purchase them from other nations .

ground combat system development and improvement is informed by existing and emerging technologies and budgets as well as observations from current land conflicts .

as this process is also intended to address potential future battlefield threats , beliefs as to what the future combat operational environment will look like , as well as what future technologies might be available for military use , also influence a nation's developmental efforts .

this process , broadly referred to as "modernization," varies from nation to nation based on a variety of factors , including available financial resources and a nation's technological and defense industrial aptitude .

the u.s. army's current fleet of main battle tanks ( mbts ) , tracked infantry fighting vehicles ( ifvs ) , tracked self - propelled ( sp ) artillery , and multiple launch rocket systems ( mlrs ) , the nucleus of the army's armored ground forces , was developed in the 1970s and fielded in the 1980s to counter the soviet union's and warsaw pact's numerically superior ground forces .

the combat performance of these systems against iraqi forces operation desert storm in 1991 reaffirmed for many the role these systems would play in future army ground operations .

efforts to modernize these systems , however , did not enjoy the same level of success as did their 1991 combat performance .

in 2002 the secretary of defense cancelled the $11 billion crusader sp artillery system largely due to its excessive weight and cost .

in 2009 the secretary of defense cancelled the $160 billion future combat system ( fcs ) program , intended to develop replacements for the m - 1 abrams tank , the m - 2 bradley ifv , and the m - 109a6 paladin sp artillery system , due to unrealistic technology expectations and cost .

a spin off modernization effort to replace the m - 2 bradley , the ground combat vehicle ( gcv ) , was cancelled in 2014 due to affordability concerns .

in light of these and other program cancellations , the 2011 decker – wagner army acquisition review found that since 1996 , the army had spent over $1 billion a year on programs that were ultimately canceled and since 2004 , that amount had increased to between $3.3 billion and $3.8 billion dollars a year .

this amount represented 35 to 42 percent of the army's research , development , testing and evaluation ( rdt&e ) budget .

this report , commissioned by army leadership , further served to erode confidence among some policymakers that the army could successfully modernize its major combat systems .

this perception , along with significant budgetary restrictions , has created a dilemma for the army .

army leadership notes for the first time since world war i , that the army does not have a new ground combat vehicle under development and "at current funding levels , the bradley and abrams will remain in the inventory for 50 to 70 more years. .

regarding armored vehicle development , the army suggests "our enemies , and even our friends and allies , have not remained static and , in fact , even our allies are modernizing to such an extent that they have outpaced us in some areas," raising the possibility that in the not - too - distant future , foreign armored vehicle design and capabilities could surpass existing u.s. systems .

the army's effort to replace the abrams and bradley , referred to as the next generation combat vehicle ( ngcv ) , is reportedly anticipated to be: a multi - decade effort that will require completing the majority of the work prior to 2025 because it's going to take 10 years for industry to actually build and field what we want for the first unit equipped in 2035 .

tied in with the initiative will be four years of analysis and a focused science and technology effort .

this approach suggests that for almost the next two decades , the army will continue to rely on legacy upgraded cold war ground combat systems .

in the meantime , other nations could potentially develop and field multiple iterations of new advanced ground combat systems while a number of factors , including limited funding and the constraints of the u.s. defense acquisition process precludes similar u.s. developmental efforts .

one defense expert characterizes the u.s. defense acquisition process as consisting of a ponderous requirements definition process , ill - informed by knowledge resident in the defense industrial community , engage in an excessively drawn out series of competitions and then pursue a painfully laborious major program that might produce half of what is needed in twice the time and at higher costs .

this situation is further exacerbated by what some consider a less than well - defined vision for the ngvc: that's not to say that the next - generation combat vehicle might be an infantry fighting vehicle .

but it could also be a single combat vehicle that replaces the abrams [and] the bradley.... we don't know yet , with another option creating a family of vehicles very similar to the original future combat system program .

while it may not be realistic to have definitive design criteria for a vehicle to be fielded in 2035 established now , a clearer sense of direction is viewed by some as necessary — sooner as opposed to later — to facilitate not only program success but also to instill a sense of confidence in policymakers that the army can successfully execute ground combat vehicle replacement programs .

in recognition that both potential enemies and allies are modernizing their ground combat systems , the following figures compare selected tanks , ifvs , tracked sp artillery systems , and mlrs using a number of standard capabilities applied across the systems .

comparison of these representative ground combat systems is illustrative only .

detailed technical military analysis of these systems and assessments of their relative effectiveness in combat is classified and beyond the scope of this report .

 ( see the appendix for terms and abbreviations used in the figures. ) .

the following sections provide general observations based on a comparison of the aforementioned systems .

it is not intended to be a definitive technical evaluation of these systems but instead provide context for current and future policy - related discussions .

as previously discussed , observations from current conflicts as well as beliefs as to what future conflicts might look like inform the military modernization process .

these observations and beliefs are used to help determine what types of improvements should be made to existing ground combat systems in terms of lethality , survivability , mobility , and maintainability .

they may also prompt a conclusion that an entirely new combat system will be required to address current and potential future threats .

the state of international ground combat vehicle modernization , lessons from recent and ongoing conflicts , and predictions of what the future operating environment holds in store for combatants suggests a number of possible implications for army modernization efforts .

these possible implications are discussed first at the general and then at the system level .

during a january 12 , 2017 , talk at the association of the u.s. army , army chief of staff general mark milley reportedly noted while readiness will continue to be the service's top priority in 2017 , the army will mount a "major effort" this year to modernize the force .

in this regard , without speculating on the army's future budget , he stated the army had developed a "priorities list" which he intends to share in the near future with congress and the public .

while air defense , ground mobility for light infantry units , and aviation survivability are known modernization priorities , it remains to be seen how the army will approach the modernization and possible eventual replacement of major ground combat systems .

as allies and potential protagonists upgrade and replace their ground combat systems to meet current and projected battlefield threats and tactics , army modernization of ground combat systems , which have served the nation well for decades , may take on an added degree of importance .

active protection system ( aps ) : subsystems integrated into or installed on a combat vehicle to automatically acquire , track , and respond with hard or soft kill capabilities to a variety of threats including rocket - propelled grenades ( rpgs ) and anti - tank guided missiles ( atgms ) .

anti - tank ( at ) : a projectile designed to penetrate armor on a vehicle .

anti - tank guided missile ( atgm ) : a missile guided by wire , optics , or laser which is fired from a vehicle , aerial platform , or by ground troops designed to penetrate armor on a vehicle .

dual - purpose improved conventional munitions ( dpicm ) : dual - purpose improved conventional munitions are base - ejection , payload - carrying artillery rounds or surface to surface missiles .

these projectiles are filled with submunitions .

during flight , the base of the projectile is blown off and centrifugal force disperses submunitions at an optimum altitude and distance from the desired target for area coverage .

there are both anti - armor and antipersonnel submunitions with some types designed for delayed action or to impede mobility ( mines ) .

the air - to - surface variety of this kind of munition is better known as a cluster bomb .

dpicms are generally considered cluster munitions .

explosive reactive armor ( era ) : era typically consists of a layer of high explosive between two metallic armor plates .

when a penetrating weapon strikes the armor , the explosive detonates in order to damage the penetrator .

fire control system ( fcs ) : a fire control system is essentially the "brain" of the weapon system , orchestrating the sighting by means of a variety of sensors , in order to facilitate accurate aiming of weapons .

forward looking infrared radar ( flir ) : forward looking infrared radar consists of forward - looking infrared cameras and other thermal imaging devices that detect infrared radiation , typically emitted from a heat source ( thermal radiation ) .

these sensors create a "picture" or video depiction of an object .

flir can be can be used to help drivers navigate vehicles at night , in fog , snow , or in other low visibility conditions as well as to aim the vehicle's weapon systems .

high explosive ( he ) : explosives that typically detonate at the speed of sound and are primarily used for military applications .

heavy machine gun ( hmg ) : large caliber machine guns generally .50 caliber or greater .

gmlrs: guided mlrs unitary rocket ( note: unitary munitions do not contain submuntions ) .

nbc: nuclear , biological , and chemical ( refers to chemical , biological , and nuclear weapons ) .

rpgs: rocket propelled grenades ( anti - personal and anti - vehicle grenades fired from the shoulder by a single soldier ) .

tacms: tactical missile systems ( a ground to ground missile employed by u.s. mlrs systems ; also referred to as atacms or army tactical missile systems ) .

tow: tube - launched , optically tracked , wire - guided anti - tank missile developed and used by the u.s. military .

uas: unmanned aerial system ( also referred to as drones or unmanned aerial vehicles ( uavs ) ) .

