recent and planned nuclear reactor closures have raised questions about the future of nuclear power in the united states and its potential contribution to the u.s. electricity mix .

the nuclear power industry and its supporters have proposed that congress take action to prevent the shutdown of currently operating u.s. reactors before the expiration of their operating license .

supporters contend that nuclear power should be valued as a domestic source of highly reliable , low - carbon electricity .

however , opponents contend that nuclear power suffers from too many drawbacks ( eg , safety risks ) and that federal incentives should focus instead on renewable energy and efficiency .

there are currently 60 operating nuclear power plants in the united states comprising 99 reactors and representing 99,316 megawatts of generating capacity — nearly 10% of existing utility - scale generating capacity , and approximately 20% of total power generation .

generally , u.s. nuclear plants are located in one of two market types: ( 1 ) competitive — where the value of electricity fluctuates based on supply - side price offers that are generally a function of fuel ( eg , natural gas ) costs and demand - side price bids , and ( 2 ) cost - of - service — where the value of electricity is set at a rate based on regulator - approved costs , operating expenses , and a reasonable investment return .

some nuclear plants located in competitive power markets are subject to full or partial rate regulation , which reduces financial risk associated with fluctuating electricity prices .

access to competitive wholesale power market prices can result in regulatory bodies deciding that early nuclear plant retirement is in the best interest of rate payers based on projected electricity prices .

other plants located in competitive power markets operate on a "merchant" basis , where electricity prices and revenues are subject to commodity price fluctuations and supply / demand dynamics .

merchant nuclear power plants are the focus of this report .

competitive power markets are managed by either a regional transmission organization ( rto ) or an independent system operator ( iso ) , which operates electricity and capacity markets that determine revenues for nuclear , and other , power generators .

unlike cost - of - service market areas — where generators have electricity price rates that are approved and periodically revised by a state utility commission — competitive power markets are subject to electricity price volatility that results from supply and demand fundamentals as well as fuel ( eg , natural gas and coal ) costs for the marginal price - setting generators .

while generators operating in cost - of - service market areas are not immune to fuel competition , to date nuclear power plants that have announced early closure or have been identified by financial consultants and ratings agencies as "at - risk" of closure are located in competitive market areas .

u.s. nuclear power plants operating in competitive power markets are in an era of challenging economic conditions — increasing operating costs and low wholesale power prices in some locations — that create uncertainty regarding the future of some plants .

six reactors have permanently shut down during the past five years ; 10 reactors — at eight plant sites — have announced , since 2010 , their intent to close — nine in the past two years ( see figure 1 ) ; and 10 have been identified by consultants and ratings agencies as "at - risk" of closing prior to the expiration of their operating licenses .

in total , these plants represent 22,078 gigawatts of generating capacity , which is roughly 20% of the current nuclear power fleet .

of the 10 power reactors that have announced their intent to close , some operate under full or partial rate regulation — they receive a set price for electricity sales — and some operate solely as merchant power plants — they are subject to the price dynamics of competitive power markets .

however , the one common link among the reactors that have announced their intent to close is that they are located in competitive power markets ( figure 1 ) .

because they are subject to wholesale power price dynamics , merchant generators operating in competitive power markets are the focus of the economic discussion included in this report .

this report provides background on the evolution of nuclear power in the united states , discusses recent and announced plant closures , explains the economic conditions creating financial challenges for merchant nuclear power plants , and presents policy considerations associated with the future of existing nuclear power plants .

commercial - scale nuclear power generation in the united states was inaugurated in 1957 by the startup of the shippingport reactor in western pennsylvania .

built by the u.s. atomic energy commission ( aec ) and operated by duquesne light company , the relatively small ( 60 megawatt ) power plant was not considered economically viable .

however , shippingport paved the way for additional demonstration reactors that were rapidly scaled up in generating capacity to provide a viable alternative to power plants fired by fossil fuels .

harnessing the tremendous energy potential of nuclear fission had been a major federal goal since the development of nuclear weapons during world war ii .

post - war policymakers widely anticipated that nuclear power plants could generate much or most of the power that would be needed to satisfy the nation's rapidly escalating demand for electricity , particularly if plutonium and uranium from spent nuclear fuel were recycled for use in advanced fast - neutron reactors .

it was also hoped that the widespread adoption of nuclear power would mitigate volatile and rising fossil fuel prices , growing dependence on foreign oil , and air pollution .

the legal framework for the u.s. nuclear power industry was established by the atomic energy act of 1954 ( aea ) , which authorized the private sector to own and operate nuclear facilities under aec licensing .

to encourage private - sector adoption of the new and potentially hazardous technology , congress enacted the price - anderson act as an amendment to the aea in 1957 , establishing a special public liability system for reactor operators and suppliers .

shippingport and other small , early commercial nuclear plants were constructed with subsidies under the aec's power reactor demonstration program .

beginning in 1963 , reactor suppliers began selling substantially larger units — around 500 megawatts and above — on a "turnkey" basis to electric utilities .

by 1965 , plants as large as 1,100 megawatts were being ordered by utilities under a non - turnkey basis , with contract terms similar to those of non - nuclear power plants .

rising coal prices and the apparently improved economics of larger reactors prompted electric utilities to order 20 new nuclear units in 1966 and 31 in 1967 — only a decade after the startup of shippingport .

reactor orders continued at a strong pace through 1971 and then jumped to 38 in 1972 and 41 in 1973 .

however , the wave of reactor orders then receded as dramatically as it had begun .

surging energy prices resulting from the arab oil embargo in 1973-1974 dramatically slowed the growth of u.s. electricity demand , and it became apparent that electric utilities had ordered too much generating capacity of all types .

in addition , nuclear power plant construction costs were sharply escalating , interest rates were rising , and greater safety expenditures were required after the 1979 core - melt accident at three mile island 2 .

all reactors ordered from 1974 through 1978 were subsequently canceled , and no further reactor orders were placed in the united states until 2008 , when contracts were signed for four new units now being built in georgia and south carolina .

most of the reactors ordered from 1971 through 1973 were also canceled , for a total of 126 cancellations .

in addition to the cancellations , the lower - than - expected growth in electricity demand led electric utilities to slow the construction of many reactors that had not been canceled , stretching their completion into the 1980s and 1990s , and to 2016 in the case of one reactor , watts bar 2 .

of the 256 reactor orders placed through the 1970s , 134 reactors , including the early aec demonstration plants , ultimately were completed and placed into service .

throughout the history of the u.s. nuclear power program , reactors have permanently shut down for a variety of reasons .

many of the small , early aec reactors were not necessarily expected to operate for a long time , and nine of them had been permanently closed by the late 1970s .

three mile island 2 , a nearly new reactor , closed in 1979 after its accident .

four reactors were permanently closed during the 1980s , including the shoreham plant on long island , ny , which had never begun full - power operation .

during the 1990s , 10 reactors shut down , including the large , two - unit zion plant in illinois .

rising natural gas prices in the early 2000s significantly improved the economics of nuclear power , because they made gas - fired electric generation more expensive while nuclear generation costs remained comparatively low ( discussed in detail later in this report ) .

existing reactors were no longer being closed , and the first u.s. license applications for new reactors since 1978 were filed with the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc , the regulatory successor to the aec ) beginning in 2007 .

however , gas prices fell sharply after 2009 and have remained low , primarily because of strong production of domestic shale gas .

six reactors have permanently shut down since the beginning of 2013 , and additional closures have been announced .

the current economic situation has clouded the outlook for new u.s. reactors .

nrc has issued construction and operating licenses to seven new reactors and is currently considering applications for seven more .

however , except for the four units in georgia and south carolina that are now under construction , no commitments have been made to build any others .

as shown in table 1 , of the 134 commercial reactors that have started operating since the beginning of the u.s. nuclear power program , 35 have permanently closed , leaving 99 currently operating and 4 under construction .

the 99 operating u.s. commercial power reactors are located in 30 states at 60 plant sites .

nuclear power plants annually provide about 20% of total u.s. electricity generation , most recently 19.5% in 2015 .

nuclear power accounted for 61.6% of u.s. "zero carbon" electricity generation in 2015 .

under the atomic energy act , nuclear power reactors are licensed to operate for 40 years and are eligible for 20-year license renewals thereafter .

because about half of u.s. reactors started operating in the 1970s or earlier , the licenses of much of the reactor fleet would have expired by now without renewal .

as of july 2016 , according to nrc , 80 of the 99 currently operating reactors have received 20-year license renewals , and 12 additional renewal applications are under review .

the 20-year renewals , allowing 60 years of operation , would extend the licenses of most current reactors through the 2030s and of almost all the remainder through the 2040s .

further 20-year renewals are also possible under the aea , extending plant lives to 80 years or longer .

after experiencing no commercial reactor closures during the first decade of the 21 st century , the u.s. nuclear power industry has seen six reactors retire during the past five years , with at least 19 more considered to be at risk of closure by their owners or major credit rating agencies ( see table 2 ) .

however , new york and illinois have recently taken action to keep seven of the at - risk reactors operating .

these actual , announced , and potential nuclear plant shutdowns fall into several broad and sometimes overlapping categories .

the fundamental problem for most of the at - risk plants is that their revenues depend almost entirely on regional wholesale electricity markets , where prices have been insufficient to cover their costs .

some plants , such as quad cities , have relatively low operating and maintenance costs , but still cannot bring in sufficient revenue in their regional markets , because of a combination of oversupply , transmission congestion , and other local factors .

several single - unit nuclear plants , which generally have higher costs per megawatt - hour , are having trouble competing even in markets with relatively high power prices .

for example , the pilgrim plant in the new england market is reportedly receiving revenues that are insufficient to cover fuel , operating and maintenance , and capital expenditures , as discussed below .

the chronic inability to cover costs during routine operations is not the only source of nuclear plant retirement risk: marginally economic plants can be vulnerable to closure because of major repairs , capital expenditures , prolonged shutdowns , and other non - routine events .

merchant plants may be especially vulnerable , but such occurrences can even prompt the retirement of rate - regulated plants , as seen at san onofre and crystal river .

non - revenue factors , such as concerns about seismic safety at diablo canyon , can also contribute to nuclear plant closures .

at the most basic level , existing nuclear power plants need to generate revenues from electricity sales , capacity markets ( where available ) , and other potential sources that exceed the average total cost ( atc ) — fuel , capital , and operating — of producing electricity in order to economically justify continuing operations .

generally , prices for wholesale electricity — the largest source of revenue for merchant nuclear power plants participating in competitive markets — have decreased in recent years while nuclear generation atcs have increased .

as a result , the financial condition of some u.s. nuclear power plants has been stressed and in some cases atcs have exceeded revenues , resulting in actual and planned closures .

however , the degree of financial pressure across the nuclear fleet is not uniform .

each power plant is subject to a unique mix of market and cost variables , including ( 1 ) plant site and locational pricing , ( 2 ) the regional transmission organization ( rto ) market , ( 3 ) non - electricity revenue sources ( eg , capacity payments ) , ( 4 ) plant size , ( 5 ) transmission constraints , ( 6 ) generation mix within the transmission area , and ( 7 ) the marginal cost of electricity from price - setting fuels ( eg , coal and natural gas ) .

a limited plant - level assessment of electricity revenues and fuel and operations and maintenance ( o&m ) costs is included in this report ( see the appendix ) .

however , a detailed plant - by - plant financial analysis that includes all revenue and cost variables is beyond the scope of this report , as are the economics and levelized cost of electricity ( lcoe ) considerations associated with constructing new nuclear plants .

the following sections provide an overview of concepts and trends that impact the financial and economic conditions considered by existing u.s. nuclear power plants .

the increasing number of recent nuclear power plant closures and announced early retirements has motivated discussion about whether the federal government should provide financial support mechanisms for existing nuclear power facilities .

the nuclear industry and its supporters contend that such support is in the national interest because nuclear power plants provide large amounts of highly reliable , low - carbon electricity .

however , opponents contend that nuclear power suffers from too many drawbacks ( such as accident risk and waste management problems ) and that federal incentives should focus instead on renewable energy and efficiency .

furthermore , federal financial incentives for existing nuclear power would likely be opposed by owners of other generating assets that could potentially benefit financially as a result of early nuclear plant retirements .

nevertheless , if federal support for nuclear power were pursued , congress would have a variety of options to consider , each with its own set of policy questions .

one challenge associated with federal - level nuclear incentives is that financial conditions across the entire fleet are not uniform .

each nuclear power facility is subject to a unique set of cost , price , and financial performance variables .

to date , much of the policy action has taken place at the state level , with several states considering , passing , or implementing legislation / regulations to support nuclear power ( see text box below , state - l evel policy action to support existing nuclear power plants ) .

secretary of energy ernest moniz has reportedly indicated that the federal government has limited existing authority to provide financial support for operating nuclear power plants and that doing so is currently a state issue .

a recent report by the secretary of energy advisory board task force on the future of nuclear power included this recommendation for the department of energy ( doe ) : for existing nuclear plants , the task force endorses doe's efforts to work with the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) , state regulatory authorities , and regional and independent system operators to encourage arrangements that will preserve the u.s. fleet until the end of their useful life , subject to continued compliance with prevailing safety and environmental regulations .

the task force believes this is essential if u.s. carbon goals are to be achieved .

a range of policy options are available to congress , should it choose to act , that could potentially provide some degree of financial support for operating u.s. nuclear power plants .

some of these potential options are discussed in the following sections .

in march 2015 the nuclear energy institute ( nei ) , along with other industry groups , announced a joint effort to pursue market and price reforms in competitive electric power markets .

the groups sent a letter to the federal energy regulatory commission outlining a set of principles for price formation reforms .

generally , the primary market reform argument is that clearing prices do not include all costs ( eg , start - up and uplift ) associated with operating an electric power system .

as a result , lmps may be lower than they otherwise would be if all costs were included .

ferc has an ongoing energy price formation initiative to evaluate electricity price formation in rto and iso markets .

in june 2016 ferc issued a rule requiring rtos / isos to change their settlement procedures and shortage pricing triggers in order to more accurately compensate generation resources .

ferc is also evaluating other price formation issues ( eg , uplift payments ) ; future rules could potentially impact electricity price formation in wholesale markets .

congressional action in this area could include oversight of how ferc's energy price formation initiative might impact nuclear power generators .

this effort is consistent with the future of nuclear power task force recommendation referenced above .

a federal production tax credit ( ptc ) is currently available for the generation of electricity by new , advanced nuclear power facilities during their first eight years of operation .

however , no federal tax incentives are available for existing nuclear power plants .

generally , currently available energy tax credit incentives are designed to encourage construction and operation of new energy production facilities and are based on either energy / electricity production ( i.e. , production tax credit or ptc ) or investment ( i.e. , investment tax credit or itc ) .

in addition to the nuclear ptc for new plants mentioned above , two specific energy tax credits currently available to renewable energy technologies are ( 1 ) the renewable electricity production tax credit , and ( 2 ) the investment tax credit for renewable energy .

legislation making existing nuclear power generation eligible for either of these existing tax credit incentives would provide some financial value and could potentially support continued operation of at - risk plants .

however , since the financial condition across the entire u.s. nuclear fleet is not uniform there would likely be plants that capture the tax credit value as a windfall , without actually needing it to justify continued operations .

because of the low - carbon attributes of nuclear - generated electricity , a price on carbon emissions could potentially benefit existing nuclear power plants if the carbon price were reflected in wholesale electricity prices .

however , the design of such a carbon price policy could determine whether or not existing nuclear power would be financially advantaged .

a carbon price policy could take many forms , including a carbon tax , a cap - and - trade approach , or an environmental regulatory approach such as the clean power plan ( cpp ) .

a carbon tax would place a value on carbon emissions that , all else being equal , would increase the cost of producing electricity from carbon emitting fuels .

to the extent that such costs are included in marginal - unit price offers from coal and natural gas generators , a carbon tax could effectively increase wholesale market clearing prices that determine electricity sales revenue for existing nuclear power plants .

however , a regulatory approach such as the cpp , which would likely result in an effective carbon price in many states , may have varied effects for existing nuclear facilities , depending to some degree on whether states achieve cpp compliance with a rate - based or mass - based target .

a cpp rate - based standard ( metric tons of carbon per megawatt - hour of electricity generation ) does not include existing nuclear in the calculation of megawatt - hours .

therefore , if an existing nuclear plant closes , there will be no change in a state's carbon emissions rate under the rate - based approach .

under the rate - based standard , replacement of an existing nuclear plant with a gas - fired plant could reduce a state's calculated emissions rate , if the emissions rate from the new gas - fired capacity were lower than the state average .

by comparison , states using a mass - based approach would likely have a stronger incentive to maintain existing nuclear power .

under a mass - based approach , if an existing nuclear plant shut down and was replaced by gas - fired generation , the total carbon emissions in the state would rise , making it more difficult for a state to achieve its cpp reduction goals .

according to epa's analysis of the cpp , "existing nuclear generation could be slightly more competitive under a mass - based implementation than under a rate - based implementation , because the former tends to create more wholesale price support for those generators. .

power purchase agreements ( ppas ) established between at - risk nuclear power plants and federal agencies are a policy option that could potentially provide a degree of electricity price certainty for both parties .

ppas have been used by the federal government to purchase power from renewable electricity projects over multiple years .

a federal agency could potentially contract with a nuclear plant to purchase power at an agreed - upon price over a multi - year period .

one possible contractual mechanism might be a contracts for difference ( cfd ) contract model .

a cfd contract essentially sets a price level for electricity and requires / entitles the parties to make up the difference between the actual market price and cfd contract price .

this contract structure provides price certainty to both the buyer and the seller while eliminating the requirement to physically deliver nuclear electricity to a federal facility .

 table a - 1 below contains analysis of electricity revenues and fuel and o&m costs for 33 nuclear power plants operating in competitive power markets within the united states .

for each plant , 2015 fuel and o&m costs are subtracted from electricity sales revenue .

both revenue and cost data used to perform this analysis are at the plant level , with revenues represented by the nodal electricity price paid to each power plant and plant - level fuel and o&m cost information as reported by third - party sources .

the analysis in table a - 1 is unique in that it compares plant - level electricity sales revenue with plant - level costs .

published material reviewed for this report included nodal electricity prices compared with industry average costs as well as plant - level costs compared with regional hub prices .

although this combination of plant - level data sets is a unique attribute of this analysis , nevertheless it provides a limited view of the financial state of u.s. nuclear power plants and does not consider other cash expenses such as capital expenditures or additional revenue sources such as capacity payments — where available — and ppa contracts .

additionally , crs is not assessing whether or not plants are at risk of closure .

estimates included in the table indicate only whether or not electricity sales generate enough revenue to cover fuel and o&m costs .

however , total plant - level profitability , and therefore the economic viability of each plant , can be influenced by other cost and revenue considerations that are not included in the estimates presented .

data - access limitations prevented crs from performing such analysis for this report .

