the 115 th congress states that tax reform is a priority .

in recent years , the focus of individual income tax reform has been on reducing the number of statutory tax brackets as part of a base broadening , rate reducin g tax reform .

on june 24 , 2016 , republicans released a tax reform blueprint , "a better way for tax reform. .

this blueprint proposes to consolidate the seven individual income tax brackets under current law into three , and to eliminate the alternative minimum tax ( amt ) .

tax reform legislation introduced in the 113 th congress , the tax reform act of 2014 ( h.r .

1 ) , also proposed to reduce the number of individual income tax brackets , and repeal the amt .

tax reform debates often highlight statutory rates .

as is illustrated in this report , however , under the current tax system , statutory rates provide limited information on tax burden .

statutory rates also provide limited information on the economic incentives created by the tax code .

when evaluating the equity and economic efficiency ( behavioral ) effects of tax reform proposals , it is important to look beyond the statutory rate .

this report highlights two other tax rate measures: average tax rates and effective marginal tax rates .

a taxpayer's average tax rate is the share of total income that is paid in taxes .

a taxpayer's effective marginal tax rate is the portion of an additional dollar in earnings that is paid in individual income tax .

the analysis in this report relies on the 2010 internal revenue service ( irs ) statistics of income ( soi ) individual public use file .

the individual public use file is a microdata file designed to provide a representative sample of individual income tax filers in a given year .

the 2010 file contains 159,791 records designed to provide statistical information for the 142.9 million individual income tax returns filed .

the report uses the national bureau of economic research's taxsim model to compute tax liability , for the purposes of calculating average tax rates , and effective marginal tax rates .

the focus of this report is on the federal individual income tax .

thus , the tax rates reported here do not include payroll taxes , corporate income taxes , excise taxes , or estate taxes at the federal level .

nor do the tax rates in this report include any state tax liability .

the report also does not include any analysis of the effect of transfer payments on effective marginal tax rates .

not all individuals or households file income tax returns .

for example , in 2016 , an estimated 83% of "tax units" are expected to file individual income tax returns .

the other 17% of tax units are not expected to file returns and have no federal individual income tax liability .

overall , roughly 44% of tax units are expected to have zero or negative income tax liability in 2016 .

but , many taxpayers that have zero or negative income tax liability have positive payroll tax liability .

when both income and payroll taxes are considered , an estimated 18% of tax units are expected to have no income or payroll tax liability in 2016 .

since this report relies on data from the irs soi public use file , only individuals and households ( or tax units ) that filed individual income tax returns are included in the analysis .

this report provides an overview of the three types of tax rates commonly considered in tax reform debates: statutory , average , and effective marginal tax rates .

the first part of the report defines these concepts , and discusses them in the context of the current federal individual income tax system .

the report also includes an analysis of how these tax rates vary across the income distribution .

the report also looks at variation in average and effective marginal tax rates across taxpayers with similar levels of income .

the report concludes with a discussion of potential implications of the analysis for tax reform .

many tax policy debates focus on the statutory tax rates , or the tax rates applied to taxable income .

however , in practice , statutory rates do not necessarily reflect a taxpayer's tax burden .

other measures of tax rates that provide more information on tax burdens include average tax rates and effective marginal tax rates .

average tax rates provide a good measure for comparing the burden of taxes across different taxpayers , while both average and effective marginal tax rates provide information on potential economic distortions caused by taxation .

the differences between statutory , average , and effective marginal tax rates are important when analyzing tax policy and considering matters of equity and efficiency .

since statutory tax rates provide limited information about tax burdens , questions of equity are often better addressed by using average rates .

since effective marginal tax rates do not equal statutory tax rates for a large proportion of taxpayers , statutory rates provide limited information on the incentives created by the tax code .

in the current tax system , statutory tax rates do not provide much information about individual taxpayers' overall tax burden .

average tax rates provide better information about how much taxpayers are paying in income tax .

for that reason , analysis of tax policy proposals tends to focus on average tax rates , rather than statutory rates .

in a progressive tax system , average tax rates rise with income .

taxpayers with a greater ability to pay contribute a larger share of their income to taxes , consistent with the notion of vertical equity .

a progressive tax system also means that average tax rates tend to be less than statutory tax rates .

in 2010 , taxpayers in the top 1% of the income distribution had an average tax rate of 19.8% , even though the top statutory rate was 35% .

summarizing average tax rates for different income groups can also mask variation in average tax rates within income groups .

exemptions , deductions , exclusions , credits , and other features of the tax code mean that , even for taxpayers with similar incomes , average tax rates can vary substantially .

thus , there can be ( and are ) taxpayers in the 35% statutory rate bracket with average tax rates below taxpayers in the 10% or 15% statutory bracket .

efforts to address horizontal equity may result in average tax rates that differ for taxpayers with similar levels of income .

horizontal equity suggests that taxpayers who are equal before paying taxes should face a similar tax burden .

horizontal equity also provides that some allowance could be made for family size or composition .

in the existing tax system , controlling for differences in family composition reduces , but does not eliminate , variations in tax burden across the income distribution .

further , controlling for family composition tends to expose differences in average tax burdens and effective marginal tax rates between taxpayers with and without children in the lower and middle parts of the income distribution .

however , towards the top of the income distribution , average and effective marginal tax rates tend to be more similar across family types .

this suggests that how the tax system adjusts for horizontal equity depends where a taxpayer is on the income distribution .

marginal tax rates can affect taxpayers' work and savings decisions .

increases in marginal tax rates reduce the after - tax returns to work , and tend to cause taxpayers to work less ( economists call this the "substitution effect" ) .

with higher tax rates , however , taxpayers may work more to maintain their standard of living ( economists call this the "income effect" ) .

theoretically , the income effect might offset some of the reduction in labor supply following tax increases , or increases in labor supply following tax cuts .

empirical evidence suggests that increases in marginal tax rates reduce labor supply , but that the effects are small .

a 2012 survey of the literature found that a policy that reduced after - tax income by 1% would lead to a 0 to 0.2% decrease in hours worked ( or a 0 to 0.2% decrease in labor force participation ) .

there are also questions about the extent to which taxpayers know their marginal tax rate , or understand how and when it changes .

analysis of taxpayer behavior regarding effective marginal tax rates has shown that while some taxpayers do report income to maximize tax credits and avoid high effective marginal tax rates , these patterns are not observed consistently in response to various phase - ins and phaseouts in the tax code .

broadly , however , there is agreement that taxes distort behavior , and result in taxpayers making decisions that are different than they would have made in the absence of taxes .

to the extent that effective marginal tax rates lead to taxpayers changing behavior — whether it be changes in labor supply , changes in the form of compensation received ( un - taxed fringe benefits as opposed to wages ) , or non - reporting of income — effective marginal tax rates are the metric that can be used to measure the efficiency cost of taxation .

the notion that an economically efficient tax system is one with a broad base , allowing for low tax rates , is based on the belief that higher rates impose a larger efficiency cost .

as illustrated above , for many taxpayers , effective marginal tax rates differ from statutory rates .

a tax system with low statutory rates , but high effective marginal tax rates , could cause more distortions than a system with higher statutory rates , but lower effective marginal rates or effective marginal rates closer to statutory rates .

while marginal tax rates can distort taxpayer behavior , for these tax rates to drive changes in behavior , taxpayers need to understand what they are .

in the current system , complexity and a lack of transparency regarding effective marginal tax rates makes it hard for taxpayers to understand the economic incentives created by the tax code .

in other words , if taxpayers are not aware that they face a high effective marginal tax rate , then they would not be expected to respond by reducing work hours or changing behavior in some other way .

policymakers engaged in tax reform efforts may seek to make the tax system simpler , fairer , and more efficient .

with respect to statutory , average , and effective marginal tax rates , there are several considerations for policymakers designing a tax reform plan that achieves these goals .

first , the number of statutory tax brackets has little impact on complexity .

instead , complexity comes from defining the tax base , or what is treated as taxable income .

for example , are employee - provided fringe benefits taxable ? .

the rules created in response to this and similar questions make for a complex tax system .

other sources of complexity include various tax incentives designed to address social and economic issues , including but not limited to tax benefits for families , children , education , housing , and charitable giving .

temporary tax provisions , as well as frequent changes in tax policy , also contribute to a complicated individual income tax system .

while there is ample room for simplification in tax reform , consolidating and reducing the number of tax brackets alone does little to achieve this objective .

second , evaluations of equity should consider differences in tax burdens both across and within income groups .

the extent to which the tax system is proportional , progressive , or regressive can be evaluated by looking at the average tax burden across income groups .

however , as illustrated in this report , under the current individual income tax system , there is substantial variation in tax burdens within income groups .

policymakers might consider whether this variation is desirable , perhaps because it makes adjustments for family size or other ability - to - pay considerations ( in other words , makes adjustments to enhance horizontal equity ) .

third , low effective marginal tax rates do more than low statutory rates to promote economic efficiency ( that is , they introduce fewer distortions in real economic activity ) .

in an uncomplicated tax system , effective marginal rates are equal to statutory rates .

under the current system , however , a taxpayer's effective marginal tax rate often differs from the statutory rate .

phaseouts of various tax benefits , limiting the benefits of certain provisions to low - and moderate - income taxpayers , results in marginal tax rates that exceed the statutory rate .

thus , there is a tradeoff between equity and efficiency objectives .

if a reformed tax system includes provisions to reduce the tax burden for low - and moderate - income taxpayers without extending those benefits to higher - income taxpayers , policymakers might consider the marginal tax rate effects of phaseouts associated with those policies .

finally , it is helpful to remember the primary goal of taxation: raising revenue .

that said , the individual income tax can , and often is , used to achieve social , regulatory , and other policy objectives .

doing so , however , introduces complexity , and can involve trade - offs between other objectives .

for example , refundable tax credits enhance the progressivity of the tax system , increasing after - tax income for those with little or no tax liability .

with a fixed revenue target , refundable tax credits might be compensated for elsewhere in the system with higher rates .

these higher rates could distort taxpayer behavior , possibly creating a disincentive to work .

the need to raise revenues can constrain the extent to which the tax code can be used to achieve other policy objectives .

appendix a .

the 2010 public use file and the individual income tax system in 2010 much of the analysis in this report relies on data from the irs soi public use file .

the most recent public use file available at the time this report was written was for tax year 2010 .

this appendix provides additional information on the irs soi public use file and the individual income tax system in 2010 , highlighting differences between the system in 2010 and the current system .

the 2010 irs soi public use file contains 159,791 records designed to provide statistical information for the 142.9 million individual income tax returns filed in 2010 .

the focus of this report is on the 2010 tax year .

thus , records pertaining to previous tax years ( 5,117 records in total ) are dropped , leaving a file that represents 138.3 million returns .

information on the filing status of taxpayers filing 2010 returns in the irs soi public use file can be found in table a - 1 .

an estimated 45.1% of returns filed for 2010 were for single taxpayers .

an estimated 38.0% were for married filers filing joint returns .

the remainder of returns were filed using the married filing separately or head of household filing status .

table a - 2 provides information on returns filed , categorized according to adjusted gross income ( agi ) .

in 2010 , 57.6% of returns filed reported an agi of less than $40,000 , while 87.1% of returns filed reported an agi for less than $100,000 .

statutory tax rates applied in 2010 appear in table 1 .

in 2010 , the top statutory tax rate was 35% .

in 2010 , less than 1% of tax returns filed had income taxed at the top marginal statutory rate ( see figure a - 1 ) .

these returns accounted for 14% of agi in 2010 .

just over 27% of taxable income was taxes at the 35% rate in 2010 .

the proportion of taxpayers taxed at the top rate and the share of income taxed at the top rate were similar between 2010 and 2014 .

however , the top rate increased from 35% to 39.6% between these two years .

overall , given the current statutory rate bracket structure , changes in the top statutory rate would affect few taxpayers , but would affect a larger proportion of income .

there are several features of the 2010 tax code that differ from the tax code in 2016 that affect effective marginal tax rates .

for example , the making work pay tax credit was available in 2010 , providing up to $800 for joint returns , or $400 for single returns .

this credit phased out for higher - income taxpayers .

some taxpayers may have claimed the first - time homebuyer tax credit for property purchased in 2010 .

like the making work pay tax credit , this provision phased out for higher - income taxpayers .

both of these provisions generated increased effective marginal tax rates for taxpayers in the phaseout range .

under current law , the pease itemized deduction limit and the personal exemption phaseout ( pep ) raise effective marginal tax rates for higher - income taxpayers .

these provisions were not in effect in 2010 .

appendix b .

supplemental tables and data this appendix contains charts and figures to supplement the analysis presented in the body of the report .

table b - 1 contains data underlying figure 2 and figure 6 in the body of the report .

table b - 2 contains data underlying figure 4 and figure 7 in the body of the report .

table b - 3 contains data underlying figure 5 , as well as additional information on the distribution of effective marginal tax rates within statutory tax brackets .

table b - 4 contains information on the income levels in the income deciles for each of the family types included in figure 8 and figure 9 in the body of the report .

the final two figures presented in this appendix , figure b - 1 and figure b - 2 , reproduce figure 8 and figure 9 using the income decile break points for the entire sample of taxpayers ( as opposed to break points determined for each individual family type ) .

