on january 5 , 2011 , the house of representatives adopted an amendment to house rule xii to require that members of the house state the constitutional basis for congress's power to enact the proposed legislation when introducing a bill or joint resolution .

 ( the amendment does not pertain to concurrent or simple resolutions. ) .

the constitutional authority statement ( cas ) rule , found at house rule xii , clause 7 ( c ) , was subsequently adopted in the 113th , 114th , 115th , and 116th congresses .

as the cas rule begins its ninth year , the requirement continues to be a topic of congressional debate and inquiry , as members of the house contemplate how to comply with the rule prior to every submission of a bill or joint resolution .

this report aims to aid in understanding the cas requirement .

it begins by providing a broad overview of ( 1 ) congress's powers under the constitution and ( 2 ) congress's role in interpreting this document .

the report then specifically addresses house rule xii , clause 7 ( c ) , discussing its key requirements and limits , the legal effect of a cas , and the debate over the rule's value .

the report concludes by discussing trends with regard to the house's recent cas practices and by providing considerations for congressional personnel drafting cass .

the report contains two tables: table 1 identifies the constitutional provisions most commonly cited in cass during the last six months of the 114 th and 115 th congresses , and table 2 lists suggested constitutional authorities for various types of legislation .

understanding the purpose and logic of the cas rule first requires an understanding of both the powers provided to the congress under the constitution and congress's role in interpreting the constitution .

the framers of the constitution feared tyranny as the result of the "accumulation of all powers" of government "in the same hands" and , thus , "sought to guard against it by dispersing federal power to three interdependent branches of government. .

reflecting this fear , the federal constitution divides the government's power among the legislative , executive , and judicial branches , with the congress exercising the legislative power , the president exercising the executive power , and the federal courts exercising the judicial power .

"it is a breach of the national fundamental law" if congress "gives up its legislative power" to one of the other branches or if congress "attempts to invest itself or its members with either executive power or judicial power. .

while only congress may exercise the legislative power , this power , like those belonging to the other branches of the federal government , is cabined by the terms of the constitution .

article i , section 1 , of the constitution vests "all legislative powers herein granted ... in a congress of the united states," with the phrase "herein granted" indicating that the congress's authority to legislate is "confined to those powers expressly identified in the document. .

as a result , the supreme court has interpreted article i's vesting clause as creating a congress of specified or "enumerated powers. .

as the court noted in united states v. morrison , "[e]very law enacted by congress must be based on one or more of its powers enumerated in the constitution. .

given the powers of congress and the limits on those powers under the constitution , the question remains as to which branch of the federal government may interpret the scope of congress's powers .

the question is one that has been debated from the very beginnings of the country .

in its 1803 decision in marbury v. madison , the supreme court held that the logic of having a written constitution that enumerates the legal limits imposed on the federal government , coupled with the tenure protections provided to the federal judiciary under the constitution , confirmed the supreme court's role in interpreting the constitution and invalidating acts of other branches of government that contravene this document in the context of a live case or controversy .

pursuant to marbury ' s famous command , it is "the province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law is. .

while marbury firmly established that the judicial branch has a role in interpreting the constitution , including the power to strike down laws held to be incompatible with the founding document , it did not , however , expressly state that the judiciary has a final or even exclusive role in defining the basic powers and limits of the federal government .

to the contrary , the early history of the united states is replete with examples of all three branches of the federal government playing a role in constitutional interpretation , with congress and the executive openly questioning the supreme court's pronouncements on constitutional law , such as the court's rulings on the national bank or slavery .

as these examples show , marbury was not seen to interfere with the ability of either congress or the president to interpret the constitution .

rather , marbury only asserted the judiciary's power to act as the ultimate expositor of the constitution in the limited context of cases that were properly before the court .

instead , thomas jefferson's view that "each of the three departments has equally the right to decide for itself what is its duty under the constitution , without any regard to what the others may have decided for themselves under a similar question," appears to have prevailed in congress during the early days of the united states .

this is evidenced by the fact that members of congress spent "a considerable amount of time" "debating the constitutional limitations on" legislation during the first 100 years of the nation .

in the mid - 20 th century , however , the supreme court began articulating a theory of judicial supremacy , wherein the court no longer shared its role in interpreting the constitution with the other branches of the federal government , but rather characterized its role as being the preeminent arbiter of the constitution's meaning .

for example , in cooper v. aaron , the court read marbury as "declaring the basic principle that the federal judiciary is supreme in the exposition of the law of the constitution , and [this] principle has ever since been respected by this court and the country as a permanent and indispensable feature of our constitutional system. .

in other words , the cooper court concluded that the "interpretation[s] of the [constitution] enunciated by this court ... [are] the supreme law of the land," with constitutional interpretations by other actors , including congress , necessarily lacking the same force .

supporters of the judicial supremacy view assert that it promotes stability and uniformity in constitutional interpretation , as well as preserves constitutional norms from majoritarian pressures .

the court's decision in cooper , coupled with broader institutional factors that may further constrain congress's ability to engage in constitutional interpretation , has provided support for the notion of judicial supremacy in constitutional interpretation within the coordinate branches of government .

as a result , while congress certainly continues to debate about the constitution during the legislative process , in the modern era , the court's views on the constitution appear to have taken on an elevated role vis - รก - vis those views of the other branches of government .

the theory of judicial supremacy is far from a consensus view , however , and several aspects of the american constitutional system may counsel for a more robust role for congress in constitutional interpretation .

in recent decades , a number of legal scholars and government officials have criticized the judicial supremacy view , instead advancing the view that the constitution should more regularly be the subject of interpretation by those outside of the judicial branch .

this view posits that congress and others outside of the government possess independent and coordinate authority to interpret the constitution .

supporters of this view point to the fact that the constitution requires all members of congress to "be bound by oath or affirmation ... to support [the] constitution ... ," a requirement that presumes senators and representatives must understand and interpret the constitution in their work in congress .

similarly , courts' practice of affording a presumption of constitutionality to laws passed by congress necessarily assumes that members of congress engage in constitutional interpretation during the legislative process .

in addition , if congress opts not to engage in interpreting the constitution , a vacuum could arise in constitutional dialogue because various judicially crafted doctrines generally serve to keep the courts from making pronouncements on a wide range of constitutional questions .

indeed , as justice kennedy observed in his concurring opinion in trump v. hawaii , because there are "numerous instances in which the statements and actions of government officials are not subject to judicial scrutiny or intervention," it is "imperative" for public officials to "adhere to the constitution and to its meaning and promise. .

these arguments can be seen as relevant to the current cas requirement imposed under the house rules insofar as they suggest that congress should have some role in interpreting the constitution .

originally adopted as an amendment to house rule xii on january 5 , 2011 , the cas rule prohibits members from introducing a bill or joint resolution without a "statement citing as specifically as practicable the power or powers granted to congress in the constitution to enact the bill or joint resolution. .

the current cas rule functionally replaced a requirement that existed during the 105th through 111th congresses , mandating that committee reports for bills reported out of committee "include a statement citing the specific powers granted to the congress in the constitution to enact the law proposed by the bill or joint resolution. .

a cas is not part of the text of the legislation ; instead , it "accompanie[s]" the legislation .

the cas must be "submitted at the time the bill or joint resolution" is presented for introduction and referral , that is , when the legislation is dropped in the "hopper. .

the submitted cas appears in the congressional record and is published electronically on congress.gov .

this section of the report identifies issues that members and congressional staffers may find useful to consider when assessing whether and how a constitutional provision may provide a source of authority for legislation .

first , the section notes available resources that may aid in interpreting the constitution .

second , the section suggests potential constitutional bases for various types of legislation .

a house rule xii , clause 7 ( c ) , statement regarding the constitutionality of legislation is required only when a member of the house introduces legislation .

the cas , by its nature , is just the starting point for constitutional dialogue respecting a bill or joint resolution .

nothing in the rule prohibits further discussions about the constitutional issues that a piece of legislation may implicate .

while the customary practice with regard to cass , to date , has been to provide a short citation to the provision in the constitution that affirmatively grants congress the authority to enact the underlying legislation , it is not unprecedented for members to cite sources beyond the text of the constitution , such as supreme court case law , primary source materials on the constitution , or a constitutional law treatise .

other cass have gone beyond citing to the affirmative powers that the constitution provides congress and have discussed potential restraints the constitution imposes that may prohibit the enactment of the underlying legislation .

outside of a cas , members can request a formal floor debate respecting the constitutionality of pending legislation , and constitutional debate and dialogue can occur in a host of other contexts , including voting to enact legislation , committee hearings , committee reports , and more "informal practices , norms , and traditions. .

also , members of congress have a variety of resources available to help inform their participation in constitutional debate , including "expert witnesses at hearings , their legally trained staff , [and] constitutional experts at the [crs]. .

in particular , crs's american law division regularly provides legal advice to members and their staff on constitutional questions regarding pending legislation , whether by providing suggestions for a cas or by formally rendering an opinion on the constitutionality of pending legislation .

in this vein , members and their staff have the capability to meaningfully participate in ongoing debates over the interpretation of the constitution , beginning with the cas .

