since 1790 , when president george washington told the first session of congress that the "safety and interest" of a free people "require that they should promote such manufactures as tend to render them independent of others for essential , particularly military supplies," congress has taken a special interest in the health of the manufacturing sector .

in his report on the subject of manufactures , submitted to the house of representatives the following year , secretary of the treasury alexander hamilton suggested a variety of measures , including import duties , bounties ( subsidies ) , and patents , intended to strengthen manufacturing in what was then an overwhelmingly agricultural economy .

congress resisted bounties , but it largely accepted hamilton's recommendations for high import tariffs and strong patent protection .

defining "manufacturing" and measuring its scope have been challenges from the country's earliest days .

when he prepared the first nationwide statistics about manufacturing at the request of the secretary of the treasury , tench coxe reported the value of manufactured goods produced in 1810 as $127.7 million , but he estimated that including goods "entirely omitted or imperfectly returned" by state and territorial officials would raise the value to $172.8 million — 35% more .

additionally , coxe identified $25.9 million of goods produced in the united states "which are of a doubtful nature in relation to their character as manufactures. .

one example was pot ashes .

at the time , farmers clearing hardwood forests to plant crops often burned unneeded trees , soaked the ashes in iron pots , and then evaporated the mixture to obtain potash salts to make soap , glass , and textiles .

coxe apparently was unconvinced that this production process was "manufacturing. .

the scope and scale of manufacturing have changed considerably in the intervening centuries , but the challenge of determining when a good has been made in the united states has not gone away .

if anything , changes in the ways manufactured goods are developed , produced , and sold have made it more difficult to link production to a particular location and to measure the domestic content .

there are a variety of rationales for special government attention to domestic manufacturing .

historically , congress has been attentive to the role of manufacturing as a source of employment , especially for workers without higher education .

national security considerations may argue for the physical production of a particular product to occur within the united states .

productivity typically rises faster in manufacturing than in other sectors of the economy , making manufacturing an important source of the productivity growth that fuels economic growth .

the manufacturing sector , as defined by the u.s. government , "comprises establishments engaged in the mechanical , physical , or chemical transformation of materials , substances , or components into new products," as well as those engaged in "assembling of component parts of manufactured products" for purposes other than construction .

this definition , however , is of limited usefulness in understanding how manufacturers and workers create economic value .

the economic value of a manufactured good , and the employment related to the production of that good , may be derived from a wide variety of specific activities in addition to physical transformation .

two types of nonmanufacturing activities are especially likely to contribute to the value creation and employment in the process of creating manufactured goods and delivering them to end users .

one is business services such as research , design , marketing , logistics , and information technology .

the other is software development .

these nonphysical inputs may be produced within the manufacturing firm itself , or may be purchased from other firms .

because many manufactured products are unique , understanding of the role of nonmanufactured inputs in manufactured goods has come principally from case studies .

these studies seek to disentangle the complex supply chains used to produce many of the final goods that are sold to consumers , firms , and governments .

one such study of nokia's n95 mobile phone found that the cost of final assembly — that is , the physical manufacture of the product sold to end users — came to only 2% of the final pretax sales price ; the value of the physical inputs nokia purchased to manufacture the phone , such as processors , cameras , and integrated circuits , was estimated to be less than the value of its intellectual property , in - house services , and profit connected with the phone .

another study found the cost of assembling computers and music players to be only 3% to 5% of the selling price .

an analysis of an italian manufacturer's chinese - made shoes found that design , quality control , logistics , sales , and administration , all of which occurred in europe , accounted for about half the wholesale cost of the shoes and three - quarters of the value added .

the value of embedded software represents a substantial and growing share of the value of many manufactured products , from pacemakers and washing machines to cars and airplanes .

a recent study asserts that semiconductor manufacturers are "shifting their focus from hardware" to software embedded in their products .

similarly , according to a recent article , "a premium class car now ... runs on 100 [million] lines of software code," implying that a significant albeit uncertain share of the car's value is created by coders in offices rather than assembly workers on a factory floor .

a 2016 consultant study projects that providers of software and digital services will capture a growing share of the automotive sector's profits as autonomous vehicles come into use .

the organisation for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) , which seeks to harmonize economic data internationally , estimates that services produced in the united states contributed around one - third of the total value added in products sold by the u.s. manufacturing sector in 2011 .

this share varies considerably among manufacturing industries ( table 1 ) .

the oecd figures likely understate the role of nonphysical activities in manufacturing production , as the underlying data generally do not capture services and software produced within manufacturing establishments rather than purchased from external suppliers .

the difficulty of defining manufacturing activity and identifying manufacturing work has direct implications for efforts to encourage manufacturing in the united states as a matter of u.s. government policy .

the national identity of manufactured products has been a matter of congressional concern since at least the 1930s .

the tariff act of 1930 , as amended , requires that "every article of foreign origin ... imported in to the united states shall be marked in a conspicuous place as legibly , indelibly , and permanently as the nature of the article ... will permit in such a manner as to indicate to an ultimate purchaser in the united states the english name of the country of origin. .

imported goods that are not so marked may be taken out of the country , destroyed , or assessed a penalty equal to 10% of their value .

in regulations implementing the law , u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) defines a good's "country of origin" as "the country of manufacture , production , or growth. .

however , if further work in another country results in a "substantial transformation" of the good , that country might then be considered the country of origin .

more generally , cbp regulations apply a series of tests to be applied , in order , to determine the country of origin .

if the country of origin cannot be determined by any of these tests , the country of origin is the last country in which the good underwent production , which is defined to mean "growing , mining , harvesting , fishing , trapping , hunting , manufacturing , processing or assembling a good. .

the tariff act definition and the regulations implementing it rest on two implicit assumptions: each manufactured product is assumed to have a single country of origin .

the determination of whether a product is american - made is binary ; either it was made in the united states or it is an import .

this assumption fits uneasily with the global value chains now widely used by manufacturers to combine components from multiple countries into a single product .

physical transformation is assumed to be the means by which manufacturing creates economic benefits .

the fact that other activities related to making a product are conducted in the united states may not be relevant to the determination of whether the product is "made in u.s.a." — even if , as noted above , those activities account for a large proportion of the value of the finished good .

numerous provisions in federal law create distinctions based on the location at which goods undergo physical transformation .

examples include the following .

labor productivity has been growing far more rapidly in the manufacturing sector than in other parts of the u.s. economy .

if future manufacturing output does not increase more rapidly than productivity , fewer employees will be required for manufacturing production .

although the number of production and nonsupervisory workers in u.s. manufacturing establishments has risen 7% since the most recent trough in early 2010 , economists expect that production employment will decline in future years as new production methods , such as additive manufacturing , and more complex machines and information systems , including more flexible robots , displace workers on the factory floor .

the u.s. bureau of labor statistics , for example , projects employment declines in many manufacturing production occupations between 2014 and 2024 .

similar trends in manufacturing employment are in evidence in many other countries .

as physical production processes become more automated and require fewer production workers , it seems likely that nonphysical inputs into manufactured goods will continue to grow both as a proportion of value added in manufacturing and as a share of employment related to the goods' production .

in many cases , the national origins of nonphysical inputs are indistinct .

the process of designing a single product , for example , may involve collaboration among workers in multiple countries .

the firms concerned may not track the share of the work done in each location , making it difficult to determine the value added to the manufactured good in any single country .

there may be motivations for encouraging domestic production of manufactured goods other than fostering employment and increasing value added .

as noted above , for instance , it may be considered important for a good to be transformed within the united states for reasons of national security .

but to the extent policymakers are concerned with maximizing domestic employment or domestic value added , it is becoming increasingly challenging to design and enforce effective government policies , as emphasis on the location of physical transformation addresses an aspect of the manufacturing process that is likely to become less important over time .

additionally , to the extent that domestic content requirements such as those described above raise the cost of goods procured under federally funded contracts , they reduce the volume of procurement for any given level of expenditure and thus may adversely affect employment in nonmanufacturing industries such as construction and freight transportation .

