in october 2013 , chinese president xi jinping announced the establishment of a new china - led multilateral development bank , the asian infrastructure investment bank ( aiib ) , to "promote interconnectivity and economic integration in the region" and "cooperate with existing multilateral development banks," such as the world bank and the asian development bank ( adb ) .

after two years of negotiations , the aiib was formally established on december 25 , 2015 .

the bank currently has 52 members , including four g - 7 economies ( france , germany , italy , and the united kingdom ) .

the first aiib - financed operations were approved by the board of directors at its june 2016 meeting .

approximately 25 additional countries are expected to join in 2017 .

according to the aiib's articles of agreement: the purpose of the bank shall be to: ( i ) foster sustainable economic development , create wealth and improve infrastructure connectivity in asia by investing in infrastructure and other productive sectors ; and ( ii ) promote regional cooperation and partnership in addressing development challenges by working in close collaboration with other multilateral and bilateral development institutions .

while there are large financing needs in the region , some observers question china's motives in establishing the aiib , and argue that china is seeking to create an alternative to the world bank and the adb .

as one non - chinese individual involved in the aiib negotiations told the financial times in june 2014 , "china feels it can't get anything done in the world bank or the international monetary fund so it wants to set up its own world bank that it can control itself. .

a broader concern for the united states is the emergence of chinese - led regional economic institutions , such as the aiib , in which the united states has little influence , as alternatives to the world bank and other long - established multilateral bodes in which the united states has historically led .

others see the aiib proposal and other chinese economic statecraft efforts as direct chinese challenges to u.s. monetary and economic leadership .

instead of joining an mdb dominated by china and closely linked to china's foreign and economic policy goals , some analysts argue that the united states would be better served by supporting reforms at the world bank and other mdbs to make the institutions more inclusive of developing country priorities and to make loans that are more attractive to borrower countries .

these reforms could include shortening the time needed to approve loans , and reducing reporting requirements and loan conditionality .

the creation of the aiib is part of a broader reorientation of chinese foreign and international economic policy that has taken place since xi jinping became chinese communist party general secretary in 2012 and president in 2013 .

in contrast to his predecessor hu jintao , xi has pursued an ambitious foreign policy agenda to deepen economic , security , and political ties with neighboring countries .

over the past several years , president xi has spoken of building a "community of common destiny," first in the asia - pacific region and then throughout the globe .

his overarching goal , according to one observer , is to [l]everage china's economic power to build a network of new institutions , inspired by new ideas , to pursue new projects that will knit eurasia , the south pacific , and eastern africa into a tight network of economic , cultural , political , and strategic relationships .

the centerpiece of chinese foreign economic policy since 2013 is the "one belt , one road" ( obor ) initiative .

a report released by the china international trade institute in august 2015 identified 65 countries along the belt and road that will be participating in the initiative , which aims to use trade promotion , infrastructure development , and regional connectivity , to boost economic linkages between china and dozens of countries along a land route ( the silk road economic belt ) and a sea route ( the 21st century maritime silk road ) .

to realize this vision , china is investing in a range of institutions and initiatives , including the aiib , and other funding mechanisms such as the silk road fund and the new development bank ( also known as the brics bank ) , a collective arrangement with brazil , russia , india , and south africa .

china also seeks to influence the emerging structure of regional trade and investment relations .

by helping to finance obor , aiib may influence these relationships .

it may also reinforce a regional infrastructure that has china as its hub .

as a result , regional economies may be more inclined to augment trade and investment relations with china rather than with other economies , such as japan , south korea , taiwan , and the united states .

according to the aiib's articles , recipients of aiib financing may include member countries ( or agencies and entities or enterprises in member territories ) , as well as international or regional agencies concerned with the economic development of the asia - pacific region .

the aiib has signed a co - financing framework agreement with the world bank and three non - binding memoranda of understanding with the adb , ebrd , and the european investment bank ( eib ) .

to date , the aiib has approved nine projects worth $1.7 billion , most of which are being co - financed with established mdbs ( table 2 ) .

no procurement information on these projects is currently available .

it is unclear if information on which firms are winning projects and related procurement information will be made publically available .

according to documents prepared for the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) , aiib officials foresee its lending program growing to $1.5-$2.5 billion in 2017 and $2.5-$3.5 billion in 2018 .

despite recent distancing from china's obor initiative by chinese and aiib leadership , many of the approved projects are closely aligned with the obor initiative .

the project pipeline for the next two years includes projects in azerbaijan , georgia , india , indonesia , and oman , among others .

denmark and the united kingdom requested that aiib lending be included in the oecd's statistics on official development assistance ( oda ) , a multilateral "stamp of approval" of the quality of the aiib's activities .

in march 2016 , the secretariat of the oecd's development advisory committee reported that a review of the aiib's mandate , activities , and budget supports the aiib's inclusion in the oda statistics .

to date , the oecd has not taken any decisions on the matter .

some observers have criticized the u.s. approach toward the aiib during the obama administration .

the criticism is well captured by evan feigenbaum , a former state department official in the george w. bush administration , who has written that , "the u.s. attempt to halt or marginalize the aiib failed miserably. .

feigenbaum and others argue that the united states erred by resisting china's efforts and should have welcomed the institution when it was proposed or should join it now in order to help shape its policies and procedures .

in a bipartisan - chaired report making economic policy recommendations for the trump administration , the center for strategic & international studies writes: [i]n recognition of asians' desire for more ownership of regional economic architecture , the new administration should consider some form of u.s. participation in the aiib .

according to a november 2016 report from the institute for the analysis of global security , now that the bank is in operation and that it has taken encouraging steps to demonstrate its transparency and fidelity the united states should consider changing its approach toward it and take steps toward joining it .

a u.s. accession of the aiib would be an important gesture .

most important , it would signal to private sector players that it is safe to invest in projects co - financed by the aiib .

others argue that the obama administration's focus on aiib transparency and best practices was appropriate and provided constructive pressure on china .

for example , china's efforts to integrate aiib financing into the existing development system were praised by treasury secretary jacob lew at a march 2016 hearing before the house appropriations committee , where he took credit for pushing the chinese to adopt high standards at the aiib: [o]ur position on the asian infrastructure bank has been , on the one hand , we think it's a good thing that there's more support for international infrastructure investment in asia .

but it's very important that it be done in a way that's consistent with standards , like the standards that we pursue in our multilateral development banks that we're involved in .

we have made that case to all the participants ; we've made that case to the chinese .

and i think we've had a lot of success .

they have now adopted operating rules that are very much leaning towards observing the kinds of norms that we support in the multilateral institutions that we contribute to .

but now the question is what the actions will be .

and we'll start to know when they make loans .

the more they partner with the multilateral institutions that have high standards , the more likely they are to operate in a way that's consistent with the kinds of norms that are good for a growing , global economy and other values that we pursue in the multinational space .

turning to potential u.s. participation , the aiib maintains that it is open to u.s. membership .

some analysts argue that the u.s. government should reconsider its position and consider joining the aiib .

david dollar , a former world bank economist and senior official in president obama's department of the treasury , has emerged as one of the aiib's main boosters in washington , dc , and has argued that joining would be a "good investment" for the united states .

the establishment of aiib raises several political and economic issues for congress as it examines the aiib's activities and considers potential u.s. involvement with the bank .

typically , congress exercises its influence over mdb policy through its control over authorizations and appropriations , as well as through oversight .

the authorizing committees have included in mdb authorizing legislation many directives which affect the goal and direction of u.s. policy .

congress has also used its control over the funding process — its "power of the purse" — to set priorities and encourage the administration and mdbs to consider changes in their policies or procedures .

congress has used hearings and required reports to get information about u.s. policy and the mdbs into the public record and to draw the treasury department's attention to issues of pressing concern .

since the administration knows it must come to congress for future authorizations and mdb funding , the views expressed by congress through hearings have often had an impact on the focus and direction of u.s. policy regarding particular concerns .

while the united states is not a member of the aiib , and thus will not be authorizing and appropriating financial contributions , there are several avenues through which congress can shape u.s. policy toward the institution .

these include oversight of the aiib's operations and shaping the evolving relationship between the aiib and the mdbs where the united states is a member .

members of congress may want to follow the aiib's initial group of projects to gain a better understanding of whether and to what extent china is using the aiib to finance its political and economic priorities in the region .

chinese officials see economic development in the region as helping to guard against regional instability ( eg , in afghanistan , pakistan , and central asia ) and to deepen regional political and economic linkages to beijing .

members may also consider looking at the possible impact of aiib financing for regional infrastructure , interconnectivity , and trade relations .

the strategic or security issues raised by greater economic linkages between china and developing countries in central and south asia may are also worth considering .

for example , members may consider how the aiib may facilitate a reordering of asian trade and investment relations toward china .

regional chinese infrastructure financing may also serve to channel china's overcapacity in its manufacturing and construction sectors .

over the past decade , china has devoted around half of its gdp to domestic investment .

if the current slowdown in the chinese economy continues , regional infrastructure financing would be a way to redirect china's excess capacity in sectors such as rail and highways or port construction .

china's efforts on behalf of the aiib also raise questions about china's relationship with the existing mdbs , where it remains a large borrower ( $390 million of operations were approved in 2016 ) .

critics question why china still borrows large volumes from the mdbs , often for infrastructure projects , yet believes it has sufficient management expertise to lead a new mdb .

meanwhile , china continues to support its own large national development banks such as the china development bank and the export - import bank of china .

members of congress could consider possible ways to participate with the aiib beyond the co - financing of projects between the aiib and u.s. - led institutions such as the world bank and the adb .

members of congress could recommend that the president pursue membership in the institution or direct the treasury department to report on the feasibility and costs and benefits of u.s. membership in the institution .

members could consider ways to influence the aiib's activities outside of joining , such as encouraging further co - financing arrangements and / or participating as an observer .

another option to facilitate u.s. cooperation with the aiib would be to extend diplomatic privileges and immunities to aiib personnel .

as international organizations have become increasingly important for multilateral relations and cooperation , representatives to and employees of such organizations have occasionally been granted privileges and immunities similar to those traditionally accorded to diplomats or consular officials .

the international organizations immunities act ( ioia ) provides a significant number of privileges and immunities for international organizations designated by the president , such as immunity from suit for its official acts , and tax benefits that could make it easier for aiib to invest and raise funds in u.s. markets , among other things .

covered institutions include the united nations , imf , world bank , and several dozen other international organizations ; the united states is not a member of some of these organizations .

for example , the united states is not a member of the african union .

in 2007 , president bush extended diplomatic immunities and privileges to the african union mission to the united states .

others argue that u.s. officials should focus their efforts on increasing the attractiveness of the world bank and the other mdbs where the united states is a dominant member , by advocating for and approving greater representation by developing countries in the institutions and embracing innovative financing mechanisms , such as the world bank's program - for - results , which seeks to promote greater reliance on domestic regulatory regimes while linking finance to performance and development outcomes .

members might also want to consider a broader review of the mdb system in light of the proliferation of sources of development finance .

compared to 15 or 20 years ago , when the mdbs and other traditional donors provided the bulk of development assistance , the current environment is characterized as an "age of choice," with a variety of new donors , multilateral funds , private investment funds , etc .

in light of the new landscape for development finance , members may consider whether mdbs are still a preferred means for providing official development assistance .

members may also want to consider the extent to which there may be duplication of efforts across the mdbs , and the role of private financing .

several operational aspects of the proposed aiib raise concerns for some u.s. officials .

china's large voting power combined with the aiib's nonresident executive board has led some analysts to question the aiib's independence from chinese leaders .

the exact nature of the relationship between the aiib and china's domestic foreign and economic policy agenda remains unclear .

prior to the establishment of the aiib , china , through its bilateral aid , has supported large - scale infrastructure projects throughout asia often with less regard to social or environmental standards , or the underlying institutions in the recipient country .

some observers are concerned that some developing countries will resist the safeguards and conditions attached to world bank or adb loans and turn to the aiib instead .

other analysts stress that the aiib's safeguards policies and operating procedures are largely drawn from the policies of the other mdbs , and have been largely well received by the official and ngo community .

since most of the aiib's initial projects are co - financed with more established mdbs and must follow their safeguards and standards , it is still too early to evaluate the aiib's compliance with its own stated policies .

members might want to consider the implications for u.s. firms if the aiib facilitates the emergence of china - focused regional standards or norms .

for example , if chinese policymakers use the aiib to install network and telecommunications equipment made by the chinese companies huawei and zte throughout the asia - pacific region , u.s. technology firms might be effectively kept out of the asia - pacific market .

members of congress may also want to follow the procurement contracting for the aiib's initial projects .

while china has issued assurances that there will be open and transparent procurement , and the aiib has issued procurement policies and guidelines in january and july 2016 , it remains uncertain to what extent firms from non - aiib member countries will be considered and / or chosen for bidding on aiib projects .

will u.s. firms be able to bid fairly and participate in projects funded by the aiib ? .

as with mdb governance policies , it remains too early to evaluate the aiib's commitment to open and transparent procurement .

