the every student succeeds act ( essa ) , signed into law on december 10 , 2015 ( p.l .

114-95 ) , comprehensively reauthorized the elementary and secondary education act of 1965 ( esea ) .

among other changes , the essa amended federal k - 12 educational accountability requirements for states and local educational agencies ( leas ) receiving esea funds , including those regarding the identification , support , and improvement of high schools with low graduation rates .

under the essa , states seeking title i - a funds are required to submit accountability plans to the department of education ( ed ) that must address , among other things , their approaches toward dealing with low high school graduation rates .

in implementing these plans , states must identify for support and improvement all public schools failing to graduate one - third or more of their students .

leas that serve schools identified for support and improvement are required to develop a plan to improve graduation rates .

if a school does not improve within a state - determined number of years , the school is subject to more rigorous state - determined actions .

the national graduation rate for the class of 2016 was 84.1% — the highest rate recorded since 2010-2011 , when most states and leas began consistently reporting under 2008 federal guidelines .

improvement in the national rate has been accompanied by improvements in nearly every state and across all reported groups of students , including all racial and ethnic subgroups , low - income students , english learners , and students with disabilities .

however , graduation rate gaps persist among the several student subgroups .

moreover , the graduation rate varies enormously among individual high schools across the country , with a large number of schools doing poorly on this measure .

importantly for essa accountability implementation , crs analysis of school - level data reveals that as many as 16% of high schools may fail to graduate at least one - third of their students .

thus , there are potentially thousands of high schools nationwide that may be identified for intervention in the coming years .

implementation of the accountability rule occurs in school year 2017-2018 and relies on additional criteria that would undoubtedly impact this estimate .

in addition to new accountability rules , the essa provided the first definition of the high school graduation rate in federal education law .

this was the culmination of years of effort at the national , state , and local levels to achieve national uniformity of measurement and establish statewide longitudinal data systems .

put simply , the essa defines the four - year adjusted cohort graduation rate ( acgr ) as the number of students who graduate in four years with a regular high school diploma divided by the number of students who form the adjusted cohort for the graduating class .

from the beginning of 9 th grade , students entering that grade for the first time form a cohort that is adjusted by adding students who subsequently transfer into the cohort and subtracting students who subsequently transfer out , emigrate to another country , or die .

the following formula provides an example of how the acgr is calculated for the class of 2016 .

as figure 1 shows , the rate of high school completion in the united states increased dramatically after world war ii .

the rate displayed in this figure is not the acgr ; rather , it represents the number of persons ages 25 to 29 whose highest level of educational attainment was at least a high school diploma ( or its equivalent ) .

it is based on responses to the current population survey ( cps ) .

after 10-15 percentage - point increases every decade , this measure plateaued at about 85% in 1980 and stood at 92.5% in 2017 .

although the overall rate of high school completion has reached an historically high level , inequities persist among racial and ethnic groups .

in general , these groups have made progress similar to the overall trend with one exception: hispanics have seen a rapid increase in high school completion in recent years .

even with this increase , the attainment gap between white , non - hispanics and hispanics remains wide — 13 percentage points in 2017 .

black attainment also continues to lag behind that of asians and non - hispanic whites — maintaining a roughly five percentage point gap below the latter since the early 1990s .

the cps educational attainment rate is presented here ( in figure 1 ) because it is useful for tracking long - term trends .

it is important to note the differences between the acgr and the cps educational attainment rate .

the cps is a cross - sectional measure ( i.e. , taken at a single point in time ) of those included in the survey sample .

the acgr is a longitudinal measure that tracks an entire cohort of students from entry into high school to graduation .

another distinction between the two measures is that the cps includes diploma equivalencies ( such as the general educational development ( ged ) test ) in its rate , while the acgr only includes "regular" diplomas .

the inclusion of equivalencies may partly explain why the cps rate is higher than the acgr .

additionally , the cps rate shown in figure 1 is for people ages 25 to 29 — giving them more time to complete high school or receive a ged compared to the four years allotted to cohorts in the acgr .

more broadly , while the acgr is confined to those engaged in the school system , the cps captures a wider population of persons in society , generally .

even with these differences , the overall acgr collected since 2010-2011 shows similar trends .

as table 1 shows , the overall graduation rate increased five percentage points between 2011 and 2016 — a rate similar to the three percentage point increase in the overall cps educational attainment rate estimate for the same time period .

the two high school completion measures show somewhat different trends among racial / ethnic groups .

in the cps data , the white , non - hispanic rate increased less than 1% between 2011 and 2016 , while it increased over 4% in the acgr data .

during the same period , the cps rate for blacks increased less than 3% , while the acgr for blacks increased over 9% .

the cps rate grew just over 1% for asians while the acgr grew almost 4% .

both measures had similar changes for hispanics .

because the essa accountability requirements apply to both the total student body within schools as well as specified subgroups , states must report the acgr for several subgroups including low - income students , english language learners , students with disabilities , and various racial / ethnic categories .

the data spanning 2011-2016 indicate progress among all three of these subgroups: graduation rates among low - income students increased more than seven percentage points , english language learners increased nearly ten percentage points , and students with disabilities increased six and a half percentage points .

the rate of on - time high school completion varies widely across the country .

for the class of 2016 , the acgr in 27 states was above the national average ( 84.1% ) and below the national average in 23 states .

new mexico had the lowest acgr ( 71% ) and iowa had the highest ( 91.3% ) .

figure 2 displays the acgr for the class of 2016 by state .

four states graduated fewer than 76.1% of their students , nineteen states graduated 76.2% - 84.1% , seventeen states graduated 84.1% - 87.7% , and ten states graduated 87.8% or more .

as shown in table 2 , graduation rates have increased or remained the same in every state between the graduating classes of 2011 and 2016 .

the largest increase occurred in alabama , which saw an increase from 72% ( which was below the national average ) , to 87.1% ( which was above the national average ) .

four states — alaska , georgia , nevada , and west virginia — had increases of more than ten percentage - points .

three states — indiana , south dakota , and vermont — saw increases of less than one percentage point over this same period .

essa provisions require that , beginning with the 2017-2018 school year , each state must use the acgr as an indicator in their accountability systems and in calculating long - term and interim goals .

analysis of school - level data for the class of 2015 reveals 2,512 high schools — 16% of schools nationwide — had an acgr of less than 70% ( table 3 ) .

[note that , due to privacy protections imposed on publically available data , this analysis uses 70% ( instead of 66.7% ) as the cutoff for schools to be identified for intervention .

these limitations only apply to published data ; states would not face such constraints as they have access to the complete data of actual rates reported for every school. .

because this analysis uses 70% instead of 66.7% , it likely overestimates the number of schools that may be identified for intervention due to low graduation rates .

this analysis may further overestimate the number of schools that may be identified for intervention because the accountability provisions do not take effect until the 2017-2018 school year and graduation rates have been improving .

even with these caveats , this analysis suggests that there are potentially thousands of high schools that may be identified for improvement due to failure to graduate more than one - third of their students .

whether or not these schools would be uniquely identified for intervention based upon graduation rates ( or identified for other reasons as well ) is unknown .

that is , it is unclear how much overlap may exist among schools identified by graduation rate and those identified for other reasons ( i.e. , the lowest - performing 5% of title i schools and those with chronically underperforming subgroups ) .

nonetheless , the number of schools identified as being in need of comprehensive support for this reason may be large in some states .

the department of education ( ed ) collects the adjusted cohort graduation rate ( acgr ) from states through its edfacts initiative .

these data are made public on ed's website .

disclosure avoidance techniques are applied to comply with privacy protections required by the family educational rights and privacy act .

these steps result in complete suppression of the acgr for schools with cohorts of fewer than 6 students , reporting of acgr ranges for cohorts between 6 and 200 students , and reporting of exact rates for cohorts over 200 students .

the widths of the acgr ranges are determined by cohort size and get progressively wider as a cohort size decreases .

the actual acgr reported by states lies somewhere within the published range .

acgr ranges reported by edfacts are shown in table a - 1 .

