during the first session of the 115th congress , congress faced numerous international trade and finance policy issues .

a major focus was examining and responding to the trump administration's evolving trade policy .

u.s. trade policy under president trump to date arguably represents a significant shift from recent past administrations under both republicans and democrats .

in particular , the administration has displayed a more critical view of u.s. trade agreements , made greater use of various u.s. trade laws with the potential to restrict u.s. imports , and placed increased emphasis on bilateral trade balances as a key metric of the health of u.s. trading relationships .

another major issue before congress involved growing interest in whether and in what ways the u.s. process for determining the national and economic security implications of foreign investment in the united states should be reformed .

continued focus on the u.s. - china economic relationship , and economic sanctions against iran , cuba , north korea , russia , and other countries also have been of interest to congress .

president trump's withdrawal of the united states from the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) free trade agreement ( fta ) among 12 asia - pacific nations , alongside a stated preference for negotiating bilateral rather than multi - party trade agreements were notable developments in the trump administration's policy approach to u.s. trade agreements .

also significant are administration initiatives to potentially revise the two largest existing u.s. ftas , through the ongoing renegotiation of the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , and modification talks regarding the u.s. - south korea ( korus ) fta .

these decisions , in addition to the evolving global landscape on trade agreements , including a recently - concluded , revised tpp ( now called the comprehensive and progressive agreement for trans - pacific partnership ( cptpp ) ) among the 11 parties , without the united states , raise potentially significant legislative and policy issues for congress , including: ( 1 ) potential congressional consideration of legislation to implement a revised nafta , ( 2 ) the economic and strategic rationale for u.s. participation in multi - party and other ftas , ( 3 ) the extent to which past u.s. ftas should be modernized or revised and , if so , in what manner , ( 4 ) how much priority should be placed in u.s. trade policy on new fta and multilateral trade agreements , and ( 5 ) the effect of ftas not including the united states on u.s. economic and broader interests , and the appropriate u.s. response to the proliferation of agreements .

another major issue is the role of the united states in the multilateral , rules - based trading system under the world trade organization ( wto ) , historically led by the united states .

the wto has served as the foundation of the international trading system and wto agreements serve as the floor of commitments in u.s. ftas , but the institution has languished for decades in terms of achieving new multilateral trade disciplines and liberalization in important areas , such as digital trade .

president trump may formally request and justify to congress an extension of current u.s. trade promotion authority ( tpa ) until 2021 , to provide authority for expedited consideration of future trade agreements if they meet specific conditions and criteria .

this process would present congress a significant opportunity to examine the u.s. role in the wto and current and future trade agreement negotiations , particularly in how they meet tpa's congressionally - mandated u.s. trade negotiating objectives .

the united states under the trump administration has renewed the use of specific trade laws that have not been used in several years , such as section 232 , designed to investigate the national security impact of specific imports .

it has also placed greater emphasis on "fair" and "reciprocal" trade .

for example , with respect to china , a section 301 case was launched involving china's policies on intellectual property rights and forced technology transfer , among other measures .

china continues to be viewed as a growing main competitor of the united states in the global economy , as recognized in the recently - released u.s. national security strategy .

the policy implications for congress of potential action under various trade investigations may depend on a number factors such as: how firms , industries and workers are affected by measures , such as increased tariffs , that may be taken ; what other countries' reactions may be ( such as possible retaliation ) ; and how future actions are in line with core u.s. commitments and obligations under the wto and other trade agreements .

the u.s. - china trade and economic relationship is complex and wide - ranging .

it will likely entail continued close examination by congress in terms of current and future policy issues .

in addition to specific trade practices of concern , congress may undertake closer scrutiny of the economic and geopolitical implications of china's sizable belt and road initiative to finance and develop infrastructure across multiple countries and regions , as well as the proliferation of china's industrial policies in high technology industries that may challenge u.s. firms and potentially disrupt global markets if fully implemented .

international trade and finance issues have been important to congress because they can affect the overall health of the u.s. economy and specific sectors , the success of u.s. businesses and workers , and americans' standard of living .

they also have implications for u.s. geopolitical interests .

conversely , geopolitical tensions , risks , and opportunities can have major impacts on international trade and finance .

these issues are complex and at times controversial , and developments in the global economy often make policy deliberation more challenging , because they involve balancing many competing interests .

congress is in a unique position to address these and other issues , particularly given its constitutional authority for legislating and overseeing international trade and financial policy .

this report provides a brief overview of select trade and finance issues that may be of interest to the 115 th congress .

members of congress exert significant influence over the course of u.s. trade policy and its implementation through their legislative , appropriations , and oversight roles .

given current debates about trade and u.s. trade policy , fundamental questions about the future direction of trade and international economic issues are likely to continue to be areas of interest for the 115 th congress .

in engaging on these issues , congress may conduct oversight of the renegotiation of the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , and potentially consider implementing legislation for a revised nafta , and oversight of modification of the korus fta ; consider new bilateral trade agreement negotiations , including with the uk or japan ; examine the status of trade negotiations launched under the previous administration , including the potential transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) with the european union ( eu ) , a potential plurilateral trade in services agreement ( tisa ) , and ongoing discussions at the wto , as well as the future implications of the tpp without u.s. participation ; conduct oversight and take possible legislative action concerning a range of other trade issues , including u.s. trade relations with china and other major economies , as well as u.s. export and import policies and programs ; and monitor developments in capital flows and global debt levels , the international financial institutions and u.s. funding levels , the evolution of the aiib , and other countries' exchange rate policies , among other international finance issues .

u.s. trade and economic policy affects the interest of all members of congress and their constituents .

congressional actions on these issues can impact the health of the u.s. economy , the success of u.s. businesses and their workers , the standard of living of americans , and u.s. geopolitical interests .

some of these issues may be highly contested , as members of congress and affected stakeholders have differing views on the benefits , costs , and role of u.s. trade policy .

the dynamic nature of the global economy — including the increasingly interconnected nature of the global market , the growing influence of emerging markets , and the growing role of digital trade , among other factors — provide the backdrop for a robust and complex debate in the 115 th congress over a range of trade and finance issues .

