the 21st century cures act ( p.l .

114-255 ) was signed into law on december 13 , 2016 , by president barack obama .

on november 30 , 2016 , the house passed the house amendment to the senate amendment to h.r .

34 , the 21st century cures act , on a vote of 392 to 26 .

the bill was then sent to the senate where it was considered and passed , with only minor technical modification , on december 7 , 2016 , on a vote of 94 to 5 .

the law consists of three divisions: division a — 21st century cures act ; division b — helping families in mental health crisis ; and division c — increasing choice , access , and quality in health care for americans .

crs has published a series of reports on this law , one on each division .

this is the report for division a of the law .

division a of the law provides funding for biomedical research — including the precision medicine initiative ( pmi ) and the cancer moonshot initiative — and for the opioid crisis response ; modifies food and drug administration ( fda ) pathways for the approval of regulated medical products ; and makes a number of reforms to the national institutes of health ( nih ) .

division a of the law also includes and builds on provisions from both the previously passed house bill , h.r .

6 ( the 21 st century cures act , passed in july 2015 ) , and a package of senate medical innovation bills that were considered in the early part of 2016 .

as noted , both the house and the senate considered previous legislation to support medical innovation , primarily through reforms to the nih and changes to the drug , biologic and device approval pathways at the fda .

on february 3 , 2015 , senators lamar alexander and patty murray , chairman and ranking member of the committee on health , education , labor and pensions , announced the start of a bipartisan initiative to "examine the process for getting safe treatments , devices and cures to patients and the roles of the [fda] and the [nih] in that process. .

1 this initiative culminated in a package of 19 bipartisan bills that were reported out of the senate health , labor , education , and pensions ( help ) committee in a series of three executive sessions held on february 9 , 2016 ; march 9 , 2016 ; and april 6 , 2016 .

one of these 19 bills , the adding zika virus to the fda priority review voucher program act ( s. 2512 ) , subsequently was passed by both chambers and signed into law on april 19 , 2016 ( p.l .

114-146 ) .

the senate's medical innovation package was that chamber's companion effort to the house's 21 st century cures initiative , which resulted in the house passage of h.r .

6 , the initial version of the 21 st century cures act , on july 10 , 2015 , on a vote of 344 to 77 .

h.r .

6 was the result of a series of hearings and roundtable meetings hosted by the house energy and commerce committee dating back to spring 2014 .

the hearings and roundtables focused on a broad range of topics , including modernizing clinical trials , incorporating patient perspectives into medical research and regulatory processes , precision / personalized medicine , digital health care , and more .

while it consisted of many different provisions , h.r .

6 was primarily focused on efforts to increase strategic investments in medical research at nih and change some aspects of how the fda executes its regulatory oversight mission with regard to the review and approval of new drugs , biologics , and medical devices .

this report provides a brief summary of each provision of the 21 st century cures act ( division a of p.l .

114-255 ) , by title , subtitle , and section .

the division includes five titles , as follows: ( 1 ) innovation projects and state responses to opioid abuse ; ( 2 ) discovery ; ( 3 ) development ; ( 4 ) delivery ; and ( 5 ) savings .

most provision summaries include a brief background of current law in addition to a description of the new provision of law .

throughout the report , clarity takes priority over consistency .

for example , some summaries are more detailed than others where such detail is necessary to highlight important changes .

a list of acronyms used throughout this report can be found in appendix of this report .

sections 4001 through 4008 of title iv address the federal policies to promote the adoption and use of ehr technology .

they are based on the provisions in s. 2511 , the improving health information technology act , which was reported by the senate help committee on april 5 , 2016 .

these eight sections are discussed below .

the health information technology for economic and clinical health ( hitech ) act of 2009 authorized medicare and medicaid incentive payments to acute - care hospitals and physicians who attest to being meaningful users of certified electronic health record ( ehr ) technology .

the law instructed the hhs secretary to make the measures of "meaningful use" more stringent over time , which cms has done in stages .

stage 1 of meaningful use requires eligible hospitals and physicians to use ehr technology to meet a series of meaningful use objectives that generally involve capturing and storing structured patient data ( eg , vital signs , medications , lab test results ) .

providers must use ehr technology that has been tested and certified as having the capability to perform these functions .

testing and certification entities are authorized by the hhs office of the national coordinator for health information technology ( onc ) .

stage 2 of meaningful use requires eligible hospitals and physicians to use their ehr technology to perform more advanced functions , such as giving patients access to their electronic health information and exchanging patient data during transitions of care ( eg , a hospital discharge to a rehabilitation facility , or a physician referral ) .

beginning in 2015 , hospitals and physicians that are not meaningful ehr users are subject to a medicare payment adjustment ( i.e. , penalty ) unless they qualify for a hardship exception .

cms published a final rule in october 2015 modifying the meaningful use stage 2 objectives and establishing the objectives for stage 3 , which hospitals and physicians must meet by 2018 .

the agency made significant changes to the meaningful use program in response to the concerns of health care providers about the challenges and burdens they face in making ehr technology work .

for example , cms eliminated several clinical documentation objectives , and instead focused on a few objectives that capture more advanced uses of the technology ( eg , cds , health information exchange ) .

cms also published an accompanying final rule ( the 2015 edition final rule ) that expands the certification program .

in addition to certifying the next generation of ehr technology that hospitals and physicians need to achieve meaningful use stage 3 , the program will be able to certify health information technology ( hit ) products with a different combination of capabilities and functionalities that meet the needs of other types of health care providers and settings that are not eligible to participate in the ehr incentive program .

the 2015 edition final rule for the certification program established new transparency requirements for hit developers .

it also seeks to improve interoperability , for example , by requiring certified hit products to adopt new and updated vocabulary and content standards for structured health information , including a common clinical data set composed of standardized data elements , and by improving the testing of the ability of hit systems to transmit , receive , and use standardized clinical documents .

onc released a national interoperability roadmap in october 2015 — developed over an 18-month period with input from numerous stakeholders — to coordinate efforts around achieving hit interoperability .

the roadmap establishes interoperability goals for the next 10 years , with 2017 set as the deadline for individuals and health care providers along the care continuum to be able to send , receive , find , and use core clinical data .

onc expects the roadmap to evolve in partnership with the public and private sectors as technology and policy dictate .

the roadmap discusses the payment and regulatory drivers for promoting interoperability , as well as the central policy and technical components of a fully interoperable nationwide health information infrastructure .

a key challenge is overcoming legal and governance barriers to trusted information exchange by getting stakeholders to agree to and follow a common set of standards , services , policies , and practices that facilitate exchange and use of electronic health information without limiting competition .

medicare access and chip reauthorization act of 2015 ( macr a ) macra declared it a national objective to achieve widespread interoperability of certified ehr technology by the end of 2018 .

the law defines interoperability as the ability of health information systems to not only exchange clinical information but to also use the information based on common standards in order to improve care and patient outcomes .

in addition , macra instructed the hhs secretary , within one year of enactment , to submit a report to congress on ways to help health care providers compare and select certified ehr technology , such as through surveying ehr users and vendors and making such information publicly available .

finally , macra required the hhs secretary , in consultation with stakeholders , to establish interoperability metrics to measure progress toward achieving the national objective of widespread interoperability of certified ehr technology by july 1 , 2016 .

if that objective is not met by december 31 , 2018 , the hhs secretary will have until december 31 , 2019 , to submit a report to congress identifying the barriers to widespread interoperability and providing recommendations for achieving it .

information blocking onc released a report to congress on health information blocking in april 2015 .

the report defined information blocking as knowingly and unreasonably interfering with the exchange or use of electronic health information , and examined the nature and extent of the practice based on available evidence .

it also detailed the actions that onc is taking , in coordination with other federal agencies , to address information blocking .

finally , the report identified gaps in authority that limit the ability of onc and other federal agencies to effectively target , deter , and remedy such conduct .

macra requires eligible hospitals and physicians , beginning april 2016 , to indicate through meaningful use attestation ( or some other process specified by the hhs secretary ) that they have not knowingly and willfully taken any action to limit or restrict the interoperability of their certified ehr technology .

patient access the health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) privacy rule gives individuals the right of access to inspect , obtain a copy of , and transmit to a third party a copy of their health information .

one of the meaningful use objectives that must be met by hospitals and physicians using certified ehr technology is to provide individuals with the ability to view , download , and transmit ( vdt ) their electronic health information .

as part of meeting that objective , the 2015 edition final rule for the certification program requires ehr developers to publish application programming interfaces ( apis ) ; that is , programming instructions to enable other software application developers to produce apps giving individuals access to their clinical data .

patient matching onc released a report on patient identification and matching ( i.e. , linking patient records with the correct individual ) in february 2014 .

it recommended standardizing patient attributes for the purpose of information exchange , coordinating activities among organizations , and introducing ehr certification criteria for capturing patient identification standards .

patient matching was addressed in the 2015 edition final rule for the hit certification program .

certified ehr systems must be able to create a summary - of - care document that includes the following standardized patient data: first name ; last name ; previous name ; middle name ( including middle initial ) ; suffix ; date of birth ( year , month , and day are required fields ; hours and minutes are optional ) ; address ; phone numbers ( home , business , cell ) ; and sex .

the medicare improvements for patient and providers act ( p.l .

110-275 ) established social security act section 1898 , which makes funds available to the hhs secretary "to make improvements under the original medicare fee - for - service program under parts a and b … including adjustments to payments for items and services furnished by providers of services and suppliers under such original medicare fee - for - service program. .

many subsequent laws have modified the amount in the fund , but to date none of the monies have been expended .

most recently , the comprehensive addiction and recovery act of 2016 ( p.l .

114-198 ) modified section 1898 to make $140 million available "during and after 2021. .

section 5001 would change the amount available in the fund from $140 million to $270 million .

states generally are free to set payment rates for items and services provided under medicaid as they see fit , subject to certain exceptions and a general requirement that payment policies are consistent with efficiency , economy , and quality of care and are sufficient to provide access equivalent to the general population's access .

however , there are federal upper payment limits on fee - for - service reimbursement of certain medicaid providers .

federal upper payment limit regulations specify that states cannot pay more in the aggregate for certain types of services than the amount that would be paid for the services under the medicare principles of reimbursement ; the medicare principles of reimbursement are based on methodologies that apply to regions and certain metropolitan areas , and may result in different payment amounts in different states .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) applies an upper payment limit to durable medical equipment ( dme ) under medicaid for items and services furnished on or after january 1 , 2019 .

section 5002 requires the federal upper payment limit on dme be implemented one year earlier – for items and services furnished on or after january 1 , 2018 .

social security act title xi identifies medicare - and medicaid - related anti - fraud provisions , which include penalties and exclusions on individuals and other entities that engage in certain types of federal health program misconduct ( federal health programs include medicare and medicaid , as well as other programs that provide health benefits or insurance funded by the federal government ) .

under social security act section 1128a , the hhs oig is authorized to impose civil monetary penalties ( cmps ) and assessments on individuals , organizations , agencies , or other entities , that engage in improper conduct related to federal health care programs , including penalties for knowingly presenting or causing to be presented to a federal or state employee or agent false or fraudulent claims ( beneficiaries are not subject to civil penalties under social security act section 1128a ) .

for example , penalties may apply to services that were not provided as claimed , or claims that were part of a pattern of providing items or services that a person knows or should know are not medically necessary .

in addition , certain payments made to physicians to reduce or limit services are also prohibited .

social security act section 1128a provides for monetary penalties of up to $10,000 for each item or service claimed , up to $50,000 under certain additional circumstances , as well as treble damages .

social security act 1128 , exclusion from federal health programs is mandatory under certain circumstances , and permissive in others .

exclusions are mandatory for those convicted of certain offenses , including ( 1 ) a criminal offense related to the delivery of an item or service under medicare , medicaid , or a state health care program ; ( 2 ) a criminal offense relating to neglect or abuse of patients in connection with the delivery of a health care item or service ; and ( 3 ) a felony relating to the unlawful manufacture , distribution , prescription , or dispensing of a controlled substance .

the hhs oig has permissive authority to exclude entities or individuals from federal health programs under a number of circumstances such as: convictions for certain fraud misdemeanors , theft , embezzlement , breach of fiduciary duty , or other financial misconduct ; convictions for interference or obstruction of criminal investigations ; and revocation or suspension of a health care practitioner's license for reasons bearing on the individual's or entity's professional competence , professional performance , or financial integrity .

section 5003 amends section 1128a of the social security act by adding new subsections ( o ) , ( p ) , ( q ) , ( r ) , and ( s ) .

under section 5003 any person ( including organizations , agencies , or other entities , but excluding beneficiaries ) who commits improper conduct related to grants , contracts , or other agreements funded by hhs is subject to cmps as follows: knowingly presents or causes to be presented a specified claim that the individual knows or should know was false is subject , in addition to other penalties prescribed by law , to cmps of up to $10,000 for each specified claim .

in addition , individuals determined to have presented these specified claims is subject to assessments of up to three times the amount of the specified claim in lieu of damages sustained by the united states or a specified state agency .

knowingly makes , uses or causes to be made or used a false statement , omission , or misrepresentation of a material fact in an application , proposal , bid , progress report , or other document required to receive or retain funding for hhs - funded grants , contracts , or other agreements is subject , in addition to other penalties prescribed by law , to cmps of up to $50,000 for each false statement , omission , or misrepresentation of material fact .

in addition , individuals determined to have made , used , or caused to be made these false or fraudulent specified claims are also subject to assessments of up to three times the total amount of the funds or property obligated to the hhs secretary in lieu of damages sustained by the united states or a specified state agency ; knowingly makes , uses , or causes to be made or used a false record or statement material to a false or fraudulent specified claim under an hhs - funded grant , contract , or other agreement is subject , in addition to other penalties prescribed by law , to cmps of up to $50,000 for each false record or statement .

in addition , individuals determined to have made , used , or caused to be made these false or fraudulent specified claims are subject to assessments of up to three times the amount of the specified claim in lieu of damages sustained by the united states or a specified state agency .

knowingly makes , uses , or causes to be made or used , a false record or statement material to an obligation to pay or transmit funds or property to the hhs secretary or knowingly conceals or knowingly and improperly avoids or decreases an obligation to pay or transmit funds or property related to an hhs - funded grant , contract , or other agreement are subject , in addition to other penalties prescribed by law , to cmps of up to $50,000 for each false record or statement or $10,000 for each day that the individual knowingly conceals or knowingly and improperly avoids or decreases an obligation to pay .

in addition , individuals determined to have made , used , or caused to be made these false or fraudulent specified claims are subject to assessments of up to three times the total amount of the funds or property obligated to the hhs secretary in lieu of damages sustained by the united states or a specified state agency ) .

fails to grant timely access , upon reasonable request ( as defined in regulations issued by the hhs secretary ) , to the hhs oig for conducting audits , investigations , evaluations , or other statutory functions related to grants , contracts , and other agreements with hhs is subject , in addition to other penalties prescribed by law , to cmps of up to $15,000 for each day of the failure to grant timely access .

in addition to cmps , section 5003 authorizes the hhs secretary to exclude individuals who knowingly commit improper conduct related to hhs - funded grants , contracts , and other agreements from participation in federal health care programs and to direct appropriate state agencies also to exclude these individuals from participation in any state health programs .

the social security act sections 1128a ( c ) , ( d ) , ( g ) and ( h ) apply to section 5003 cmps or assessments as they do to penalties , assessments or proceedings under social security act section 1128a ( a ) .

section 5003 also specifies that in applying the social security act section 1128a ( d ) , references to claims under social security act section 1128a ( d ) are treated as a reference to claims as defined in section 5003 .

section 5003 defines the following terms applicable to social security act section 1128a ( o ) and ( p ) : department means the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

material means having a natural tendency to influence , or be capable of influencing , the payment or receipt of money or property .

other agreement includes a cooperative agreement , scholarship , fellowship , loan , subsidy , payment for a specified use , donation agreement , award , or sub - award ( regardless of whether one or more of the persons entering into the agreement was a contractor or subcontractor ) .

program beneficiary means , in the case of grant , contract , or other agreement designed to accomplish the objective of awarding or otherwise furnishing benefits or assistance to individuals and for which the hhs secretary provides funding , an individual who applies for , or who receives , such benefits or assistance from a grant , contract , or agreement .

program beneficiary does not include , with respect to a grant , contract , or other agreement , an officer , employee , or agent of an individual or entity that receives an hhs - funded grant or enters into a contract or other agreement .

recipient includes a sub - recipient or subcontractor .

specified state agency means an agency of state government established or designated to administer or supervise the administration of a grant , contract , or other agreement funded in whole or in part by the hhs secretary .

under section 5003 , a specified claim under social security act section 1128a means any application , request , or demand under a grant , contract , or other agreement for money or property , whether or not the united states or a specified state agency has title to the money or property , that is not a claim [social security act section 1128a ( i ) ( 2 ) , defines a claim as an application for payments for items and services under a federal health care program] and that: ( 1 ) is presented or caused to be presented to an officer , employee , or agent of hhs or any agency thereof or any specified state agency ; or ( 2 ) is made to a contractor , grantee , or any other recipient if the money or property is to be spent or used on hhs's behalf or to advance an hhs program or interest , and if hhs: ( a ) provides or has provided any portion of the money or property requested or demanded ; or ( b ) will reimburse the contractor , grantee , or other recipient for any portion of the money or property which is requested or demanded .

in addition , the term obligation as used in social security act section 1128a ( o ) means an established duty , whether fixed or not fixed , arising from an express or implied contractual , grantor - grantee , or licensure - licensee relationship , for a fee - based or similar relationship , from statute or regulation , or from the retention of any overpayment .

section 5003 also requires the following conforming amendments be made: by adding "specified claims" to "claims" in social security act section 1128a ( e ) ; and ( a ) in social security act section 1128a ( f ) in the matter before paragraph ( 1 ) , inserting "or specified claim ( as defined in subsection ( r ) ) after "district where the claim" ; and inserting "or , with respect to a person described in subsection ( o ) , the person ) " after "claimant" ; and ( b ) in the matter following paragraph ( 4 ) inserting " ( or , in the case of a penalty or assessment under subsection ( o ) , by a specified state agency ( as defined in subsection ( q ) ( 6 ) ) ," after "or a state agency" .

although most outpatient prescription drugs are covered under medicare part d , medicare covers certain drugs and biologicals under part b .

biological products are derived from living organisms rather than inorganic chemical compounds .

part b drugs and biologicals include drugs furnished incident to physician services , immunosuppressive drugs following a medicare - covered organ transplant , erythropoietin for treating individuals with anemia who have end - stage renal disease , certain oral anti - cancer drugs , and drugs administered through dme .

medicare providers and suppliers purchase part b drugs , and then are paid by medicare after administering the drugs to beneficiaries .

generally , medicare reimburses physicians and other providers , such as hospital outpatient clinics , for part b drugs and biologicals at 106% of the volume weighted average of each drug's average sales price ( asp ) billed under the same billing code .

health care providers also are paid separately for the administration of part b drugs and biologicals to patients .

some part b drugs and biologicals however , such as blood products , vaccines , and drugs administered through dme are reimbursed differently .

drugs administered through dme , such as infusion pumps , are reimbursed at 95% of the drug's average wholesale price ( awp ) in effect on october 1 , 2003 .

a drug or biological's awp is a commercially published reference price , but not an average paid by purchasers or charged by wholesalers .

awp is considered a manufacturer's suggested wholesale price to retailers and is published in drug pricing compendia .

awp is not defined in statute or regulation .

section 303 ( b ) of the medicare prescription drug improvement and modernization act of 2003 ( mma ; p.l .

108-173 ) required the hhs secretary to establish a competitive acquisition program for certain dme products in specified areas .

under the dme competitive acquisition program as described in the social security act section 1847 , payment for dme items in competitive bidding areas is based on supplier bids , rather than on a medicare dme fee schedule .

medicare part b drugs administered through dme are included in dme competitive bidding .

the dme competitive acquisition program started in nine metropolitan areas in january 2011 and has since expanded to 100 metropolitan areas .

several hhs oig reports , such as the february 2013 report , part b payments for drugs infused through durable medical equipment ( oei - 12-12-00310 ) , have shown that under the medicare part b drug reimbursement methodology based on awp the amount medicare paid dme suppliers for some drugs furnished through dme was substantially greater than what it cost dme suppliers to purchase those drugs .

based on an april 2015 oig study , implementing oig recommendations could have reduced payments for dme infusion drugs by hundreds of millions of dollars ( oei - 12-15-00110 ) , other part b drugs furnished through dme , such as insulin ( administered through an infusion pump ) , the amount it cost dme suppliers to purchase some drugs was considerably less than what medicare paid for those drugs drug acquisition costs generally exceeded the medicare payment rate .

beginning on january 1 , 2017 , section 5004 requires medicare to reimburse dme suppliers for medicare part b infusion drugs and biologicals furnished through dme in the same manner as other medicare part b drugs ; on the basis of 106% of the volume weighted average of the asps of drugs included in the same medicare billing code .

section 5004 excludes medicare part b drugs and biologicals furnished through dme from the dme competitive acquisition program .

prior to passage of the cures act , state medicaid programs were required to promptly notify the hhs secretary ( and for physicians , also the state licensing board ) when they terminated , suspended , otherwise sanctioned , or prohibited providers ( or other individuals ) from participating under the state medicaid plan .

in addition , prior to passage of the cures act , states were required to terminate individuals or entities from their state medicaid program when the hhs secretary or another state medicaid program terminated participating providers for cause - - fraud , integrity , or quality issues .

states also may terminate providers for reasons other than cause such as inactivity , death , and failure to renew their license or revalidate enrollment , but states are not obligated to report non - cause terminations to the hhs secretary .

states also were required to deny claims for items or services provided by terminated individuals or entities for the duration of the termination and the hhs secretary is required to recover the federal share of claims paid by states ( or medicaid managed care entities ) to terminated providers .

the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) section 6401 ( b ) ( 2 ) required the cms administrator to establish a process to notify all state medicaid and chip programs within 30 days of the effective date of a provider termination by medicare or any state medicaid or chip program .

to address the notification requirement , cms established an internet web - based portal which was replaced in 2014 by the "termination notification database. .

both the web - based portal and the termination notification database enable states to voluntarily report provider and other entity terminations and also to identify individuals and entities that other state programs terminated .

in march 2014 and august 2015 reports , the hhs oig identified shortcomings with the voluntary termination reporting such as that the state provider termination data included providers terminated for reasons other than cause and the reported data were often insufficient for other states to confidently use to identify terminated providers .

prior to passage of the cures act , states were not required to enroll providers employed by medicaid managed care entities and , potentially , terminate those providers for cause , although states were obligated to inform managed care plans of the requirement to screen all employees and contractors for federal health program exclusions .

managed care entities under contract to state medicaid programs were required to identify providers in the plan's network , who were terminated or otherwise sanctioned by a state medicaid agency or medicare .

in addition , state medicaid programs were required to identify and report to the cms administrator or the hhs secretary terminations for cause and other sanctions on medicaid managed care providers .

beginning on july 1 , 2018 , section 5005 requires states to submit information within 30 days of the effective date on participating providers of services or any other person under a medicaid state plan or a waiver who was terminated .

following the notice to the hhs secretary that a provider was terminated , states are required to submit to the hhs secretary the following information , as appropriate , on terminated providers: ( 1 ) the terminated provider's name ; ( 2 ) the type of provider ; ( 3 ) the provider's practice specialty ; ( 4 ) the provider's date of birth , social security number , national provider identification number , and state license or certification number ; ( 5 ) the termination reason ; ( 6 ) a copy of the termination notice ; ( 7 ) the effective date of the termination ; and ( 8 ) any other information the hhs secretary requires .

the termination notice effective date is defined as the later of ( a ) the date on which the termination is effective , as specified on the termination notice , or ( b ) the date on which all applicable appeal rights have been exhausted or the timeline for appeal has expired .

section 5005 requires the hhs secretary within 30 days of notification of a provider termination to review the provider termination and , if appropriate , include the termination in termination notification database or similar system that was developed under aca section 6401 ( b ) ( 2 ) .

under section 5005 , by july 1 , 2018 states are required to include a provision in medicaid and chip managed care contracts that managed care entities will terminate from their networks any providers of services or individuals terminated from medicare or any state medicaid or chip program .

beginning on july 1 , 2018 , section 5005 requires the hhs secretary to prohibit payment to states for medicaid expenditures for terminated fee - for - service ( ffs ) providers under a medicaid state plan or waiver .

the effective date for the prohibition is 60 days after the date on which terminated providers are added to the termination database or similar system required by aca section 6401 ( b ) ( 2 ) .

beginning on july 1 , 2018 , section 5005 requires the hhs secretary to prohibit payments to states for managed care expenditures incurred by the state for medicaid state plan services ( or waivers ) provided by terminated providers .

beginning on july 1 , 2018 , the hhs secretary is prohibited from reimbursing states for the federal share of services provided by managed care entities unless the state has a contract with the managed care entity that complies with the section 5005 requirement for medicaid managed care contracts to include a provision requiring managed care entities terminate providers from the managed care entity network who were terminated from medicare or other state medicaid or chip programs .

by july 1 , 2017 , in consultation with state medicaid directors , the hhs secretary is required by section 5005 to issue regulations establishing uniform terminology for describing the reasons providers are terminated from medicaid or chip .

by january 1 , 2017 , section 5005 requires states to require that medicaid ffs and managed care entity ( by january 1 , 2018 ) providers to enroll with the state by submitting the following identifying information the providers: ( 1 ) name , ( 2 ) specialty , ( 3 ) date of birth , ( 4 ) social security number , ( 5 ) national provider identification number ( if applicable ) , ( 6 ) federal taxpayer identification number , and ( 7 ) state license or certification number ( if applicable ) .

participating ffs and managed care entity providers include entities that furnish items and services , order , prescribe , refer , or certify medicaid eligibility for services under a medicaid state plan or waiver .

section 5005 specifies that certain medicaid requirements must apply to states under chip in the same manner as they apply to state medicaid programs .

more specifically , section 5005 requires state chips to terminate providers if the providers were terminated by medicare or other state medicaid or chip programs .

by january 1 , 2017 , section 5005 requires state chips to require participating ffs providers to enroll by submitting identifying information .

in addition , section 5005 requires the secretary to limit federal matching payments to states if states have not implemented the requirement that managed care contracts include a provision agreeing to terminate providers who were terminated by medicare or other state medicaid or chip programs .

before march 31 , 2020 , the hhs oig is required to submit a report to congress on the implementation of section 5005 .

the report is required to include the following: ( 1 ) an assessment of the extent to which providers who are included in the termination notification database as required by section 5005 are terminated from participation in state medicaid plans or waivers ; ( 2 ) information on federal financial participation paid to states in violation of section 5005 prohibition on payments to states for terminated providers and payments to medicaid managed care entities that were required to terminate providers who were terminated under medicare or other state medicaid plans or waivers ; ( 3 ) an assessment of the extent to which state contracts with medicaid managed care entities comply with the new section 5005 requirement that state managed care contracts include a provision barring terminated providers from participation in medicaid and chip provider networks ; and ( 4 ) an assessment of the extent to which states are enrolling ffs and managed care providers participating in medicaid or under a waiver as required by section 5005 .

provider directories — lists of the health care providers contracted to furnish care under a health care program — are useful in ensuring that eligible individuals have access to covered services .

states have considerable discretion in how they communicate sources of available care under their fee - for - service ( ffs ) medicaid programs to beneficiaries .

federal law currently does not require state medicaid programs to publish ffs provider directories .

for medicaid services furnished through managed care , by contrast , provider directories are federally required .

under new medicaid managed care regulations that will take effect for contract years beginning on or after july 1 , 2017 , the directories must cover a wider range of providers , include more information , and be available on the managed care entity's website .

section 5006 requires state medicaid programs to publish annually and make available on their websites a ffs provider directory .

the directory must identify participating physicians and may at state option include other participating provider types , listing at minimum the provider's contact information and specialty .

for providers that participate in a primary care case management ( pccm ) system , the directory must indicate whether the physician or other provider is accepting new medicaid patients and the provider's cultural and linguistic capabilities .

the requirements of section 5006 do not apply to any state where all medicaid beneficiaries receiving services under the medicaid state plan or waiver , except indians or alaska natives , are enrolled in a comprehensive risk - based managed care organization ( mco ) or similar prepaid health plan .

section 5006 will bring the administration of medicaid ffs and managed care programs into closer alignment .

the state ffs provider directories must be published no later than january 1 , 2017 .

if the secretary of health and human services determines that state legislation would be required for any particular state to have the authority to amend its medicaid state plan to require the publication of a ffs provider directory , then the state will be considered compliant with the timing requirement of section 5006 so long as it publishes its provider directory before the first day of the first calendar quarter after the close of the first regular legislative session beginning after the date of enactment of the cures act .

under federal medicaid law , most trusts are counted as an asset in determining medicaid eligibility for aged and disabled individuals and are subject to asset transfer rules .

however , there are certain exceptions in current law to the general rule of counting trusts as an asset .

specifically , medicaid does not count certain special - needs trusts and pooled trusts as assets and does not apply asset transfer rules to these trust types .

this exception is commonly referred to as the "special needs trust exception. .

in order for a trust to meet this exception under medicaid , a trust must contain the assets of an individual under age 65 ( i.e. , non - elderly individual ) who meets the statutory definition of disability under ssa section 1614 ( a ) ( 3 ) .

ssa section 1917 ( d ) ( 4 ) ( a ) permits only parents , grandparents , legal guardians , or a court to establish a special needs trust on behalf of a non - elderly disabled individual .

such trusts must contain assets of the disabled individual and the trust must be used to provide funding for certain expenditures that supplement medicaid benefits , subject to certain limitations .

special needs trusts allow non - elderly individuals with disabilities to maintain their eligibility for medicaid .

when the beneficiary dies , the state receives the remaining proceeds of the trust equal to any amounts paid for medical assistance provided under the state medicaid program .

section 5007 makes a technical correction to the language regarding special needs and pooled trusts under medicaid , which are exempt from asset counting and transfer rules , to allow non - elderly individuals with disabilities to establish a special needs trust on their own behalf .

this provision is effective on or after the date of enactment .

outpatient prescription drugs are an optional medicaid benefit , but all states cover prescription drugs for most beneficiary groups .

medicaid law requires prescription drug manufacturers who wish to sell their products to medicaid agencies to enter into rebate agreements with the hhs secretary on behalf of states .

under these voluntary rebate agreements , drug manufacturers pay a rebate to state medicaid agencies for drugs purchased for medicaid beneficiaries .

most drug manufacturers participate in the medicaid drug rebate program .

the medicaid rebate program requires states to cover all of a participating manufacturer's drugs , but states have the option to not cover or restrict use of certain drugs , drug classes , or drug uses which are identified in the social security act , section 1927 ( d ) ( 2 ) .

this list of medicaid excluded drugs includes drugs used for cosmetic purposes or hair growth .

when states elect to cover the statutorily excluded drugs , drug classes or drug uses , they receive federal financial participation ( ffp ) , the federal share of state medicaid expenditures .

states are prohibited from receiving ffp when they cover certain statutorily excluded drugs , such as sexual or erectile dysfunction drugs , except when those drugs are medically necessary for other purposes .

beginning with the enactment date of the cures act , section 5008 prohibits states from receiving ffp for drugs used for cosmetic purposes and hair growth , except when those drugs are medically necessary .

section 4002 of the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) established the prevention and public health fund ( pphf ) , to be administered by the hhs secretary , and provided it with a permanent annual appropriation .

prior to enactment of the cures act , appropriations to the pphf were as follows: for fy2010 , $500 million ; for each of fiscal years 2012 through 2017 , $1 billion ; for each of fiscal years 2018 and 2019 , $1.25 billion ; for each of fiscal years 2020 and 2021 , $1.5 billion ; and for fy2022 , and each fiscal year thereafter , $2 billion .

section 5009 amends the pphf appropriation as follows: for each of fiscal years 2018 and 2019 , $900 million ; for each of fiscal years 2020 and 2021 , $1 billion ; for fy2022 , $1.5 billion ; for fy2023 , $1 billion ; for fy2024 , $1.7 billion ; and for fy2025 and each fiscal year thereafter , $2 billion .

this amendment decreases the total pphf appropriation for fy2018 through fy2024 by $3.5 billion .

the strategic petroleum reserve ( spr ) was authorized by congress as part of the energy policy and conservation act of 1975 ( 42 u.s.c .

6241 ) ( epca ) .

congress authorized the spr as a response to rising oil prices and petroleum product shortages related to the oil embargo established against the united states , the netherlands , and canada by the organization of the arab petroleum exporting countries ( oapec ) .

the spr is authorized to hold up to 1 billion barrels of oil , although it currently holds 695 million barrels .

the oapec embargo also fostered the creation of the international energy agency ( iea ) .

the iea was established to enable oil - importing nations to develop plans and measures for emergency responses to energy crises .

iea member countries , including the united states , are committed to maintaining oil stocks ( inventories ) equivalent to 90 days of their prior year's net imports , developing programs for demand restraint in the event of emergencies , and agreeing to participate in an oil sharing program in times of emergency shortage .

the current spr oil inventory represents 149 days of net import coverage .

the president may authorize an spr drawdown upon determining that a severe oil supply interruption exists nationally , or internationally , or is imminent .

the secretary of energy also has limited authority to release oil from the spr for a test drawdown .

section 5010 directs the secretary of energy to drawdown and sell crude oil from the spr in the amount of 10 million barrels during fy2017 , 9 million barrels in fy2018 , and 6 million barrels in fy2019 , for a total of 25 million barrels .

the resultant oil sales revenue is to be deposited in the general fund of the treasury during the fiscal year corresponding to the year of sale .

section 5010 amends spr drawdown limitations as specified in subparagraphs ( c ) and ( d ) of epca section 161 ( h ) ( 2 ) .

the amendment sets the minimum holding levels of the spr at 450 million barrels , instead of the current minimum holding level of 500 million barrels .

aca section 1323 provides that each u.s. territory can choose whether to establish a health insurance exchange by october 1 , 2013 .

if a territory elects to establish an exchange , it could receive a portion of a $1 billion appropriation to provide financial assistance to individuals who obtain coverage through the exchange .

if a territory does not elect to establish an exchange , it could receive an increase in medicaid funds .

no territory elected to establish an exchange .

section 5011 rescinds $464 million from unobligated amounts of the $1 billion appropriation for u.s. territories that elect to establish an exchange .

medicare part b covers a variety of durable medical equipment ( dme ) when it is medically necessary and prescribed by a physician .

durable medical equipment ( dme ) is equipment that ( 1 ) can withstand repeated use , ( 2 ) has an expected life of at least three years ( effective for items classified as dme after january 1 , 2012 ) , ( 3 ) is used to serve a medical purpose , ( 4 ) generally is not useful in the absence of an illness or injury , and ( 5 ) is appropriate for use in the home .

infusion pumps are dme , and the drugs infused are covered supplies necessary for the functioning of the dme .

infusion pumps are covered by medicare if , in part , the administration of the drug in the home is reasonable and necessary , an infusion pump is necessary to safely administer a drug , and either ( a ) the drug is administered by a prolonged infusion of at least 8 hours because of proven improved clinical efficacy , or ( b ) the drug is administered by intermittent infusion ( each episode of infusion lasting less than 8 hours ) that does not require the beneficiary to return to a physician's office prior to the beginning of each infusion and toxicity or adverse side effects of the drug are unavoidable without infusing it at a strictly controlled rate .

the dme benefit does not include coverage of personnel to assist with the infusion ( as the requirement that the administration of the drug in the home is reasonable is a condition of coverage ) .

under a separate provision of law ( not dme ) , social security act , section 1861 ( s ) ( 2 ) ( z ) , medicare part b is required to cover intravenous immune globulin ( ivig ) for the treatment of primary immune deficiency diseases in the home .

however , the statutes do not cover the items and services necessary for the in - home administration of ivig .

the specific items and services are the supplies and in - home nursing services necessary to inject the ivig intravenously .

the medicare ivig access and strengthening medicare and repaying taxpayers act of 2012 ( medicare ivig access act , p.l .

112-242 ) requires the hhs secretary to establish a demonstration project to evaluate the benefit of providing payment for items and services needed for the in - home administration of ivig .

the ivig demonstration began august 2014 and will end september 30 , 2017 .

the medicare ivig access act also required the hhs secretary to establish a per visit payment amount for items and services ( including nursing services ) needed for the in - home administration of ivig based on national per visit low - utilization payment amount under the prospective payment system for home health services covered under medicare .

in order to receive payments under medicare part b and retain a medicare billing number , dme suppliers that furnish items of equipment or provide services under medicare part b must comply with quality and other medicare conditions of participation requirements .

medicare conditions of participation for dme suppliers include being licensed in the state where suppliers are located and being accredited by an independent accreditation organization approved by cms .

section 5012 creates a new medicare home infusion therapy benefit , effective january 1 , 2021 .

home infusion therapy is defined as a specific set of items and services furnished by a qualified home infusion therapy supplier , which are furnished in the home to an individual who is under the care of an applicable provider and who has a plan prescribed by a physician that specifies the type , amount , and duration of infusion therapy to be provided .

the physician must also periodically review the plan .

specifically , the items and services included in home infusion therapy consist of professional services , including nursing services , training and education ( not included as part of the training and education associated with durable medical equipment ) , remote monitoring and monitoring services , and home infusion therapy drugs .

a qualified home infusion supplier means a pharmacy , physician , or other provider or supplier licensed by the state in which she practices and who furnishes infusion therapy to individuals with acute or chronic conditions requiring administration of home infusion drugs , ensures safe and effective administration , is accredited , and meets other requirements determined by the secretary ; a home infusion therapy supplier may meet these qualification requirements by subcontracting with another pharmacy , physician , provider of services , or supplier who meets the requirements .

an applicable provider ( whom cares for the individual ) is defined as a physician , nurse practitioner , and a physician assistant .

home has the same definition under the home infusion therapy benefit as under the durable medical equipment benefit .

home infusion drug is defined as a drug or biologic administered intravenously or subcutaneously for an administration period of 15 minutes or more , in the home of an individual through a dme pump , and does not include insulin pump systems or self - administered drugs or biologicals on a self - administered drug exclusion list .

prior to furnishing home infusion therapy , the physician who establishes the plan is required to notify the beneficiary of the options available for infusion therapy ( home , physician's office , hospital outpatient department. ) .

section 5012 requires the secretary to implement a payment system for the new benefit described above .

the payment is to be determined on a per - day basis , and is to vary by type of therapy and nursing utilization , and is to be adjusted by a geographic wage index , patient acuity , and complexity of drug administration .

the payments will be updated yearly by the percent increase in the consumer price index for all urban consumers for the 12-month period ending in june of the preceding year , adjusted for a measure of nationwide economic productivity .

the per - day payment amounts determined in this way are prohibited from exceeding the cost of infusion therapy services provided in a physician's office .

in addition , the secretary has discretion to make adjustments to reflect outliers ( or excessively costly patients ) in a budget - neutral manner .

in developing the payment system , the secretary may consider the costs of providing infusion therapy , consult with suppliers , and consider payments for similar services under medicare part a or medicare advantage , and private insurance .

section 5012 allows the secretary to consider prior authorization requirements for home infusion therapy services .

section 5012 requires the secretary to designate organizations for accrediting home infusion therapy suppliers by not later than january 1 , 2021 .

the secretary is to consider the following factors in designating the accreditation organizations: ( a ) the ability of the organization to conduct timely reviews , ( b ) the ability of the organization to take into account the capacities of suppliers located in rural areas , ( c ) whether the organization has established reasonable fees for their accreditation services , and ( d ) such other factors as the secretary determines appropriate .

the secretary is required to review the list of designated accreditation organizations , taking into account those factors specified above , and may , by regulation , modify the list of accreditation organizations .

if the secretary removes an organization from the list of accreditation organizations , any supplier that is accredited by the organization will be considered to have been accredited for the remainder of the effective period of accreditation , even after the organization is removed from the list of accrediting organizations .

if an accrediting organization is designated by the secretary before january 1 , 2019 , and a supplier is accredited by the organization before january 1 , 2021 , then that supplier will be considered to have been accredited as of january 1 , 2023 and for the remainder of the effective period of accreditation ; this provision would allow suppliers that received accreditation early to avoid having to be re - accredited for an extended period .

aca: patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l .

110-148 , as amended ) accv: advisory commission on childhood vaccines acip: advisory committee on immunization practices asc: ambulatory surgical center aspr: health and human services assistant secretary for preparedness and response ast: antimicrobial susceptibility testing barda: biomedical advanced research and development authority brain initiative: brain research through advancing innovative neurotechnologies initiative cacs: carrier advisory committees carb: national strategy for combating antibiotic - resistant bacteria cber: fda center for biologics evaluation and research cbrn: chemical , biological , radiological , or nuclear cdc: centers for disease control cder: center for drug evaluation and research cdrh: center for devices and radiological health cds: clinical decision support the center: national center for medical rehabilitation research clia: clinical laboratory improvement amendments of 1988 cmps: civil monetary penalties cms: centers for medicare & medicaid services cmmi: center for medicare and medicaid innovation cow: certificate of waiver dme: durable medical equipment dod: department of defense ehr: electronic health record epca: energy policy and conservation act of 1975 ( 42 u.s.c .

6241 ) etasu: elements to assure safe use eua: emergency use authorization faca: federal advisory committee act faers: fda adverse event reporting system database fdp: federal demonstration partnership fda: food and drug administration fdaaa: food and drug administration amendments act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-85 ) fdama: food and drug administration modernization act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-115 ) fdasia: food and drug administration safety and innovation act ( p.l .

112-144 ) ffdca: federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ffs: fee - for - service foia : freedom of information act fy: fiscal year gao: government accountability office gs : general schedule hhs: department of health and human services help: senate health , labor , education , and pensions committee hipaa: health insurance portability and accountability act of 1986 hct / ps : human cells , tissues , and cellular and tissue - based products hde: humanitarian device exemption hit: health information technology hitech: health information technology for economic and clinical health act of 2009 ihs: indian health service irb: institutional review board iacuc: institutional animal care and use committee ic: nih institutes and centers ide: investigational device exemption iea: international energy agency iom: institute of medicine lcd: local coverage determinations macra: medicare access and chip reauthorization act of 2015 macs: medicare administrative contractors mco: managed care organization mda: medical device amendments of 1976 ( p.l .

94-295 ) medpac: medicare payment advisory commission mpfs: medicare physician fee schedule nas: national academy of sciences ncats: nih's national center for advancing translational sciences ncds: national coverage decisions nda: new drug application nih: national institutes of health ( nih ) nichd: eunice kennedy shriver national institute of child health and human development nlm: national library of medicine oapec: organization of the arab petroleum exporting countries ocp: office of combination products ocr: hhs office for civil rights oig: hhs office of inspector general oira: office of information and regulatory affairs omb: office of management and budget onc: office of the national coordinator for health information technology ostp: white house office of science and technology policy ot: other transaction opps: medicare hospital outpatient prospective payment system fee schedule pahpra: pandemic and all - hazards preparedness reauthorization act of 2013 ( p.l .

113-5 ) pccm: primary care case management system pdufa: prescription drug user fee act of 1992 phi: protected health information phs: public health service agencies phsa: public health service act of 1944 pma: premarket approval pathway pmi: precision medicine initiative pphf: prevention and public health fund pra: paperwork reduction act ( 44 u.s.c .

chapter 35 ) r&d: research and development rems: risk evaluation and mitigation strategies samhsa: substance abuse and mental health services administration sbrs : silvio o. conte senior biomedical research service ssa: social security act spr: strategic petroleum reserve va: department of veterans affairs vdt: view , download , and transmit vfc: vaccines for children program vicp: national vaccine injury compensation progra .

