poverty estimates — the number and percentage of persons living in poverty — have been of interest to congress not only to gauge the nation's economic health , but also because they are used to determine funding allocations for a variety of programs .

understanding how poverty is defined , how it is measured , and what information is used to compute poverty estimates can help congressional policymakers more adeptly consider how proposed legislation might affect the low - income population .

to that end , this report provides a synopsis of poverty measurement in the united states , focusing on the following: the official measure of poverty , which is used to obtain official counts and percentages of the poor ; the supplemental poverty measure , which is used for research purposes only and was developed to improve upon some limitations of the official measure ; and the health and human services ( hhs ) poverty guidelines , which are used in administering programs for low - income persons but not to measure the poor population .

this report discusses poverty measures developed for official , research , and administrative uses in the united states .

it does not address international poverty measures , current poverty estimates , or policy responses for alleviating poverty .

the american heritage dictionary of the english language defines poverty as "the state of being poor ; lack of the means of providing material needs or comforts. .

"poor" in turn is defined as "having insufficient wealth to meet the necessities or comforts of life or to live in a manner considered acceptable in a society. .

central to these definitions are "needs," "comforts," and living "in a manner considered acceptable in a society. .

taken together , they characterize poverty as an economic concept that refers to limited resources: being in poverty indicates a level of hardship or deprivation because resources are insufficient to meet a level of material well - being .

in the united states , economic resources often are expressed in monetary terms , and that expression makes poverty a financial concept .

persons living in poverty lack the financial resources to meet a basic level of material well - being .

poverty measures convey the number or percentage of people falling below given income amounts , which are intended to represent a level of economic privation and are computed using some factually based measurement of basic needs .

the poverty measures discussed in this report focus on financial resources .

a family's income is compared against a dollar amount representing some measure of need , called a threshold , which typically varies by a family's size and composition .

those with family income less than the threshold are considered to be "in poverty," or poor ; those with incomes greater than or equal to the threshold are not considered to be in poverty .

all members of the same family have the same poverty status .

poverty estimates are obtained using household surveys .

the census bureau releases data from the official poverty measure every september for the previous full calendar year , based on the current population survey annual social and economic supplement ( cps asec ) .

"resources" in this measure are defined as money income before taxes , and they do not include the valuation of noncash benefits like the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) and housing subsidies .

as its measure of need , it uses 48 dollar amounts , called poverty thresholds , which vary by family size and the members' ages .

these thresholds are updated for inflation using the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( cpi - u ) , but are not adjusted geographically — the same thresholds are used throughout all 50 states .

both income and the thresholds in the official measure refer to the previous full calendar year .

table 1 displays the poverty thresholds for 2015 .

as shown above , the thresholds do not increase by the same dollar amount between each family size .

similarly , within each family size , the thresholds do not increase or decrease by the same amount as the number of children increases and the number of adults decreases .

the manner in which the threshold dollar amounts vary across family types and compositions is called the equivalence scale .

equivalence scales capture economies of scale in maintaining families .

some costs needed to maintain a family are fixed and do not change with family size , while others are directly affected by the number of family members .

the official measure's equivalence scale was not computed directly , but rather came about implicitly because the thresholds were based on food costs and data on family expenditures .

there has been broad agreement among poverty scholars that the limitations noted above represent serious drawbacks to the official poverty measure , and also that fixing them has not been a straightforward task .

experts within the federal government , in universities , and in private research institutions have spent decades developing approaches to address these shortcomings , and evaluating the effectiveness of those approaches .

in 2009 , the office of management and budget ( omb ) convened an interagency technical working group ( itwg ) to consolidate the research and propose a single supplemental poverty measure , which would be used for research purposes only .

the itwg did not recommend supplanting the official poverty measure , nor did it recommend using the supplemental poverty measure for administrative purposes .

comments on the supplemental poverty measure were solicited through a federal register notice .

pursuant to research recommendations , the supplemental poverty measure focused on ensuring that the definition of need specified in the thresholds , and the resources available to meet those needs , were consistent with each other .

additionally , the measure's methodology was designed to be practical to implement , with the understanding that its methods would continue to be refined periodically , as new data source availability and research findings warranted .

neither the official poverty measure nor the supplemental poverty measure was established in statute .

the official measure gained its status through the bureau of the budget's circular a - 46 , issued in 1969 .

omb , the successor agency to the bureau of the budget , issued statistical policy directive 14 in 1978 , reconfirming the measure as official and directing federal agencies to use it for statistical purposes .

the directive explicitly stated that the measure was not developed for administrative purposes , and allowed for other measures of poverty to be developed , as long as the data for those measures were distinguished from the official series .

given that federal agencies , such as the census bureau , were directed to use the official measure for statistical purposes ( such as obtaining the number of people in poverty ) , any legislation that requires a count of the number of people in poverty ( or a count below some other ratio of income to poverty ) in order to determine formula grants makes use of the official poverty measure , even if the text of the legislation does not name the measure explicitly .

two examples are the state formula grant for the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) , and title i - a funding allocation formulas for school districts .

a more complete list of programs is available in appendix d of crs report r43863 , federal benefits and services for people with low income: programs and spending , fy2008-fy2013 , by karen spar and gene falk .

like the official poverty measure , the research supplemental poverty measure was not established in statute .

it was developed after decades of research both within and outside the federal government .

leading up to that effort , dozens of alternative poverty measures had been developed , some as early as the 1980s .

omb provided the auspices for an itwg that recommended the methodology for the supplemental poverty measure , and solicited public feedback through a federal register notice .

shown in table 3 are sets of dollar amounts , called poverty guidelines , that are computed and published annually by the department of health and human services .

these are different from the census bureau's poverty thresholds shown in table 1 .

unlike the measures discussed in this report , the poverty guidelines are not used to count the number of people or families in poverty .

rather , they are used for administrative purposes , such as determining whether an individual or a family qualifies for programmatic assistance .

programs sometimes use different multiples of the poverty guidelines for determining eligibility .

for instance , under the national school lunch program , a child qualifies for free lunch if his or her household's income is less than 130% of ( that is , 1.3 times ) the poverty guidelines , and qualifies for a reduced - price lunch if his or her household income is 185% of ( that is , 1.85 times ) the poverty guidelines .

these poverty guidelines are referenced in the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1981 .

the hhs poverty guidelines are not used to measure the poverty population , and therefore this report does not refer to them as a poverty "measure. .

because both the poverty guidelines and the poverty thresholds are issued by federal agencies , either set of dollar amounts could conceivably be called the "federal poverty level" ( fpl ) , and thus that term is ambiguous .

which dollar amounts are to be used depends on the context: thresholds for obtaining counts of the population in poverty ; or guidelines for administrative use , particularly with regard to an individual's or family's program eligibility .

to clarify , the official poverty measure discussed in this report is based on the poverty thresholds that are computed and published by the census bureau , and are used for statistical purposes .

as explained earlier , the official poverty thresholds were based on empirical measures of dietary need , the amount that a family in economic distress might need to spend on food in order to attempt to meet its dietary needs , and the spending patterns of families across the income distribution ( to determine what percentage of an average family's budget was spent on food ) .

however , this method yielded dozens of thresholds that were not evenly stepped by family size .

as the war on poverty developed , a set of dollar amounts was needed for practical administrative use .

the hhs poverty guidelines serve that purpose .

the hhs poverty guidelines do not directly reflect family needs as measured by food cost and family spending data because they were simplified for administrative use .

beginning in 1965 , the office of economic opportunity ( oeo ) began to issue poverty guidelines that were based on the poverty thresholds , but with one dollar amount per family size ( and at that time , farm / non - farm status ) .

these earliest oeo dollar amounts , which were the predecessors of the hhs poverty guidelines , were averages of the poverty thresholds that orshansky developed .

to obtain one dollar amount per family size , oeo averaged the thresholds that had the same family size but different compositions , weighted the average to reflect that not all family compositions occurred with equal frequency , and rounded to the nearest $5 .

a 1967 oeo memo introduced guidelines that were rounded to the nearest $100 and adjusted so that family size increments were evenly spaced by the same dollar amount .

like that of oeo , current hhs practice also applies rounding , but instead of rounding to the nearest $100 , the difference between family sizes is computed first , rounded to the nearest $20 , and then used to compute the guidelines for each family size , starting from a rounded figure for a four - person family as the base .

the hhs poverty guidelines are published every winter , typically in late january or early february .

they are computed using the weighted average thresholds published by the census bureau in its annual poverty release the previous fall , inflated forward to the current year using the consumer price index .

the steps to even out the differences between family sizes , and apply rounding , are performed after the inflation adjustment .

by applying the inflation adjustment to the poverty thresholds from the previous year , hhs is able to publish the guidelines for the current year six to eight months before the census bureau releases that year's survey estimates , and thus they can be used by program administrators that much sooner .

table 3 provides the 2017 poverty guidelines .

