the federal government is vested with the exclusive power to create rules governing alien entry and removal .

however , the impact of alien migration — whether lawful or unlawful — is arguably felt most directly in the communities where aliens reside .

state and local responses to unlawfully present aliens within their jurisdictions have varied considerably , particularly in determining the role th at state or local police should play in enforcing federal immigration law .

at one end of the spectrum , some states and localities actively assist federal immigration authorities in identifying and apprehending aliens for removal .

for example , jurisdictions sometimes enter into "287 ( g ) agreements" with the federal government , in which state or local law enforcement are deputized to perform certain immigration enforcement activities .

some states and localities have attempted to play an even greater role in immigration enforcement , in many cases because of perceptions that federal efforts have been inadequate .

in the past , some have adopted measures that criminally sanction conduct believed to facilitate the presence of unlawfully present aliens and have also instructed police to actively work to detect such aliens as part of their regular duties .

the adoption of these kinds of measures has waned considerably , though , after the supreme court's 2012 ruling in arizona v. united states held that several provisions of one such enactment , arizona's s.b .

1070 , were preempted by federal immigration law .

subsequent lower court decisions struck down many other state and local measures that imposed criminal or civil sanctions on immigration - related activity .

at the other end of the spectrum , some states and localities have been less willing to assist the federal government with its immigration enforcement responsibilities .

often dubbed "sanctuary jurisdictions," some states and localities have adopted measures that limit their participation in enforcing federal immigration laws , including , for example , prohibiting police officers from assisting with federal efforts to identify and apprehend unlawfully present aliens within the state or locality's jurisdiction .

that said , there is debate over both the meaning and application of the term "sanctuary jurisdiction. .

additionally , state and local jurisdictions have varied reasons for choosing not to cooperate with federal immigration enforcement efforts , including reasons not necessarily motivated by disagreement with federal immigration enforcement policies , such as concern about potential civil liability or the availability of state or local resources to assist federal immigration enforcement efforts .

during president donald trump's first month in office , he issued an executive order , "enhancing public safety in the interior of the united states," which , in part , seeks to encourage state and local cooperation with federal immigration enforcement and disincentivize state and local adoption of sanctuary policies .

this report discusses legal issues related to state and local measures limiting law enforcement cooperation with federal immigration authorities , as well as the federal government's efforts to counter those measures .

it begins by providing a general explanation of the term "sanctuary jurisdiction" for the purpose of this report .

next , it provides an overview of constitutional principles underlying the relationship between federal immigration laws and related state and local measures , namely , preemption and the anti - commandeering doctrine .

then , it discusses various types of laws and policies adopted by states and localities to limit their participation with federal immigration enforcement efforts , which may give rise to a label of "sanctuary jurisdiction," and federal efforts to counter those measures .

finally , the report concludes with a discussion of the lawsuits challenging the executive order targeting sanctuary jurisdictions and certain executive branch actions to implement the executive order .

state or local measures limiting police participation in immigration enforcement are not a recent phenomenon .

indeed , many of the recent "sanctuary" - type initiatives can be traced back to church activities designed to provide refuge — or "sanctuary" — to unauthorized central american aliens fleeing civil unrest in the 1980s .

a number of states and municipalities issued declarations in support of these churches' actions .

others went further and enacted more substantive measures intended to limit police involvement in federal immigration enforcement activities .

these measures have included , among other things , restricting state and local police from arresting persons for immigration violations , limiting the sharing of immigration - related information with federal authorities , and barring police from questioning a person about his or her immigration status .

still , there is no official definition of a "sanctuary" jurisdiction in federal statute or regulation .

broadly speaking , sanctuary jurisdictions are commonly understood to be those that have laws or policies designed to substantially limit involvement in federal immigration enforcement activities , though there is not necessarily a consensus as to the meaning of this term .

some jurisdictions have self - identified as a sanctuary ( or some other similar term ) .

for other jurisdictions , there might be disagreement regarding the accuracy of such a designation , particularly if state or local law enforcement cooperates with federal immigration authorities in some areas but not others .

any reference by this report to a policy of a particular jurisdiction is intended only to provide an example of the type of measure occasionally referenced in discussions of "sanctuary" policies .

these references should not be taken to indicate crs is of the view that a particular jurisdiction is a "sanctuary" for unlawfully present aliens .

the heart of the debate surrounding the permissible scope of sanctuary jurisdictions centers on the extent to which states , as sovereign entities , may decline to assist in federal efforts to enforce federal immigration law , and the degree to which the federal government can stop state action that undercuts federal objectives in a manner that is consistent with the supremacy clause and constitutional principles of federalism .

 .

several states and municipalities have adopted measures intended to limit their participation in federal immigration enforcement efforts .

these limitations take several forms .

for example , some states and localities have sought to restrict police cooperation with federal immigration authorities' efforts to apprehend removable aliens , sometimes called "don't enforce" policies .

other measures may restrict certain state officials from inquiring about a person's immigration status , sometimes referred to as "don't ask" policies .

still others restrict information sharing between local law enforcement and federal immigration authorities , sometimes described as "don't tell" policies .

the following sections discuss some state and local restrictions on law enforcement activity in the field of immigration enforcement along those lines , including the relationship between these restrictions and federal law .

over the years the federal government has enacted measures designed to counter certain sanctuary policies .

notably , in 1996 congress enacted section 434 of the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act ( prwora ) , and section 642 of the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act ( iirira ) , to curb state and local restrictions on information sharing .

most recently , the president issued executive order 13768 , "enhancing public safety in the interior of the united states," which , as relevant here , seeks to encourage state and local cooperation with federal immigration enforcement and disincentivize state and local adoption of sanctuary policies that hinder federal immigration enforcement .

these federal initiatives — and related legal issues — are described below .

shortly after taking office , president trump issued executive order ( eo ) 13768 , "enhancing public safety in the interior of the united states," which , in section 9 , addresses sanctuary jurisdictions .

specifically , section 9 ( a ) of the eo seeks to encourage state and local cooperation with federal immigration enforcement and disincentivize — by threatening to withhold federal grant money — state and local adoption of sanctuary policies .

although eo 13768 did not explicitly define "sanctuary jurisdiction," later interpretive guidance from the department of justice ( doj or justice department ) defined the term , as it is used in the executive order , as a jurisdiction that willfully refuses to comply with 8 u.s.c .

§ 1373 ( iirira § 642 ) .

this section discusses recent litigation concerning efforts by the trump administration to deter the implementation of state or local "sanctuary" policies .

it begins by providing a brief description of section 9 ( a ) of eo 13768 and the doj's implementation of its requirements .

next , it discusses ongoing litigation involving challenges to section 9 ( a ) .

several of these cases involve direct challenges to the executive order .

other lawsuits involve challenges to the justice department's decision , in implementing the executive order , to attach new conditions for grant eligibility under the edward byrne memorial justice assistance grant ( byrne jag ) program and community oriented policing services ( cops ) program , all of which are designed to encourage state and local law enforcement cooperation with federal immigration enforcement .

finally , this section discusses a lawsuit filed by the united states against california , claiming that three new state laws obstruct the federal government's immigration enforcement efforts and , as a result , violate the constitution's supremacy clause .

ongoing lawsuits concerning sanctuary jurisdictions may offer clarity on some unsettled and cross - cutting issues involving immigration and federalism .

the tenth amendment reserves for the states the "police power" to regulate and protect the health , safety , and welfare of the public , and , in adopting sanctuary policies , jurisdictions have sometimes invoked public safety concerns as a justification for enacting those measures .

but the federal government's power to regulate immigration - related matters is substantial and exclusive , and on occasion the exercise of this power has been found to render unenforceable state or local initiatives that conflict with federal immigration enforcement priorities .

additionally , congress generally may condition the receipt of federal funds on compliance with specific conditions that achieve federal goals .

still , the anti - commandeering doctrine restricts the federal government from compelling the states to administer or enforce a federal regulatory program , like the immigration laws , whether through direct compulsion or prohibition , or indirectly , through monetary incentives that are unduly coercive .

with that background , the heart of the debate in the lawsuits challenging eo 13768 and its implementation has principally centered on what constitutionally permissible methods are available to the federal government to stop or deter state and local adoption of sanctuary policies , which the government views as hindering federal immigration enforcement objectives , and , on the flip side , whether and when state and local sanctuary policies do , in fact , undercut federal immigration enforcement efforts in a manner that contravenes the supremacy clause .

in city & county of san francisco v. trump and county of santa clara v. trump , for example , the district court's ruling that enjoined section 9 ( a ) hinged , in part , on its conclusion that the executive branch lacked statutory authority from congress to withhold and create new conditions for federal grants , and that purporting to withhold all federal grants from what it labeled as sanctuary jurisdictions was unconstitutionally coercive , given the sheer amount of money a sanctuary jurisdiction would stand to lose if it didn't dispense with its policies .

congress could step in to ratify section 9 ( a ) , at least in part , using its spending power to incentivize states to cooperate with immigration enforcement , so long as it doesn't threaten to withhold an amount of money that could be deemed coercive .

and in city of chicago v. sessions and city of philadelphia v. sessions , the district courts and one appellate court concluded that the executive branch lacked statutory authority to impose some of the spending conditions that the doj attached to the byrne jag program .

likewise , congress could amend the byrne jag statute to give the attorney general , as it has done for other grant programs , the discretion to impose conditions on the receipt of the federal grant .

moreover , since murphy , the courts considering the challenges to section 1373 have concluded that the statute is no longer constitutionally viable , given the supreme court's application of the anti - commandeering doctrine to a federal statute that prohibits states from enacting certain kinds of laws .

accordingly , to achieve section 1373's goals , congress may consider using its power of the purse to incentivize states and localities to share immigration - related information with federal immigration authorities .

