t itle vii of the civil service reform act of 1978 , commonly referred to as the "federal service labor - management relations statute" ( fslmrs ) , recognizes the right of most federal employees to engage in collective bargaining with respect to their conditions of employment .

although the fslmrs does not permit the negotiation of matters that are specifically provided for by federal law , such as wages and retirement benefits , federal unions have bargained with management over a variety of other subjects , such as the availability of daycare facilities and the allocation of parking spaces .

under the fslmrs , unions may also negotiate for the availability of "official time," paid time off from assigned government duties to engage in activities related to labor - management relations .

the ability to negotiate for official time has been of particular interest to congress .

legislation that would require the reporting of official time and limit how such time is used has been introduced in the 115 th congress .

this report provides background on the fslmrs and discusses key rights afforded to federa l employees and management under the statute .

the report also examines the availability of official time and reviews some of the significant official time cases decided by the federal labor relations authority ( flra ) , the federal agency that administers the fslmrs .

prior to the enactment of the fslmrs , federal employees were permitted to engage in collective bargaining pursuant to two executive orders .

executive order 10988 , issued by president kennedy in 1962 , granted federal employees the right "to form , join and assist any employee organization or to refrain from such activity. .

under that order , once recognized as the exclusive representative of employees in an appropriate bargaining unit , an employee organization could negotiate an agreement that would cover all employees in that unit .

executive order 11491 , issued by president nixon in 1969 , further developed the framework for federal labor - management relations by establishing the ( 1 ) federal labor relations council , a predecessor to the flra , and ( 2 ) federal service impasses panel ( fsip ) , an entity that continues to provide assistance to resolve negotiation impasses .

executive order 11491 also identified unfair labor practices that were prohibited for management and labor organizations .

in 1978 , the right to engage in collective bargaining became recognized in statute through the fslmrs , which codified many of the concepts included in the executive orders .

in addition to providing for the right to engage in collective bargaining , the fslmrs also established the flra , which , among other duties , supervises union elections , adjudicates unfair labor practice complaints , and resolves questions concerning the negotiability of bargaining proposals .

under the fslmrs , a labor organization becomes the exclusive representative of a collective bargaining unit following a secret ballot election in which a majority of the employees in the unit vote favorably for the union .

once selected , the union is responsible for representing the interests of all employees in the bargaining unit , even if an individual has chosen not to join the union .

unlike organized employees in the private sector , federal employees are also prohibited from engaging in a strike .

according to the bureau of labor statistics , in 2016 , 27.4% of all federal employees were members of a union .

while the union membership rate for federal workers has declined slightly over the past ten years , it continues to exceed the union membership rate for private - sector employees .

in 2016 , only 6.4% of private - sector employees were members of a union .

this disparity in union membership rates has been noteworthy to some given the inability of federal employees to negotiate over wages and major employee benefits .

the fslmrs requires that employees who represent a union in the negotiation of a collective bargaining agreement be granted official time — paid time off from assigned government duties — for such activity .

section 7131 ( d ) of the fslmrs also permits the negotiation of additional official time "in any amount the agency and the exclusive representative involved agree to be reasonable , necessary , and in the public interest. .

the flra has interpreted this section to require the negotiation of official time proposals that involve employees performing labor - management relations activities beyond negotiation of a collective bargaining agreement .

accordingly , section 7131 ( d ) limits management's ability to assign work pursuant to section 7106 ( a ) .

in military entrance processing station los angeles and afge local 2866 , the flra observed: "section 7131 ( d ) 'carves out an exception' to management's right to assign work ; otherwise , that right 'would preclude any negotiation of official time provisions , since official time always affects an agency's ability to assign work.' .

in afge local 2761 and dep't of the army , army publications distribution ctr .

 , the flra identified some of the activities for which official time is available based on the fslmrs's legislative history: examples of representational activities for which official time may be used include the investigation and attempted informal resolution of employee grievances ; participation in formal grievance resolution procedures ; attendance at , or preparation for , meetings of committees on which both the labor organization and management are represented ; and discussion of problems in contract administration with management officials .

other activities perhaps less directly related to collective bargaining have been considered labor - management activities for which official time may be available , as well .

for example , in nat'l federation of federal employees , local 2050 and environmental protection agency , the flra found negotiable a proposal involving official time for employees who serve as union representatives and respond to media inquiries about matters affecting the bargaining unit's conditions of employment .

in nat'l federation of feder al employees local 122 and dep't of veterans affairs , the flra concluded that section 7131 ( d ) permits an agency and a union to negotiate a proposal authorizing official time for employees to lobby elected officials in support of or opposition to legislation that could affect their working conditions .

noting that the fslmrs provides employees who act as union representatives the ability to present the views of the union to congress , the flra reasoned that official time may be negotiated because a union "may have particular representational interests in lobbying congress because congress may determine directly many conditions of employment of federal employees. .

the flra emphasized , however , that official time is appropriate only if the employee is functioning as a union representative and the lobbying relates to matters that pertain to the bargaining unit's conditions of employment .

section 7131 ( d ) has also been interpreted to allow some union members to spend all of their time working on union - related matters ; that is , official time would cover an employee's entire work day .

in afge council of locals 214 v. flra , the d.c .

circuit rejected the flra's position that an official time proposal that would allow for some employees to spend 100% of their time handling union representational functions was negotiable only at the election of the agency .

the flra maintained that because the proposal was "integrally related" to the number of employees or positions assigned to a project or organizational entity , an agency could , but was not required to , negotiate .

the d.c .

circuit concluded , however , that the flra's interpretation of the fslmrs failed to give effect to section 7131 ( d ) : "the result of the flra's construction here is to drain the official time provision of any reasonable meaning and thus to frustrate the intent of congress. .

while the flra expressed concern that a 100% official time proposal could impair an agency's ability to function effectively , the d.c .

circuit maintained that its decision required only that the parties negotiate such a proposal .

the court noted that an agency "has no obligation to abandon what it conceives to be the best interests of the agency merely because it must negotiate on an official time proposal. .

however , there are limits as to what can be considered official time .

in afge local 2761 , the flra concluded that an official time proposal that would have allowed designated union representatives to attend employee funerals was not negotiable .

the flra explained: "the union does not show , and it is not apparent to us , that the use of official time to attend an employee's funeral relates to any labor - management activities under the [fslmrs]. .

in 2002 , the office of personnel management ( opm ) began requiring federal agencies to report the number of official time hours used by their employees in the preceding fiscal year .

until recently , opm produced annual reports on the government - wide use of official time .

opm's most recent report , however , was published in 2014 and includes official time statistics for fiscal year 2012 .

opm officials have reportedly maintained that the agency is not required to report official time , and that it plans to issue future official time reports on a biannual basis .

legislation that would require opm to submit official time reports to congress has been introduced in the 115 th congress .

h.r .

1293 would amend section 7131 to require opm to report , for the previous fiscal year , the total amount of official time granted to employees , the specific types of activities for which official time was provided , and the total amount of compensation afforded to employees in connection with their official time activities .

this information would have to be provided cumulatively , as well as for each individual agency .

a second bill has been introduced in the 115 th congress to prohibit the availability of official time for lobbying .

h.r .

1364 , the official time reform act of 2017 , would amend section 7131 to provide that an employee may not be granted official time "for purposes of engaging in any political activity , including lobbying activity. .

h.r .

1364 would also disallow any day spent principally on official time , in excess of an aggregate 365 days , from becoming part of an employee's creditable service for purposes of the civil service retirement system or the federal employees' retirement system .

according to the bill , an employee spends a day "principally on official time" if at least 80% of his day is spent on official time .

the house committee on oversight and government reform ordered both measures to be reported in march 2017 .

