over the past several years youth have experienced a dramatic decline in employment .

this includes during the summer months , when youth labor force activity tends to be higher than other times of the year .

one potential policy option for addressing youth employment is providing support for summer job programs , which are generally administered by cities with funding from both the public and private sectors .

though information on these programs is limited , they appear to serve a very small number of youth who are in the labor force .

the intent of summer employment is to provide income to youth and potentially meet broader goals , such as developing the professional and social skills youth need to succeed in the workplace .

the current federal workforce law , the workforce innovation and opportunities act ( wioa , p.l .

113-128 ) , was enacted in 2014 and shifted summer employment from being an optional to a mandatory activity under the youth activities program .

this program provides funding to localities across the united states for youth job training and employment activities .

other recent federal programs and initiatives have sought to expand employment opportunities for youth during the summer months .

this report provides information about summer youth employment , including for those youth who are low - income and face challenges with securing employment .

it starts by examining trends in employment among young people .

it then describes how cities and other localities operate summer job programs , as well as recent federal programs and initiatives to fund these local efforts .

the report concludes with considerations for congress about the federal role in supporting summer employment .

for purposes of this report , youth refers to individuals ages 14 through 24 except in reference to workforce data ( which is collected on individuals ages 16 or older who are in the labor force ) .

individuals as young as 14 are included because the youth activities program begins serving youth at this age .

older youth , up to age 24 , are included because they are often still in school and / or living with their parents .

the youth activities program also serves youth up to this age .

federal data on employment are collected in a survey each month by the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) , and include individuals ages 16 or older in the civilian , noninstitutionalized population .

these data can be used to assess the extent to which youth are participating in labor market activity ( i.e. , employed or looking for work ) .

the youth labor force participation rate ( lfpr ) is the share of the youth population ( 16 to 24 year old individuals ) that is either employed or actively looking for work ( i.e. , unemployed ) .

the youth e mplo yment - to - population ( e / p ) ratio is the proportion of the youth population that is employed .

the youth unemployment rate is the share of youth in the labor force ( i.e. , the sum of employed and unemployed youth ) who are unemployed .

together , these indicators help to gauge labor market conditions for young workers .

data for july are used in this report to represent labor force trends during the summer .

in july 2016 , approximately 38 million individuals in the civilian , noninstitutionalized u.s. population were ages 16 to 24 .

of these youth , slightly more than half ( approximately 20 million ) were in the labor force .

figure 1 includes monthly labor force participation rates , e / p ratios , and unemployment rates for youth ages 16 to 24 from july 1996 through july 2016 .

the figure shows the following: youth labor force activity increased during the summer months within each year , with the lfpr and e / p ratio peaking in july of most years .

youth labor force participation and the youth e / p ratio have declined since the late 1990s .

for example , the lfpr was 73.3% in july 1996 and 53.2% in july 2016 .

the e / p ratio was 64.1% in july 1996 and 53.2% in july 2016 .

the youth lfpr and e / p ratio declined markedly following the recessions of 2001 and december 2007 to june 2009 .

the lfpr and e / p ratio did not fully recover following the 2007-to - 2009 recession , but the e / p ratio showed some improvement .

neither indicator recovered to pre - 2000 rates .

rates of unemployment were similar in july 1996 ( 12.6% ) and july 2016 ( 11.5% ) .

the intervening years show a slight upward trend , most notably following the recession of 2011 and during and following the recession of 2007 to 2009 .

the unemployment rate remained elevated following the most recent recession until approximately 2013 .

figure a - 1 and figure a - 2 in appendix a break out monthly labor trend data for teenagers ages 16 to 19 and young adults ages 20 to 24 , respectively , from july 1996 through july 2016 .

they show that teens experienced striking declines in their labor force participation ( a decline of 33.3% , from 64.8% to 43.2% ) and e / p ratio ( a decline of 33.1% , from 54.0% to 36.1% ) over this time period .

labor force indicators for young adults experienced downward , but less precipitous , trends .

the labor force participation rate for young adults decreased from 80.6% to 73.1% ( a decline of about 9% ) and their e / p ratio declined from 72.8% to 66.4% ( a decline of about 9% ) .

unemployment rates for the two groups were roughly the same in both july 1996 and july 2016: about 16% for teens and 9% for young adults .

the research literature has not fully explored the labor force participation of low - income youth during the summer .

one analysis found that the summer employment rate of teens ages 16 through 19 increases with household income .

in the summer months of 2013 and 2014 , about one out of every five teens with family incomes below $20,000 were employed .

this is compared to about 28% of teens with household incomes of $20,000 to $39,000 ; and 32% to 41% of teens in households with higher incomes .

summer job programs are generally run at the city or county levels with public and private funding .

these programs offer employment experiences and other activities for young people who are usually between the ages of 14 and 24 .

activities can include exploring career options , project - based learning whereby youth learn about work through in - depth study , simulated work environments , training in employment skills , mentoring and assistance in finding unsubsidized positions , and internships .

there is not a census of youth who are employed in summer jobs .

a survey of 40 cities found that nearly 116,000 youth were placed in such jobs in 2015 .

figure 2 shows common characteristics of youth summer employment programs .

generally , these programs are targeted to young people in high school and some older youth who have little job experience and may lack strong family or community connections .

given concerns about youth employment rates , mayors and other municipal leaders have recently taken steps to expand summer employment programs .

there is scant information about how localities fund their summer employment programs .

they likely use a combination of funding from public ( federal , state , and local ) and private ( foundations and businesses ) sources .

private sector support encompasses both funding to cities to expand summer youth initiatives and providing job placements for youth .

for example , the boston private industry council , the city's workforce development board , secured more than 2,600 unsubsidized jobs from local employers in the summer of 2015 .

businesses like jp morgan chase , bank of america , and citi have provided financial support to multiple cities for summer jobs and created work placement programs for low - income youth across their various business locations .

further , there is little information about the cost of operating these programs , though cities report that the largest share of the programs' budgets are for subsidized wages .

the typical cost per participant is approximately $1,400 to $2,000 .

summer employment programs are generally intended to serve young people and their families , and potentially meet broader objectives .

the rationale for these programs may include the following: providing income to youth and their families ; encouraging youth to develop "soft skills" and professional skills that can help them navigate their environments and work well with others ; improving the academic outcomes and prospects for employment of youth in the future ; deterring youth from activities that could lead to them getting in trouble or being harmed ; and providing greater economic opportunities to youth in areas with few employment prospects .

federal workforce laws since 1964 have included summer job training and employment activities .

these laws have targeted such activities to low - income and other vulnerable youth .

over time , summer employment has gone from a stand - alone program under the job training partnership act ( jtpa , p.l .

97-300 ) , enacted from 1982 to 1998 ; to a required activity under the workforce investment act ( wia , p.l .

105-220 ) , enacted from 1998 to 2014 ; and then to an optional activity under wioa , enacted in 2014 and effective as of july 1 , 2015 .

wioa authorizes the youth activities program , the major federal workforce program for youth .

the program received fy2016 appropriations of $873 million .

funding under the program is allocated to states based on relative income and employment factors .

states then allocate funds to localities , through what are known as local workforce development boards ( governmental entities that administer local workforce development funds ) , based on similar factors .

localities are to provide education and employment activities to youth who have barriers to employment , and at least three - quarters of participants must be out of school .

as noted , summer employment is an allowable , but not required , activity under the program .

data are not yet available on the number of youth who have participated in summer employment under wioa .

the workforce investment act ( wia , p.l .

105-220 ) preceded wioa , and directed local areas to offer summer employment activities to low - income youth via the youth activities program .

approximately 18,000 to 20,000 eligible youth annually participated in summer employment activities under the wia youth activities program in recent years .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 , arra , or recovery act ) , which was enacted to bolster the economy during the 2007-2009 recession , had a focus on summer employment .

in the accompanying conference report for the law , congress specified that the $1.2 billion in arra funds for the wia youth activities program should be used for both summer youth employment and year - round employment opportunities , particularly for youth up to age 24 .

approximately 40% of arra dollars for the youth activities program was used for employment during the summer months , and a total of 374,489 youth participated in summer employment opportunities .

in light of changes to workforce law with regard to summer employment opportunities , recent federal initiatives have sought to bolster the summer employment prospects for young people , as summarized in table 1 .

in considering whether to further support localities in their efforts to expand summer employment , congress may want to examine the efficacy of summer employment programs and promising approaches to serving young people in these programs .

as shown in figure 2 , summer employment programs are short - term interventions that vary in their intensity and support for youth .

thus , summer jobs may not necessarily lead to changes in behavior or may have unintended consequences .

for example , youth may stay out of trouble during working hours but engage in criminal behavior in the evenings or on weekends .

the research literature on the effectiveness of summer employment programs is limited .

some studies have examined the experiences of youth in the programs and whether youth showed improvements over the summer and beyond .

dol conducted studies on how youth engaged in summer employment funded under arra in summer 2009 .

approximately three - quarters ( 76% ) of youth demonstrated work readiness skills after participating , but the study did not determine impacts on youth .

further , few studies have been conducted that involve youth randomly assigned to summer employment programs .

rigorous evaluations of federally funded summer employment programs that operated in communities from the 1960s through the 1980s found that some had short - term impacts for selected outcomes ; however , they did not have impacts on most outcomes over the long term , or failed to overcome methodological challenges .

more recent research shows that selected summer employment programs are showing promising results .

evaluations of the one summer plus ( osp ) program in chicago and the summer youth employment program ( syep ) in new york city indicate that summer jobs can reduce violent crime committed by youth participants , reduce the probability of incarceration or death , or improve academic outcomes .

the results of the evaluations are summarized in table b - 1 .

according to a 2016 study by the brookings institution , there are multiple challenges to developing and expanding summer employment programs for youth .

a major obstacle is funding , both the level of funding needed to operate a program and the uncertainty of when and how much local and state funding will be available .

municipal and other program leaders often do not have a budget until the spring , when a program is well underway .

in addition , program staff must take on many tasks simultaneously , including recruiting participants and employers , matching youth with worksites , and monitoring implementation of the program .

some summer programs do not have adequate levels of employees to take on tasks such as matching youth to appropriate worksites and preparing supervisors for their roles .

in addition , some summer programs are not able to reach or assist the most vulnerable youth who have additional barriers to work such as unstable housing .

nonetheless , the 2016 study identifies promising features for achieving successful summer employment programs: program design , and capacity and infrastructure .

p rogram design encompasses many elements , including ( 1 ) recruiting employers and worksites to provide the maximum number of job opportunities ; ( 2 ) matching young people with opportunities that are well aligned with their abilities and skills ; ( 3 ) preparing young people to succeed with professional training and financial literacy skills ; ( 4 ) supporting youth and supervisors , such as having staff that provide coaching at the worksite ; and ( 5 ) ensuring that youth connect to other opportunities in the community , such as year - round employment and programs to prepare youth for employment the following summer .

c apacity and infrastructure includes ensuring a level of staff sufficient to carry out high - quality programming , and technology systems that can facilitate better program file and records management , communication with young people , and payroll automation .

promising programs have also developed tools , like guidebooks , that consolidate information about the program for program staff , youth , and workplace supervisors .

appendix a .

monthly labor force trends for youth appendix b .

recent evaluations of summer job programs for yout .

