marijuana is the most commonly used illicit drug in the united states .

it is a psychoactive drug that generally consists of leaves and flowers of the cannabis sativa plant .

its history dates back thousands of years , but in the united states , it became popular as a recreational drug in the early 20 th century .

the thc content of marijuana is dependent on both the variety of the cannabis plant and the part used .

under federal law , cannabis and its derivatives are classified as schedule i controlled substances — thus prohibiting their possession , cultivation , or distribution — under the controlled substances act ( csa ) , regardless of its thc content , unless specifically exempted or listed in another schedule ( see " controlled substances act " ) .

the percentage of the population 12 and older currently using ( past month use of ) marijuana has generally increased over the last several years — from 6.9% in 2010 to 8.3% in 2015 .

the rate of past - month marijuana use among youth ( aged 12-17 ) , however , has remained relatively unchanged over this period ( 7.0% ) .

youth also generally perceive that obtaining marijuana — if they desire it — is relatively easy .

indeed , marijuana is available throughout the united states ; 34% of state and local law enforcement agencies that were surveyed by the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) reported an increase in availability over the last year , and 62% reported that availability had remained the same .

this report provides a background on federal marijuana policy and an overview of state trends with respect to marijuana decriminalization and legalization — for both medical and recreational uses .

it then analyzes relevant issues for federal law enforcement and the implications of state marijuana legalization .

the report also outlines a number of related policy questions that congress may confront , including legalization in the district of columbia , financial services for marijuana businesses , the medical nature of marijuana , oversight of federal law enforcement , and evaluation of marijuana as a schedule i drug .

while the federal government maintains marijuana's current placement as a schedule i controlled substance , states have established a range of laws and policies regarding its medical and recreational use .

these developments have spurred a number of questions regarding potential implications for federal drug enforcement activities and for the nation's drug policies as a whole .

in 1970 , the csa placed the control of marijuana under federal jurisdiction regardless of state regulations and laws , and its status has remained unchanged under federal law for nearly 50 years .

for more background on federal marijuana policy and the history of how marijuana came to be illegal in the united states , see appendix b .

over the past few decades , most states have deviated from an across - the - board prohibition of marijuana , and as of march 2017 , nearly 90% of the states , as well as puerto rico and the district of columbia , allowed for the medical use of marijuana in some capacity .

also , eight states and the district of columbia now allow for the recreational use of marijuana .

it is now more so the rule than the exception that states have laws and policies allowing for some manufacturing , sale , distribution , and possession of marijuana — all of which are contrary to the csa , except for the purposes of sanctioned research .

evolving state - level positions on marijuana include decriminalization initiatives , legal exceptions for medical use , and legalization of certain quantities for recreational use .

see figure 2 at the end of this section for the various marijuana policies of states .

decriminalization and legalization initiatives in the states reflect growing public support for the legalization of marijuana .

as mentioned , just prior to passage of the csa in 1970 , 12% of surveyed individuals aged 18 and older felt that marijuana should be made legal .

in 2016 , more than half ( 60% ) of surveyed u.s. adults expressed that marijuana should be legalized .

while the majority of the american public supports marijuana legalization , some have voiced concern over possible negative implications , particularly with respect to recreationa l legalization .

some concerns were outlined as enforcement priorities by doj in monitoring state legalization .

these implications include , but are not limited to , the potential impact of legalization on ( 1 ) use of marijuana , particularly among youth ; ( 2 ) traffic - related incidents involving marijuana - impaired drivers ; ( 3 ) trafficking of marijuana from states that have legalized it into neighboring states that have not ; and ( 4 ) u.s. compliance with international treaties .

on the other hand , some have been encouraged by the potential outcomes from marijuana legalization , including new tax revenue for states and a potential decrease in marijuana - related arrests .

not all potential implications are discussed in this report , and some are yet to be fully measured .

of note , data on potential effects of marijuana legalization should be interpreted with caution , as they are fairly limited , and not all factors are presented when reporting changes in statistics since state legalization .

further , conclusions about the impact of marijuana legalization would be premature without broader inclusion of both historical data and additional years of post - legalization data , as well as consideration of other factors aside from legalization .

given the current federal marijuana policy gap with certain states , there are a number of issues that congress may address .

these include , but are not limited to , issues surrounding financial services for marijuana businesses , federal tax issues for these businesses , oversight of federal law enforcement , allowance of states to implement medical marijuana laws and involvement of federal health care workers , and consideration of marijuana's designation as a schedule i drug .

in spite of the guidance issued by fincen and doj , many financial institutions remain reluctant to openly enter relationships with state - authorized marijuana businesses .

some marijuana businesses and marijuana industry proponents have complained that even when marijuana businesses are able to open bank accounts or secure other financial services , those customer relationships are frequently terminated in relatively short order , especially when the existence of the relationship between the financial institution and the marijuana business becomes public .

over the years , several legislative proposals have been designed to jump - start financial relationships with state - authorized marijuana businesses .

some of these proposals would attempt to alleviate bsa reporting burdens beyond the measures detailed in the 2014 fincen guidance .

these proposals also would amend banking laws to prevent banking regulators from "prohibit[ing] , penaliz[ing] , or otherwise discourag[ing] a depository institution from providing financial services to a marijuana - related legitimate business" ( i.e. , one that is in compliance with a state or local marijuana regulatory regime ) .

while such measures , if enacted , might help around the edges , many financial institutions and their federal regulators may remain apprehensive about ties to the marijuana industry while marijuana is listed as a schedule i controlled substance under the csa .

in the absence of legislative change to the csa , financial institutions must proceed with the knowledge that the administration could reverse or otherwise make significant changes to its enforcement priorities and policies .

in other words , while these financial institutions may not be the subject of law enforcement investigations currently , the option remains .

other legislative proposals would reclassify marijuana as a schedule ii substance — this would legalize marijuana for medical purposes .

this would likely do more to ease bank concerns with providing financial services to medical marijuana businesses but would not entirely eliminate a financial institution's legal risks , particularly if it associates with medical marijuana businesses that operate in states or localities lacking strong regulatory oversight and enforcement standards .

additionally , the reclassification of marijuana to schedule ii probably would have little impact on the provision of financial services to recreational marijuana businesses because they would still be operating in violation of the csa .

marijuana producers and retailers may not deduct the costs of selling their product ( eg , payroll , rent , or advertising ) for the purposes of the federal income tax filings .

the internal revenue code ( irc ) section 280e states that no deduction or credit shall be allowed for any amount paid or incurred during the taxable year in carrying on any trade or business if such trade or business ( or the activities which comprise such trade or business ) consists of trafficking in controlled substances ( within the meaning of schedule i and ii of the controlled substances act ) which is prohibited by federal law or the law of any state in which such trade or business is conducted .

media reports indicate that the internal revenue service ( irs ) has enforced section 280e in audits of marijuana - related businesses by refusing to accept these businesses' deductions .

irc section 280e does not prohibit a marijuana business from deducting the costs of cultivating or acquiring marijuana as a "cost of goods sold," though .

effectively this constitutes an implicit tax on marijuana - related businesses equal to the value of the tax benefit of such deductions if these firms had engaged in an industry that was legal under federal law .

one such public case involves the sacramento - based canna care marijuana dispensary .

the irs disallowed $2.6 million in deductions for employee salaries , rent , and other costs over a three - year period , which resulted in the business owing $875,000 in additional taxes .

canna care challenged the irs in u.s. tax court , but ultimately the court upheld the irs ruling .

the discrepancies between federal , state , and local tax treatments of marijuana - related businesses may create economic incentives to engage in the underground economy .

in addition to the uncertainty of federal tax enforcement procedures ( and costs of any related legal assistance ) , the inability of marijuana businesses to deduct their business expenses is effectively an implicit tax up to 39.6% ( if organized as sole - proprietor or partnership ) or 35% ( if organized as a c corporation ) of the cost of these expenses .

these implicit taxes are paid in addition to state and local sales and special excise taxes .

the status quo administration of federal tax laws creates an economic advantage for illicit marijuana sellers , who are not subject to direct taxation of their sales .

past marijuana - related tax proposals have varied in scope .

some would have exempted a business ( that conducts marijuana sales in compliance with state law ) from the section 280e prohibition against allowing business - related tax credits or deductions for expenditures in connection with trafficking in controlled substances .

in contrast , one bill would have removed marijuana from all lists of controlled substances ( and , indirectly , irc §280e restrictions on marijuana ) , and another would have imposed a federal excise tax on domestic recreational marijuana retail sales that would begin at 10% of the price and phase in a tax rate of 25% over four years .

in exercising its oversight authorities , congress may choose to examine the extent to which ( if at all ) federal law enforcement missions — in particular the dea's mission — are impacted by state legalization of marijuana .

for instance , policymakers may elect to review the mission of each federal law enforcement agency involved in enforcing the csa and examine how its drug - related investigations may be influenced by the varying state - level policies regarding marijuana .

as noted , federal law enforcement has generally prioritized the investigation of drug traffickers and dealers over that of low - level drug users .

policymakers may question whether these policies and priorities are implemented consistently across states with different drug policies regarding marijuana .

one issue policymakers may debate is whether or how to incentivize task forces , fusion centers , and other coordinating bodies charged with combating drug - related crimes .

before determining whether to increase , decrease , or maintain funding for coordinated efforts such as task forces , policymakers may consider whether state and local counterparts are able to effectively achieve task force goals if the respective state marijuana policy is not in agreement with federal marijuana policy .

policymakers may choose to evaluate whether certain drug task forces are sustainable in states that have established policies that are either inconsistent — such as in states that have decriminalized small amounts of marijuana possession — or are in direct conflict — including states that have legalized either medical or recreational marijuana — with federal drug policy .

for instance , might there be any internal conflicts that prevent task force partners from collaborating effectively to carry out their investigations ? .

of note , the arizona court of appeals ruled that patients who possess marijuana in compliance with the arizona medical marijuana act are entitled to the return of their marijuana that law enforcement may have seized during a traffic stop .

in states such as colorado , media reports indicate that some local law enforcement officers avoid seizing marijuana in certain cases because they do not want to have to return the marijuana to its owner — an act that is tantamount to distribution of a schedule i controlled substance , a violation of federal law .

as noted , in responding to states with recreational legalization initiatives , doj issued federal enforcement priorities for states with legal marijuana .

according to doj , it monitors the effects of state legalization by collaborating with other doj components and other federal agencies in assessment of marijuana enforcement - related data ; prosecuting cases that threaten federal enforcement priorities ; and consulting with state officials about areas of federal concern .

as of december 2015 , however , doj has not documented its efforts to monitor the effects of state legalization and ensure that these priorities are being emphasized .

it is unclear how the metrics to evaluate these priorities will be used to determine whether federal intervention is needed in states that have legalized .

for example , one of the eight enforcement priorities listed by deputy attorney general cole was to prevent the diversion of marijuana to other states .

while it seems the dea is aware of increased marijuana trafficking from colorado to kansas , it is unclear what level of increased trafficking might trigger action by the federal government against state marijuana laws .

congress may choose to exercise oversight over doj's enforcement priorities and metrics for tracking illicit activity in the states .

congress may also request research on or an investigation of this issue outside of actions by the administration .

the administration may alter or reverse its enforcement priorities at any time .

as mentioned , in a february 2017 white house press statement , the trump administration indicated there may be increased enforcement against recreational marijuana , and stated that there is a "big difference" between medical and recreational marijuana .

state medical marijuana laws have raised questions for federal policymakers about enforcing federal law related to marijuana in situations where individuals or organizations are acting in compliance with state law .

in previous congresses , members of both the house and the senate have introduced legislation that would amend the csa such that provisions relating to marijuana would not apply to a person who is acting in compliance with relevant state law .

as discussed , in recent years , congress has included policy riders in appropriations acts to prohibit doj from using funds to prevent states from implementing their medical marijuana laws .

congress may decide to alter , maintain , or reverse this provision .

notably , in a february 2017 white house press statement , the trump administration signaled some acceptance of the medicinal use of marijuana: "[t]he president understands the pain and suffering that many people go through who are facing especially terminal diseases and the comfort that some of these drugs , including medical marijuana , can bring to them. .

a topic of particular interest to federal policymakers has been how federal health care providers — especially those in the department of veterans affairs ( va ) — deal with state medical marijuana laws .

va policy does not deny health care services to veterans who participate in state marijuana programs ; however , it does prohibit va providers from completing the forms that effectively take the place of prescriptions in state medical marijuana programs .

members in both chambers have introduced legislation that would allow va providers to complete such forms .

similar provisions passed the senate as part of an fy2016 appropriations bill , and passed the senate committee on appropriations as part of an fy2017 appropriations bill ; however , neither were included in an enacted appropriations law .

as the gap between federal and state policies on marijuana widens each year , policymakers might decide to reevaluate federal marijuana policy .

it has only been a few years since states began to legalize recreational marijuana , but over 20 years since they began to legalize medical marijuana .

a large majority of states now have marijuana policies that contradict the csa .

in addressing state - level legalization efforts , congress could take one of several routes .

it could elect to take no action , thereby upholding the federal government's current marijuana policy and enforcement priorities .

it may also decide that the csa must be enforced in states and direct federal law enforcement to strictly enforce the csa , even when individuals may be in compliance with state laws .

alternatively , congress could choose to reevaluate marijuana's placement as a schedule i controlled substance .

given the history of its scheduling , congress may consider establishing a committee of experts to evaluate the efficacy of marijuana laws in the united states and address other issues such as the medicinal value and harm of marijuana use .

upon reevaluation , should congress determine that marijuana no longer meets the criteria to be a schedule i substance , it could take legislative action to remove it from the list of substances on that schedule .

in doing so , congress may ( 1 ) place marijuana on one of the other schedules ( ii , iii , iv , or v ) of controlled substances or ( 2 ) remove marijuana as a controlled substance altogether .

if congress chooses to remove marijuana as a controlled substance , it could alternatively seek to regulate and tax commercial marijuana activities .

if marijuana remains a controlled substance under the csa under any schedule , this would not eliminate the existing conflict with states that have legalized recreational marijuana .

if the conflict remains , congress may choose to continue to allow states to carry on with implementation of recreational marijuana laws , or it may choose to press for increased enforcement action against or within the states to attempt to stop state - sanctioned , recreational marijuana .

appendix a .

medical research on marijuana approved drugs and ongoing research the food and drug administration ( fda ) has approved two drugs containing synthetic thc: nabilone and dronabinol .

nabilone is fda - approved as an antiemetic ( to reduce nausea or prevent vomiting ) for patients receiving chemotherapy for cancer .

dronabinol is fda - approved as both an antiemetic for patients on chemotherapy and an appetite stimulant for patients with aids - related weight loss .

in addition , drugs containing plant - derived thc and / or cannabidiol ( cbd , a nonpsychoactive chemical component of marijuana ) are in the drug development and approval process .

the uk - based gw pharmaceuticals has plant - derived cannabinoid drug products in trials with the goal of fda approval .

its drug sativex® , which is composed primarily of plant - derived thc and cbd , has already gained approval in 30 other countries for the treatment of spasticity due to multiple sclerosis .

in 2014 , the company announced that the fda had granted "fast track" designation to sativex as a potential pain reliever for patients with advanced cancer ; however , in 2015 , three trials of sativex failed to show superiority over a placebo .

the company continues to seek approval of sativex and other plant - derived cannabinoid products for treatment of various conditions ( eg , childhood epilepsy ) .

scientific evaluations of marijuana recent evaluations conducted separately by the fda and the national academies of sciences , engineering , and medicine ( the national academies ) illustrate the challenge of meeting the required standard of evidence .

while taking different approaches to their evaluations , both the fda and the national academies have found that the current evidence base falls short .

fda evaluation .

the fda evaluated only marijuana , not drugs containing a plant - derived chemical constituent of marijuana or drugs containing synthetic thc .

its analysis of marijuana's potential therapeutic effects is limited to 11 published studies that met criteria for inclusion in the review ( eg , that the study must be a randomized controlled trial ) .

the studies examined marijuana's use to treat neuropathic pain ( five studies ) , stimulate appetite in patients with hiv ( two studies ) , treat glaucoma ( two studies ) , treat spasticity in multiple sclerosis ( one study ) , and treat asthma ( one study ) .

the evaluation also assessed potential risks of marijuana use ( see text box , "risks associated with marijuana use" ) .

the evaluation , called an eight - factor analysis , was conducted by the fda pursuant to a request by the dea .

the dea requests such scientific and medical evaluations from the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) in response to petitions asking the dea to reschedule marijuana administratively .

national academies evaluation .

the national academies evaluated cannabis , its constituents , and drugs containing synthetic thc .

for each of 11 health topics , the report assessed "fair - and good - quality" research , relying on systematic reviews published since 2011 ( where available ) and primary research published after the systematic review ( or since 1999 , if no systematic review exists ) .

the 11 health topics are ( 1 ) therapeutic effects ; ( 2 ) cancer ; ( 3 ) cardiometabolic risk ; ( 4 ) respiratory disease ; ( 5 ) immunity ; ( 6 ) injury and death ; ( 7 ) prenatal , perinatal , and postnatal exposure to cannabis ; ( 8 ) psychosocial effects ; ( 9 ) mental health ; ( 10 ) problem cannabis use ; and ( 11 ) cannabis use and abuse of other substances .

the report presents nearly 100 conclusions , including some related to the challenges in conducting research with cannabis and cannabinoids .

federal research requirements for marijuana many federal research requirements are standard across all schedules of controlled substances ; however , some requirements vary according to the assigned schedule of the particular substance .

federal regulations are more stringent for schedule i substances — including marijuana .

examples of this include the following: for schedule i substances , such as marijuana , even if practitioners have a dea registration for a substance in schedules ii - v , they must obtain a separate dea registration for schedule i substances .

individuals who seek to register to manufacture a controlled substance in schedule i or ii are subject to production quota limitations as determined by the dea , but registrants for substances in schedules iii - v are not subject to such quotas .

researchers are required to store schedule i and ii substances in electronically monitored safes , steel cabinets , or vaults that meet or exceed certain specifications .

they are required to store schedule iii - v substances by secure standards but the requirements are less stringent than those required for schedule i and ii substances .

when researchers apply for a dea registration to conduct research involving schedule i controlled substances , they must comply with federal regulations specifying the form and content of the research protocols .

the dea administrator must forward a copy of the application and research protocol to hhs , which is responsible for determining "the qualifications and competency of the applicant , as well as the merits of the protocol. .

the hhs secretary delegates that responsibility to the fda .

no equivalent process is required for schedule ii - v controlled substances .

marijuana supply for researchers under the csa , the attorney general is required to register an applicant to manufacture schedule i or ii controlled substances "if he determines that such registration is consistent with the public interest and with united states obligations under international treaties , conventions , or protocols in effect on may 1 , 1971. .

in the case of marijuana , the national center for natural products research at the university of mississippi has been the only registered manufacturer , operating under a contract administered by the national institute on drug abuse ( nida ) within hhs's national institutes of health .

for nearly 50 years , it has been the only official source through which researchers may obtain marijuana for research purposes — and which some have referred to as a "federal research monopoly. .

some have contended that marijuana provided by nida to researchers is "both qualitatively and quantitatively inadequate. .

marijuana's status as a schedule i drug has reportedly created difficulty for researchers who seek to study the substance but are potentially unable to meet the strict requirements of the csa , or perhaps they seek to utilize a different quality of marijuana than what is available through nida .

in august 2016 , the dea announced a policy change "designed to foster research by expanding the number of dea - registered marijuana manufacturers. .

under the new policy , the dea is willing to license additional growers to "operate independently , provided the grower agrees ( through a written memorandum of agreement with dea ) that it will only distribute marijuana with prior , written approval from dea. .

in addition , under the new policy , these growers will only be permitted to supply marijuana to dea - registered researchers whose "protocols have been determined by [hhs] to be scientifically meritorious. .

this new approach , dea states , will allow individuals to obtain a dea cultivation registration "not only to supply federally funded or other academic researchers , but also for strictly commercial endeavors funded by the private sector and aimed at drug product development. .

given that both the fda and the dea identified the lack of research as a significant factor in denying the rescheduling petitions in 2016 , and to the extent that this policy may increase the amount of marijuana research conducted , the change could contribute to future debate on rescheduling .

appendix b .

background on federal marijuana policy early 20 th century prior to 1937 , the growth and use of marijuana was legal under federal law .

during the course of promoting federal legislation to control marijuana , henry anslinger , the first commissioner of the federal bureau of narcotics ( fbn ) , and others submitted testimony to congress regarding the evils of marijuana use , claiming that it incited violent and insane behavior .

of note , commissioner anslinger had informed congress that "the major criminal in the united states is the drug addict ; that of all the offenses committed against the laws of this country , the narcotic addict is the most frequent offender. .

the federal government unofficially banned marijuana under the marihuana tax act of 1937 ( mta ; p.l .

75-238 ) .

the mta imposed a strict regulation requiring a high - cost transfer tax stamp on marijuana sales , and these stamps were rarely issued by the federal government .

shortly after passage of the mta , all states made the possession of marijuana illegal .

mid - 20 th century in the decades after enactment of the mta , congress continued to pass drug control legislation and further criminalized drug abuse .

for example , the boggs act ( p.l .

82-255 ) , passed in 1951 , established mandatory prison sentences for some drug offenses , while the 1956 narcotic control act ( p.l .

84-728 ) further increased penalties for drug offenses .

in conjunction with growing support for a medical approach to addressing drug abuse , there was a strong emphasis on law enforcement control of narcotics .

congress shifted the constitutional basis for drug control from its taxing authority to its power to regulate interstate commerce , and in 1968 the fbn merged with the bureau of drug abuse control and was transferred from treasury to the department of justice .

several years later , president nixon would declare a war on drugs .

congress and president nixon enhanced federal control of drugs in the enactment of comprehensive federal drug laws — including the controlled substances act ( csa ) , enacted as title ii of the comprehensive drug abuse prevention and control act of 1970 ( p.l .

91-513 ) .

the csa placed the control of marijuana and other plant , drug , and chemical substances under federal jurisdiction regardless of state regulations and laws .

in designating marijuana as a schedule i controlled substance , this legislation officially prohibited the manufacture , distribution , dispensation , and possession of marijuana .

the shafer commission as part of the csa , the national commission on marihuana and drug abuse , also known as the shafer commission , was established to study marijuana in the united states .

specifically , this commission was charged with examining issues such as ( a ) the extent of use of marihuana in the united states to include its various sources of users , number of arrests , number of convictions , amount of marihuana seized , type of user , nature of use ; ( b ) an evaluation of the efficacy of existing marihuana laws ; ( c ) a study of the pharmacology of marihuana and its immediate and long - term effects , both physiological and psychological ; ( d ) the relationship of marihuana use to aggressive behavior and crime ; ( e ) the relationship between marihuana and the use of other drugs ; and ( f ) the international control of marihuana .

the shafer commission , in concluding its review , produced two reports: ( 1 ) marihuana: a signal of misunderstanding , and ( 2 ) drug use in america: problem in perspective .

in its first report , the shafer commission discussed the perception of marijuana as a major social problem and how it came to be viewed as such .

it made a number of recommendations , including the development of a "social control policy seeking to discourage marihuana use , while concentrating primarily on the prevention of heavy and very heavy use. .

in this first report , the commission also called the application of criminal law in cases of personal use of marijuana "constitutionally suspect" and declared that "total prohibition is functionally inappropriate. .

of note , federal criminalization and prohibition of marijuana was never altered , either administratively or legislatively , to comply with the recommendations of the shafer commission .

in its second report , the shafer commission reviewed the use of all drugs in the united states , not solely marijuana .

it examined the origins of the country's drug problem , including the social costs of drug use , and once again made specific recommendations regarding social policy .

among other conclusions regarding marijuana , the commission indicated that aggressive behavior generally cannot be attributed to its use .

the commission also reaffirmed its previous findings and recommendations regarding marijuana and added the following statement: the risk potential of marihuana is quite low compared to the potent psychoactive substances , and even its widespread consumption does not involve social cost now associated with most of the stimulants and depressants ( jones , 1973 ; tinklenberg , 1971 ) .

nonetheless , the commission remains persuaded that availability of this drug should not be institutionalized at this time .

at the conclusion of the second report , the shafer commission recommended that congress launch a subsequent commission to reexamine the broad issues surrounding drug use and societal response .

while a number of congressionally directed commissions regarding drugs have since been established , no such commission has been directed to review the comprehensive issues of drug use , abuse , and response in the united states .

