the military missions of department of defense ( dod ) units and organizations drive the need for facilities and the supporting infrastructure on any given military installation .

therefore , as the missions assigned to those organizations change , as organizations move to or away from an installation , or as buildings age or become obsolete , facilities and supporting infrastruct ure may need to be replaced or reconfigured .

while each of the military departments has its own unique processes for vetting and setting military construction ( milcon ) priorities , the milcon process is formally structured to comply with the planning , programming , budgeting and execution ( ppbe ) process of the dod .

moving from the realization of need ( requirements determination ) through the planning , programming , and budgeting process could take three or more years for a milcon project .

when adding the time required for congressional authorization and appropriations , implementation of the federal contracting process , and the physical construction of the project , the end - to - end military construction process―beginning with the realization of the need for a facility to the opening of its doors for occupancy―may span seven years or more .

chapter 169 of title 10 , united states code , contains most of the laws governing m ilitary construction matters .

section 2801 provides definitions of certain terms used in the chapter and elsewhere in law .

it defines the term military construction as "any construction , development , conversion , or extension of any kind carried out with respect to a military installation , whether to satisfy temporary or permanent requirements , or any acquisition of land or construction of a defense access road. .

it also specifies that a military construction project includes " all military construction work ... necessary to produce a complete and usable facility or a complete and usable improvement to an existing facility ( or to produce such portion of a complete and usable facility or improvement as is specifically authorized by law ) . .

the need for a particular construction project may be part of a top - down initiative , such as the creation of new missions for a given installation or the movement of units or offices between installations , or it may be the result of needed modernization or replacement of existing buildings .

in either case , the process begins with a facility requirements evaluation by the installation's engineering staff .

installation engineers evaluate the future need for facilities such as training classrooms , firing ranges , barracks , and family housing , and compare them to the facilities that already exist .

if they discover or anticipate a shortfall , the engineers will weigh the costs and time required to rehabilitate or alter structures on site against the cost and time required to replace them .

as discussed , funding for additions or alterations to existing buildings and the construction of new buildings where costs exceed $2 million is provided through annual military construction appropriations .

facility repair at a military base is generally supported through the o&m accounts in the annual defense appropriation bill .

after engineers determine that a specific military construction project is needed , the prioritization of prospective military construction generally begins at a conference of the installation's engineers and representatives of all major resident organizations and other installation tenants .

this group is commonly referred to as a facilities utilization board .

the result of these conferences―a prioritized list of construction needs― is presented to the installation's senior military commander , who then accepts or adjusts the priorities to create a final list of proposed projects for submission up the chain of command .

the substance of that submission can be seen in a department of defense form 1391 ( dd 1391 ) , military construction project data sheet ( see an example dd 1391 at appendix c ) , created for each proposed project by the installation engineers .

the dd 1391 includes a cost estimate , a description of the proposed construction , the specific requirement for the project ( eg , a change in mission or deterioration of facilities already in use ) , the current facility situation at the installation , the impact on installation mission if the project is not approved , and any other needed justification information .

the dd 1391 form will accompany the construction request throughout the executive and legislative process .

the highest - priority projects that will fit within the budgetary guidance provided by the office of management and budget ( omb ) will be included in the president's request .

the approved projects assigned a lower priority are slated for funding in future years and are typically included in the future years defense program ( fydp ) , which is a catalogue that summarizes the forces , resources , and programs associated with dod operations over a five - year period .

therefore , some construction projects may survive the screening process only to be placed in the budgeting queue for a future year's submission .

even then , because budget levels fluctuate and the entire construction list is reviewed annually , a given project's priority may change .

legislation to appropriate funding for military construction originates as a bill in the military construction , veterans affairs , and related agencies subcommittees within the committees on appropriations for both the house and the senate .

as is the case with the annual national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) , which authorizes these appropriations , the committee reports accompanying the appropriations bills may provide useful information in addition to that found in the bills themselves .

see figure 2 .

while the committees and subcommittees exercise jurisdiction over the legislation required to set policy , authorize actions , and provide the budget authority dod needs , they also usually provide opportunities for individual members of congress not assigned to the committees of jurisdiction to provide input regarding specific construction projects .

during the period when legislation is being drafted , the committees may also issue guidance to members wishing to submit input to the committee in considering military construction matters .

the guidance might suggest additional documentation that could prove helpful to the committee in its deliberations and may also set a deadline for submission of such information .

often that deadline is set for late march , when the subcommittee staffs begin to prepare for markup of the necessary legislation .

with congressional authorization and an appropriation , the responsibility for managing military construction projects typically falls to either naval facilities engineering command ( navfac ) for navy and marine corps projects , or the army corps of engineers ( ace ) for army and air force projects .

army and air national guard headquarters bureaus manage their respective projects .

construction encompasses several phases , including the planning and design of the project , the solicitation of bids from prospective general contractors , and the construction itself .

normally , one of two general approaches , design - bid - build or design - build , will be used by the contracting officer in executing the project .

