the distribution of income in the united states continues to hold considerable congressional and public attention .

growing distance between earners at the top of the distribution and those in the middle and bottom of the distribution in recent decades has been a particular focus , as policymakers and analysts seek to understand the driving forces behind these distributional patterns and their broader implications for living standards and economic growth .

in support of congressional consideration , this report describes recent and long - term income distribution trends ; provides a summary of research on key factors that contribute to recent distributional patterns ; and identifies potential linkages between inequality and economic growth .

this section explores income distribution and income mobility trends using estimates from a variety of data sources .

census data are used to illustrate distributional trends for the overall population and within racial groups .

income data from the world wealth and income database ( wid ) — a privately constructed series based on internal revenue service ( irs ) records — are used to explore income shares at the very top of the income distribution .

both data sources are used to quantify the relative impacts of the 2007-2009 great recession and its recovery across the u.s. income distribution overall and for certain income groups .

income inequality patterns in other high - income countries are examined using a database maintained by the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) .

this section closes with a discussion of income mobility patterns — that is , how individuals' placement in the income distribution changes over time — using census bureau analysis of survey data and estimates calculated from linked irs tax records .

describing the income distribution is complicated on several levels .

at its heart , this task requires meaningful choices about which data source ( s ) to use , which in turn affects how income is defined , the unit of analysis , and the extent to which analysis will characterize the full distribution .

this report draws upon several sources , but primarily relies on official census bureau income statistics and wid income data .

these sources vary along all dimensions just mentioned ( i.e. , income definition , unit of analysis , coverage of the full distribution ) ; a summary description of these series is in the text box below .

likewise , there is not one consensus indicator that captures all aspects of the distribution .

for example , comparing incomes at the top of the distribution to the bottom captures the overall span of the distribution , whereas top - to - middle ( i.e. , upper - tail inequality ) or middle - to - bottom ( i.e. , lower - tail inequality ) comparisons provide more information about the shape and pattern of change throughout the distribution .

a single summary measure like the gini coefficient can also be employed to examine changes over time , but sometimes at a loss of details on changes within a distribution .

this report focuses on a small set of indicators , noting where other indicators tell a different story .

there is broad agreement among researchers that several factors — working in concert — have driven income distributional trends since the mid - 1970s .

however , there is less agreement about their relative importance , particularly because most empirical research focuses on a specific factor in isolation .

this section reviews leading theories and empirical work on factors believed to be significant contributors .

some studies attempt to explain what has held down income growth for low - and middle - income households and workers , others try to explain the rise in income at the top of the distribution , and some consider factors that affect the entire income distribution .

certain factors may also be more important than others at different times within this period ; notably because , as discussed above , real income was generally rising before 2000 , but since then has stagnated .

this section provides an overview of factors affecting labor income and capital income and considers the role of changing household composition on the shape of the income distribution .

although relevant to considerations of recent trends , how tax policy and government social insurance and cash transfer payments affect the income distribution is beyond the scope of this report .

while the progressivity of the tax system changes the after - tax income distribution , income data used in this report are measured on a pre - tax basis .

gross domestic product ( gdp ) measures the economy's production of goods and services .

economic growth measures the rate of increase in gdp , which is the economy's ability to produce more goods and services .

gdp is closely related by accounting identity to national income ( which is composed of business income and household income ) , so by definition gdp and national income grow together .

however , the connection between gdp growth and national income says nothing about the distribution of income .

mathematically , an increase in overall income is only possible with gdp growth , but may or may not result in income rising for all households .

in other words , gdp growth increases the size of the income pie , whereas distribution concerns how the pie is divided .

thus , the question becomes whether the division of the pie affects how quickly the pie grows .

a look at the historical record in the united states reveals no consistent relationship between gdp growth and income inequality .

relatively high and rising inequality has coincided with high gdp growth periods , such as 1995 to 2000 , and low growth periods , such as 2008 to 2015 .

likewise , falling or stable inequality has coincided with high growth periods ( expansions in the 1940s to 1960s ) and low growth periods ( the 1970s ) .

an international comparison also does not provide prima facie support for the idea that a higher level of inequality reduces growth , because the united states is more unequal than other developed countries and average u.s. growth rates have exceeded all large - and most medium - sized developed countries since the 1980s .

these results are perhaps unsurprising considering that many factors influence growth .

therefore , exploring connections between inequality and gdp growth requires analysis more sophisticated than simple correlations .

broadly speaking , two steps are needed to address the question of whether inequality has effects on growth .

the first is to identify the theoretical channels that link them .

the second is to use sufficient data and appropriate empirical methods , if possible , to isolate and measure the direction and magnitude of the relationship .

economists have identified various transmission channels through which inequality and gdp growth could theoretically be correlated .

some of these channels predict that higher inequality would be associated with lower growth and others predict it would be associated with higher growth .

channels that predict higher inequality would be associated with lower growth include the following: opportunity and mobility .

greater inequality could reduce growth if it derives from unequal opportunities or barriers to advancement ( i.e. , individuals do not have the opportunity to reach their full potential ) .

gender or racial inequality , in particular , might have a strong link to lower growth through this channel if they create barriers to or reduce the incentive for women or minorities to seek education , invest , or pursue business opportunities .

inequality of opportunity could persist if low income individuals cannot access credit markets to make efficient capital or human capital ( eg , education ) investments .

governance .

greater inequality could be associated with poorer governance or political instability , and those factors reduce growth .

greater inequality might increase ( or be the by - product of ) rent seeking behavior and undermine the legitimacy of political institutions .

for example , in the extreme , coups , civil war , corruption , and graft have significantly negative effects on growth .

redistribution and taxation .

some researchers posit that greater inequality leads to pressure for redistributive policies that lower growth .

those polices could lower growth if incentives to work , save , or invest are reduced by the policies themselves or by higher taxes that are required to fund those policies , all else equal .

however , asserting that redistributive policies reduce growth may be an overgeneralization that is only true in some cases , as some redistributive policies , such as greater access to public education or health , could have the opposite effect and boost growth .

alternatively , channels that predict higher inequality would be associated with higher growth include the following: incentives .

greater inequality could increase growth because it increases incentives to work , acquire skills , innovate , and save .

for example , a greater wage gap between high school and college educated workers increases the incentives to go to college , which would raise the productivity of the workforce .

concentrated savings .

since high - income households have higher saving rates on average and saving is necessary for long - term growth ( because it finances capital investment ) , greater inequality might induce more saving that spurs more growth .

as these channels illustrate , it may not be inequality per se that has a negative or positive effect on growth , but other phenomena that tend to be associated with inequality , such as lack of income mobility or opportunity for individuals at the bottom of the income distribution .

inequality may be an easily measurable and well - correlated proxy for these true drivers of growth , and so these distinctions would not significantly change research results .

but from a policy perspective , if the policy goal were to boost growth , it could be more effective to tackle the root causes than the inequality associated with them .

the next section discusses empirical evidence of the relationship between inequality and growth based mainly on cross - country studies .

in evaluating these studies , identifying which of these theoretical channels dominates is not as important when trying to estimate the average effect of inequality across a large number of countries as it is when trying to estimate the effect on an individual country .

each of these channels works differently and is of relatively different importance in any given country .

political instability is an example of a channel that could be a dominant determinant of growth in some countries , but of limited relevance to the united states .

if , say , the cross - country results were being driven by political instability , those findings could be robust and would still arguably not be particularly relevant to the united states .

given that theoretical channels predict that greater inequality could result in higher or lower economic growth , empirical evidence is needed to determine which of these effects discussed above dominates .

dozens of studies have attempted to measure the relationship between inequality and growth , and reach differing conclusions .

most studies try to identify the relationship between growth and inequality by comparing results across many different countries , rather than using data for a single country over time .

according to a recent literature review , the review suggests that the effect of inequality on growth tends to be negative and more pronounced in cross - section studies , in less developed countries , and when inequality in wealth distribution is considered .

by contrast , when panel data are used , the sample is mostly composed of developed countries , regional dummies are added to the growth regression and income distribution is used instead of wealth distribution , the impact of inequality on growth becomes insignificant or even positive .

a few fundamental challenges hinder any attempt to identify the true relationship between growth and inequality , and these studies attempt in various ways to address them: direction of causation .

basic statistical analysis assumes that causation runs in one direction , with a set of independent variables causing changes in a single dependent variable .

but in the case of inequality and growth , causation may run in both directions ( i.e. , inequality affects growth and growth affects inequality ) , and it is not clear which direction might dominate .

although this section explores how inequality affects growth , there are many examples from history that suggest economic growth leads to a widening distribution of income , notably when countries industrialize .

for example , the development of an integrated economy across the continental united states in the 19 th century thanks to railroads , telegraphs , and other innovations allowed u.s. businesses to achieve greater economies of scale that increased both growth and inequality at the top of the income distribution .

data q uality and consistency .

unlike gdp growth , inequality is not a basic statistic collected by all governments using standardized , widely agreed upon definitions ( of income , for example ) and data collection standards .

the quality and availability of data on inequality vary from country to country , although these have improved over time .

moreover , as discussed above , inequality can be represented by various measures , and unless these measures are perfectly correlated , then the results will depend on which measure is used .

different measures of inequality have very different policy implications .

for example , an oecd study found that "in particular , what matters most [for growth] is the gap between low income households and the rest of the population .

in contrast , no evidence is found that those with high incomes pulling away from the rest of the population harms growth. .

omitted v ariable b ias .

many different factors besides income inequality affect a country's growth rate , but there is not a consensus among economists about which factors are most important .

some of the theoretical channels posited above , such as corruption , cannot be easily or directly measured .

furthermore , statistical analysis is limited in the number of explanatory variables that can be included , and consistent , high - quality data may be lacking on important explanatory variables .

therefore , studies vary on which explanatory variables besides inequality to include and generally include relatively few .

if an important explanatory variable is omitted and that omitted variable is correlated with inequality , then the effects of inequality on growth will not be isolated and the results will be statistically biased , overstating or understating inequality's effect on growth .

using a large number of countries in a sample may help to mitigate problems with omitted variable bias .

but the fact that the relationship between growth and inequality is weaker when country - specific or region - specific effects are controlled for suggests that omitted variable bias may be a significant shortcoming .

lack of v ariation in the d ata .

cross - country comparisons are common because they provide more variation and observations than single - country studies , but even cross - country studies can suffer from a lack of variation in the data .

as discussed above , inequality in most countries has risen in recent decades .

likewise , growth is somewhat correlated across countries from year to year .

statistical analysis to identify causal relationships depends on variation in the data ; if variation is lacking , the results may not be very meaningful .

this problem is compounded because some of the channels through which inequality affects growth , such as saving and income mobility , are longer run phenomena .

if multiple year averages are used to account for this , the number of observations and variation in those observations will be reduced further .

assumption that the growth - inequality relationship is stable across countries .

cross - country studies assume that the effects of inequality on growth are the same across countries , and that the effects of other sources of growth are properly identified and the same across countries .

but given the large institutional , structural , and cultural differences between countries , and the limited number of other variables controlled for , inequality may have a very different effect on u.s. growth than its effect in another country .

in particular , most studies include both developed and developing countries .

the growth experience and growth dynamics in those two sets of countries widely differ .

some studies that separated results by developed and developing countries found that the negative relationship between inequality and growth only held or was only statistically significant for developing countries .

to the extent that the results are driven by experiences in developing countries , the results may be of limited relevance to the relationship between growth and inequality in the united states and other developed economies .

for example , arguments that inequality reduces growth by fostering corruption and undermining good governance may be more important in developing countries than in the united states .

most of these studies attempt to identify the long - term effects of inequality on growth , but some commentators have noted the coincidence with rising inequality and the two worst economic crises of the past 100 years , the great depression of the 1930s and the great recession beginning in 2007 .

although much less research has been done on this link , some economists have hypothesized that greater inequality might result in financial and economic instability , by resulting in unsustainable credit bubbles .

however , some sort of "tipping point" explanation would be needed to explain why inequality is destabilizing only beyond a certain point , because high and rising inequality in the united states is not limited to those two periods of instability .

