t he immigration and nationality act ( ina ) provides that individual aliens outside the united states are "inadmissible" — or generally barred from admission to the country — on health , criminal , security , and other grounds set forth in the ina .

however , the ina also grants the executive several broad authorities that could be used to exclude certain individual aliens or classes of aliens for reasons that are not specifically set forth in the ina .

section 212 ( f ) of the ina is arguably the broadest and best known of these provisions , but sections 214 ( a ) ( 1 ) and 215 ( a ) ( 1 ) can also be seen to authorize the executive to restrict aliens' entry or admission to the united states .

this report provides a brief overview of the executive's authority under these provisions of the ina .

it begins with and focuses primarily on section 212 ( f ) .

it also briefly notes other provisions .

the provisions currently in section 212 ( f ) — which have been part of the ina since its enactment in 1952 — state , in relevant part , that whenever the president finds that the entry of any aliens or of any class of aliens into the united states would be detrimental to the interests of the united states , he may by proclamation and for such period as he shall deem necessary , suspend the entry of all aliens or any class of aliens as immigrants or nonimmigrants , or impose on the entry of aliens any restrictions he may deem to be appropriate .

legislative history materials from the time of the ina's enactment suggest that these provisions were seen to grant the president broad authority to bar or impose conditions upon the entry of aliens , and presidents over the years have relied upon section 212 ( f ) to suspend or restrict the entry of various groups of aliens , often ( although not always ) in conjunction with the imposition of financial sanctions upon them .

among those so excluded have been aliens whose actions "threaten the peace , security , or stability of libya" ; officials of the north korean government or the workers' party of north korea ; aliens who have participated in "serious human rights violations" ; and others noted in table 1 below .

neither the text of section 212 ( f ) nor the case law to date suggests any firm legal constraints upon the president's exercise of his authority under section 212 ( f ) , as is explained below .

however , future executive actions under ina § 212 ( f ) could potentially be seen to raise legal issues that have not been prompted by the executive's prior exercise of this authority .

beyond section 212 ( f ) , other provisions of the ina can also be seen to authorize the executive to restrict aliens' entry to the united states .

most notably , section 214 ( a ) ( 1 ) prescribes that the "admission of any alien to the united states as a nonimmigrant shall be for such time and under such conditions as [the executive] may by regulations prescribe. .

 ( nonimmigrants are aliens admitted to the united states for a specific period of time and purpose pursuant to one of the "lettered" visas set forth in section 101 ( a ) ( 15 ) of the ina. ) .

section 215 ( a ) ( 1 ) similarly provides that "it shall be unlawful for any alien" to enter or depart the united states "except under such reasonable rules , regulations , and orders , and subject to such limitations and exceptions as the president may prescribe. .

in the past , the executive has relied upon section 215 ( a ) ( 1 ) , in particular , to exclude certain aliens .

for example , president carter cited to section 215 ( a ) when authorizing the revocation of immigrant and nonimmigrant visas issued to iranians during the iran hostage crisis .

the current section 215 ( a ) was enacted as part of the ina in 1952 .

however , similar language appeared in earlier immigration - related statutes .

both the earlier language and the initial version of section 215 ( a ) granted the president the power to impose additional restrictions upon aliens' entry into and departure from the united states during times of war and , in some cases , "national emergency. .

the president's exclusion of certain aliens under this authority was upheld in several court cases , the most notable of which was arguably the supreme court's 1950 decision in united states ex rel .

knauff v. shaughnessy .

there , the court rejected a challenge to the exclusion of a german "war bride" under regulations promulgated pursuant to presidential proclamation 2523 , which was itself issued under the authority of a predecessor of section 215 ( a ) .

in so doing , the court rejected the excluded bride's argument that both the regulations and the underlying statute constituted an impermissible delegation of legislative power , reasoning that "[t]he exclusion of aliens is a fundamental act of sovereignty .

the right to do so stems not from legislative power but is inherent in the executive power to control the foreign affairs of the nation. .

therefore , in the court's view , congress could not have run afoul of the non - delegation doctrine by authorizing the president to exercise this power "for the best interests of the country" during wartime because the president already possessed such authority .

the knauff court similarly rejected the argument that the regulations in question were not "reasonable," as required by the statutory authority under which they were issued — which in relevant part , made it unlawful for an alien to enter the united states "except under such reasonable rules ... as the president may prescribe. .

the court did so because it viewed the regulations excluding aliens whose entry was "deemed prejudicial to the public interest" as "reasonable in the circumstances of the period for which they were authorized , namely , the national emergency of world war ii. .

the statutory language regarding war and national emergency — which arguably factored into the court's decision in knauff — was deleted from section 215 ( a ) in 1978 .

however , it seems unlikely that this deletion would serve as a basis for overruling the knauff court's conclusions about whether the power in question was impermissibly delegated to the executive , or about what constitutes a "reasonable" regulation for purposes of section 215 ( a ) .

knauff's statements about the inherent power of nations to exclude aliens outside the united states with no recognized ties to the country would also generally seem to remain good law .

