the pacific islands region , also known as the south pacific or southwest pacific , presents congress with a diverse array of policy issues .

it is a strategically important region that encompasses u.s. pacific territories .

u.s. relations with australia and new zealand include pursuing common interests in the southwest pacific , which also has attracted chinese diplomatic attention and economic engagement .

congress plays key roles in approving and overseeing the administration of the compacts of free association that govern u.s. relations with the marshall islands , micronesia , and palau ( also referred to as the freely associated states or fas ) .

the united states has economic interests in the region , particularly fishing .

the united states provides foreign assistance to pacific island countries , which are among those most affected by climate change , particularly in the areas of climate change adaptation and mitigation .

the southwest pacific covers 20 million square miles of ocean and 117,000 square miles of land area ( roughly the size of cuba ) .

the region includes 14 sovereign states with approximately 9 million people , including three countries in "free association" with the united states — the marshall islands , micronesia , and palau .

papua new guinea ( png ) , the largest country in the southwest pacific , constitutes 80% of region's land area and 75% of its population .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

the region's gross domestic product ( gdp ) totals around $32 billion ( about the size of albania's gdp ) .

per capita incomes range from lower middle income ( solomon islands at $2,000 per capita gdp ) to upper middle income ( nauru and palau at $14,200 ) .

according to many analysts , since gaining independence during the post - world war ii era , many pacific island countries have experienced greater political than economic success .

despite weak political institutions and occasional civil unrest , human rights generally are respected and international observers largely have regarded governmental elections as free and fair .

of 12 pacific island states ranked by freedom house for political rights and civil liberties , eight are given "free" status , while fiji , papua new guinea , and the solomon islands — the three largest countries in the region — are ranked as "partly free. .

most pacific island countries , with some exceptions such as fiji , papua new guinea , and the solomon islands , have limited natural and human resources upon which to launch sustained development .

many small atoll countries in the region are hindered by lack of resources , skilled labor , and economies of scale ; inadequate infrastructure ; poor government services ; and remoteness from international markets .

in addition , some areas also are threatened by frequent weather - related natural disasters and rising sea levels related to climate change .

broad u.s. objectives and policies in the region have included promoting sustainable economic development and good governance , addressing the effects of climate change , administering the compacts of free association , supporting regional organizations , projecting a presence in the region , and cooperating with australia and regional aid donors .

other areas of concern and cooperation include combating illegal fishing , supporting peacekeeping operations , and responding to natural disasters .

areas of particular concern to congress include overseeing u.s. policies in the southwest pacific and the administration of the compacts of free association ; regional foreign aid programs and appropriations ; approving the u.s. - palau agreement to provide u.s. economic assistance through 2024 ; and supporting the u.s. tuna fleet .

the obama administration asserted that as part of its "rebalancing" to the asia - pacific region , it had increased its level of engagement in the southwest pacific , including expanding staffing and programming and increasing the frequency of high - level meetings with pacific leaders .

other observers contended that the rebalancing policy had not included a corresponding change in the level of attention paid to the pacific islands region .

u.s. diplomatic outreach to the region includes the following: in 2011 , then - president obama met with pacific island leaders on the margins of the asia pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) leaders meeting .

in 2012 , hillary clinton attended the pacific islands forum annual summit , the first secretary of state to do so , in the cook islands , where she noted u.s. assistance to the region and highlighted three u.s. objectives: trade , investment in energy , and sustainable growth ; peace and security ; and women's empowerment .

in 2013 , then - secretary of state john kerry met with pacific island leaders at the united nations and pledged to work with the region to address climate change .

in 2014 , then - secretary kerry visited the solomon islands following devastating floods there .

in 2015 , then - president obama met with leaders of kiribati , the marshall islands , and papua new guinea at the paris climate conference .

in september 2016 , then - assistant secretary of state for east asian and pacific affairs daniel russel led a u.s. delegation to the 28 th pacific islands forum in pohnpei , micronesia .

main topics of discussion included climate change , management and conservation of fisheries and other marine resources , sustainable development , regional economic integration , and human rights in west papua .

congress plays roles in approving and overseeing the administration of the compacts of free association that govern u.s. diplomatic , economic , and military relations with the marshall islands , micronesia , and palau .

u.s. economic commitments to the freely associated states — totaling nearly $200 million in fy2015 — are administered by the department of the interior .

the compact of free association review agreement , signed by the united states and the republic of palau in 2010 , awaits congressional approval .

since 2000 , the republic of the marshall islands has unsuccessfully sought additional compensation for damages related to u.s. nuclear testing on marshall islands atolls during the 1940s and 1950s .

some policymakers , including members of congress , have expressed concerns about china's growing influence in the region .

china has become a growing political and economic actor in the southwest pacific , and some observers contend that it aims to promote its interests in a way that potentially displaces the influence of traditional actors in the region such as the united states , australia , and new zealand .

in the view of one analyst , "china clearly does seek to become at least a leading power in the western pacific and perhaps the leading power in the western pacific. .

one expert reports that china's principal strategic activity in the region is signals intelligence monitoring .

toward this end , china reportedly has regularly sent vessels to the region that both track satellites and ballistic missiles and also gather intelligence .

other analysts argue that beijing does not consider the south pacific to be of key strategic importance , and note that australian assistance remains significantly larger than that provided by beijing .

some believe that although many pacific island leaders say they appreciate china's economic engagement and diplomatic policy of "non - interference" in domestic affairs , the region maintains strong ties to australia and the west that are rooted in shared history and culture as well as migration .

beijing's engagement in the region has been motivated largely by a desire to garner support in international fora and find sources of raw materials .

according to some analysts , china began to fill a vacuum created by waning u.s. attention following the end of the cold war .

while the united states does not maintain an embassy in several pacific islands countries , for example , beijing has opened diplomatic missions in all eight of the pacific island countries with which it has diplomatic relations .

china - taiwan "dollar diplomacy," in which the two entities competed for official diplomatic recognition through offers of foreign aid , has been a declining factor since the late 2000s .

the united states has relied upon australia , and to a lesser extent new zealand , to help advance shared strategic interests , maintain regional stability , and promote economic development in the southwest pacific .

australia has played a critical role in helping to promote security in places such as timor - leste , which gained its independence from indonesia following a 1999 referendum that turned violent , the solomon islands , and bougainville , which is part of papua new guinea .

the 2016 australia defence white paper articulates australia's approach to the south pacific: the south pacific region will face challenges from slow economic growth , social and governance challenges , population growth and climate change .

instability in our immediate region could have strategic consequences for australia should it lead to increasing influence by actors from outside the region with interests inimical to ours .

it is crucial that australia help support the development of national resilience in the region to reduce the likelihood of instability .

this assistance includes defence cooperation , aid , policing and building regional organisations.... we will also continue to take a leading role in providing humanitarian and security assistance where required .

new zealand's pacific identity , derived from its geography and growing population of new zealanders with polynesian or other pacific island ethnic backgrounds , as well as its historical relationship with the south pacific , undergirds its relationship with the region .

the june 2016 new zealand defence white paper articulates new zealand's ongoing interest in the south pacific: given its strong connections with south pacific countries , new zealand has an enduring interest in regional stability .

the south pacific has remained relatively stable since 2010 , and is unlikely to face an external military threat in the foreseeable future .

however , the region continues to face a range of economic , governance , and environmental challenges .

these challenges indicate that it is likely that the defence force will have to deploy to the region over the next ten years , for a response beyond humanitarian assistance and disaster relief .

new zealand will continue to protect and advance its interests by maintaining strong international relationships , with australia in particular , and with its south pacific partners , with whom it maintains a range of important constitutional and historical links .

new zealand works closely with pacific island states on a bilateral and multilateral basis .

it has played a key role in promoting peace and stability in the southwest pacific in places such as timor - leste , the solomon islands , and bougainville , and papua new guinea .

approximately 60% of new zealand's foreign assistance goes to the southwest pacific .

in september 2015 , wellington pledged to increase foreign assistance to the region by $100 million to reach a total of $1 billion in expenditures over the next three years .

new zealand also has provided development and disaster assistance to the region .

in 2015 , new zealand's then - prime minister john key reaffirmed new zealand's support for the pacific islands forum and sustainable south pacific economic development , including for sustainable fisheries .

an estimated $2 billion worth of fish is taken legally from the waters of the 14 pif countries , with an additional $400 million worth of fish thought to be taken illegally each year .

pacific island countries have sought international support for helping them to cope with the impacts of climate change , reduce greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions , and increase renewable energy use and energy efficiency .

u.s. assistance efforts in the region have focused on climate change adaptation and strengthening governmental capacity to attract international financing and successfully implement environmental programs .

many experts view the pacific islands as highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change and other environmental problems , such as sea level rise , ocean acidification , invasive species , and extreme weather events .

these environmental issues can have adverse effects on agriculture , drinking water supplies , fisheries , and tourism .

a report by the u.s .

fish and wildlife service states climate change presents pacific islands with unique challenges including rising temperatures , sea - level rise , contamination of freshwater resources with saltwater , coastal erosion , an increase in extreme weather events , coral reef bleaching , and ocean acidification .

projections for the rest of this century suggest continued increases in air and ocean surface temperatures in the pacific , increased frequency of extreme weather events , and increased rainfall during the summer months and a decrease in rainfall during the winter months .

some areas of the region lie only 15 feet above sea level , and if sea levels continue to rise as projected , kiribati , tokelau , and tuvalu may be uninhabitable by 2050 .

some experts predict that many pacific islanders face displacement over the coming decades .

kiribati reportedly is buying land in fiji in case its population needs to relocate .

much of the republic of the marshall islands is less than six feet above the sea , and some experts say that rising sea levels may make many areas of the country unfit for human habitation in the coming decades .

bikini islanders , with the support of the u.s. department of the interior , have asked to be allowed to resettle in the united states .

they claim that kili and ejit , the islands to which bikini islanders were relocated before and after the nuclear tests of the 1940s and 1950s and where about 1,000 of them currently live , can no longer sustain them , due to a lack of resources and a greater frequency of bad weather .

recurrent flooding from storms and high tides has disrupted water supplies and destroyed crops .

the department of the interior has proposed that the u.s. resettlement fund set up for bikini islanders help to support their relocation to the united states .

new caledonia , a territory of france , and bougainville , which is part of papua new guinea , are to hold referenda on independence in 2018 and 2019 .

issues and areas of possible concern to congress include u.s. assistance for the administration of free and fair elections , the building of political institutions , and the mitigation of potential conflict .

developments in bougainville also may affect u.s. relations with papua new guinea .

the french overseas territory of new caledonia , annexed by france in 1853 and formerly used as a penal colony for french convicts , may become the world's next state .

an estimated 39% of new caledonia's 260,000 people are kanaks while 27% are european , with the balance composed of "mixed race" persons and others from elsewhere in the asia - pacific .

in the 1980s , the indigenous kanaks clashed with pro - france settlers .

in a referendum in 1987 , which was boycotted by local independence groups , new caledonians voted to remain with france .

under the noumea accord of 1998 , signed by france , the kanak socialist liberation front , and the territory's anti - independence rcpr party , a referendum on independence must be held by the end of 2018 .

the bougainville conflict between the papua new guinea defense force and the pro - independence bougainville revolutionary army began over disputes related to the panguna copper mine on bougainville in the late 1980s .

key grievances related to the mine included the influx of workers from elsewhere in papua new guinea and australia , environmental damage caused by the mine , and bougainville islanders' dissatisfaction with their share of mine revenue .

tensions over the mine and secessionist sentiment led to a decade - long , low - intensity war in which an estimated 10,000 to 20,000 government troops , militants , and civilians died .

peace between the government and rebels was restored in 1997 under a new zealand - brokered agreement .

under the terms of the agreement , a referendum on self - determination is to be held by mid - 2020 .

a target date of june 2019 has now been agreed to by the papua new guinea government and bougainville regional government .

some factions reportedly have held onto their weapons out of concern that the png government will not go through with the referendum .

