the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc or the commission ) is an independent agency that regulates the interstate transmission of electricity , natural gas , and oil , among other responsibilities .

ferc's jurisdiction and regulatory authority are largely focused on interstate energy transactions , the development of a reliable energy infrastructure , and the protection of wholesale customers from unjust and unreasonable rates or undue discrimination and preference .

ferc normally has five commissioners , with a quorum of three members required to be present to transact business .

as of february 3 , 2017 , following the resignation of former chairman norman bay , there were only two serving ferc commissioners .

this report will discuss the current lack of quorum in the context of the commission's history , its responsibilities , and its major initiatives that may be impacted by the lack of quorum .

in 1920 , congress enacted the federal water power act ( fwpa ) to provide federal oversight of hydropower development on navigable waters in the united states .

the act created the federal power commission ( fpc ) to regulate the construction and operation of nonfederal hydropower projects .

in subsequent years , many companies began to enter the electric power industry .

large companies began to form and consolidate the industry , as economies of scale began to dominate the production of electric power .

many of these individual companies fell under the organizational control of even larger "holding companies. .

this was likely an effort to evade state regulation because states did not have jurisdiction over interstate transmission or rates charged for electricity , and federal regulations did not exist for such interstate activities .

in 1935 , congress passed the public utility act ( pua ) which sought to end the abuses of market power at that time .

title i of the pua , the public utility holding company act of 1935 ( puhca ; p.l .

74-333 ) , was created to address the lack of oversight over holding companies .

among other actions , puhca gave the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) authority over many holding company transactions , and it limited power industry mergers and acquisitions to contiguous areas .

title ii of the pua amended the fwpa to create the federal power act ( fpa ) , and granted authority to the fpc to regulate the interstate transmission and sales of electricity and natural gas .

the fwpa became part i of the fpa , with the fpc assuming authority over nonfederal hydropower projects on navigable waterways and federal lands .

part ii of the fpa authorized the fpc to regulate the interstate transportation and wholesale sale ( i.e. , sale for resale ) of electric energy , while leaving jurisdiction over intrastate transportation and retail sales ( i.e. , sale to the ultimate consumer ) in the hands of the states .

under fpa section 205 , all rates and charges "made , demanded , or received" by public utilities for the transmission or sale of electricity subject to fpc authority cannot be "unjust or unreasonable" and cannot be "unduly discriminatory or preferential. .

under fpa section 206 , the fpc could initiate an investigation ( on its own or by request ) to ensure that rules or practices affecting wholesale rates are just and reasonable .

ferc normally has five commissioners , with one member serving as chairman .

on january 25 , 2017 , president trump designated commissioner cheryl lafleur to serve as acting chairwoman of ferc , replacing norman bay as chair .

commissioner bay subsequently resigned from the commission effective february 3 , 2017 , leaving ferc without a voting quorum of three members ; only acting chairwoman lafleur and commissioner colette honorable remain as members of the commission .

a quorum of three members is required to be present to transact business .

under eoa section 401 ( e ) , "... a quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of at least three members present .

each member of the commission , including the chairman , shall have one vote .

actions of the commission shall be decided by a majority vote of the members present. .

the commission generally has three members from the party of the incumbent president , and two from the minority party .

however , republican commissioner philip moeller left ferc in october 2015 , and fellow republican tony clark left the commission following the expiration of his term on june 30 , 2016 .

president obama did not nominate replacements for either commissioners moeller or clark , meaning that ferc was operating with only three democratic commissioners since september 2016 .

commissioner honorable's current term expires on june 30 , 2017 , and commissioner lafleur's term expires on june 30 , 2019 .

a quorum will not be restored until at least one new member is seated .

the absence of a quorum limits ferc's authority to issue orders concerning projects or rate and tariff issues as discussed below .

on february 3 , 2017 , anticipating that the lack of quorum would continue for an indefinite period , the commission chose to issue an order ( while it still had a quorum ) delegating authority to staff for certain agency functions .

ferc stated that the order was issued to assure that the commission's regulatory obligations would be carried out "in an effective and efficient manner consistent with the public interest. .

this is not the first time the commission has issued a delegation order following a loss of quorum .

ferc took similar action to delegate authority to its staff to act in the absence of a quorum in 1993 .

ferc recognizes in the current delegation order that , in the absence of ferc authority , certain rate filings ( for example , under the fpa and nga ) may take effect under operation of law "without suspension , refund protection , or the ability of contesting parties to appeal. .

thus , ferc states that the delegation order is intended to "ensure that staff has the authority to prevent such filings from going into effect by operation of law during the period in which the commission lacks a quorum. .

ferc summarized the delegation of agency authority as follows: rate and other filings: the director of the office of energy market regulation ( oemr ) can accept and suspend rate filings , and make them effective subject to refund and further order of the commission , or accept and suspend them , make them effective subject to refund , and set them for hearing and settlement judge procedures .

for initial rates or rate decreases submitted under section 205 of the fpa , for which suspension and refund protection are unavailable , ferc staff is granted authority under section 206 to institute proceedings in order to protect the interests of customers .

extensions of time: ferc staff can extend the time for action on matters where it is permitted by statute .

waiver requests: the director of oemr can take appropriate action on uncontested filings under the nga , fpa , and ica , seeking waivers of the terms and conditions of tariffs , rate schedules and service agreements , including waivers related to capacity release and capacity market rules .

uncontested settlements: the director of oemr has authority to accept settlements not contested by any party or participant , including commission trial staff .

until there is a quorum , ferc cannot issue new agency policies or rules or make final decisions on applications to authorize certain electric utility mergers and acquisitions , natural gas pipelines , liquid natural gas import / export terminals , or hydroelectric projects .

ferc staff can , however , continue to gather information and prepare analyses ( such as for environmental impact statements and environmental assessments for pipeline projects and hydropower licenses ) necessary to process those applications .

staff may also prepare draft orders that the commission may approve , once a quorum is restored .

the commission's major activities in the electric , natural gas , and oil industries are summarized below .

a detailed description of every ferc function is beyond the scope of this report .

however , the following sections provide an overview of the major activities within the industries .

it should be noted that ferc's authority varies across these industries , with generally more regulatory control in the electric power and natural gas industries .

ferc reviews filings by public utilities seeking to establish or change rates under fpa section 205 , and hears complaints or requests to change rates under fpa section 206 .

similarly , ferc can initiate its own investigation of natural gas rates under fpa section 206 .

section 4 of the nga requires that "[a]ll rates and charges made , demanded or received by any natural gas company for or in connection with the transportation or sale of natural gas subject to the jurisdiction of the commission ... shall be just and reasonable , and any such rate or charge that is not just and reasonable is declared to be invalid. .

section 5 of the nga provides a means by which ferc and third parties can challenge the rates established by pipeline companies .

both the fpa and the nga require rates , terms , and conditions of service to be "just and reasonable," and "not unduly discriminatory or preferential. .

differences in rates can be deemed "just and reasonable" if the difference can be justified by cost or market conditions , and therefore not likely to be "unduly discriminatory or preferential. .

while the standards for fair rates and charges are similar for natural gas and electricity , the remedies available to ferc to deal with violations in electricity cases are more robust than the remedies to deal with violations in natural gas cases .

under fpa section 206 , if the commission finds that any rate or condition is not just and reasonable , or is unduly discriminatory , it can increase or decrease the rate .

while the new rate cannot be retroactive , in a complaint - initiated case , ferc can order retroactive refunds for a period going back up to 15 months , starting as early as the date the complaint is filed ( or as late as five months from the filing date ) .

there is no comparable 15-month "refund window" in an nga section 5 proceeding .

this section lists some recent policy activities at ferc which may require a vote by ferc commissioners for a final decision and subsequent ferc order: mergers and sections 201 and 203 transactions: "the commission is responsible for determining whether merger and corporate applications are consistent with the public interest .

in making its determination , the commission examines a merger's effect on competition , rates and regulation , and the potential for cross - subsidization .

the commission's screening approach to mergers , reviews for horizontal competitive concerns , and establishes guidelines for vertical competitive analysis , and establishes filing requirements for mergers that potentially raise vertical market power concerns. .

ferc policy for establishing length of hydropower licenses: "[ferc] is inviting comments on whether , and , if so , how , to revise its policy for establishing the length of original and new licenses it issues for hydroelectric projects located at nonfederal dams .

the commission's current policy is to set a 30-year term where there is little or no authorized redevelopment , new construction or environmental mitigation and enhancement ; a 40-year term for a license involving a moderate amount of these activities ; and a 50-year term where there is an extensive amount of such activity. .

ferc proposes to integrate electricity storage into organized markets: "[ferc] proposed to more effectively integrate electric storage resources into organized wholesale markets to enhance competition and help ensure that these markets produce just and reasonable rates .

[the] proposal stems from concerns that electric storage resources may face barriers that limit them from participating in organized wholesale electric markets .

in april 2016 , ferc staff issued data requests to the six regional transmission organizations and independent system operators , and a request for comments to the public , seeking information on the rules that affect the participation of electric storage resources in the organized wholesale electric markets and potential barriers to the participation of electric storage resources in those markets. .

