mandatory spending is composed of budget outlays controlled by laws other than appropriation acts , including federal spending on entitlement programs .

entitlement programs such as social security and medicare make up the bulk of mandatory spending .

mandatory spending also finances income support programs such as supplemental security income ( ssi ) , unemployment insurance , the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) , and the earned income and child tax credits .

in addition , mandatory spending encompasses certain veterans' benefits , federal employee retirement , as well as many smaller budgetary items , such as salaries of members of congress , certain federal judges , and the president .

congress sets eligibility requirements and benefits for entitlement programs .

once a beneficiary is determined to meet eligibility requirements of a specific mandatory program , benefits are generally then paid automatically .

this report describes the structure of the mandatory portion of the federal budget and past trends and projections for future mandatory outlays .

federal social insurance programs and many other federal programs funded through mandatory spending , by and large , were established to respond to events and conditions that heightened the economic vulnerability of many households .

the report outlines how historical challenges shaped the evolution of those programs and changed the role of the federal government .

that discussion focuses on mandatory spending programs that have had the most direct effect on federal finances .

the report also discusses some implications of the growth of mandatory spending on budget policy and on the long - term fiscal stance of the federal government .

trends that have influenced mandatory spending over time , such as the growth of health care costs in excess of general inflation and the retirement and aging of the baby boom generation , present policy makers with choices whether to increase federal revenues , change the structure of mandatory programs , reduce spending on other programs , or some combination of those strategies .

in recent years , net interest outlays and growth in health care costs have been lower than expected , keeping mandatory spending below previously projected levels , although whether those favorable trends will continue is uncertain .

while mandatory spending and other fiscal policy decisions have created challenges for the federal budget over recent decades , economic conditions have also shifted in ways that have undermined the financial resiliency of many households .

the distinction between mandatory and discretionary spending stems from how congress provides funding for each of those categories .

mandatory spending in budgetary laws is referred to as "direct spending. .

mandatory spending is controlled by laws other than appropriations acts , most commonly in the form of authorizing legislation .

authorizing legislation establishes or continues the operation of a federal program or agency , either indefinitely or for a specified period .

mandatory spending typically is provided in permanent or multi - year appropriations contained in the authorizing law .

funding therefore becomes available automatically each year , without further legislative action by congress .

in most cases , the authorizing law requires payment , based on a benefit formula , to an individual or entity ( eg , a state ) if eligibility criteria are met .

discretionary spending was defined as budgetary resources provided in and controlled by appropriations acts .

net interest payments , the final category of federal spending , are automatically authorized and are the government's interest payments on debt held by the public offset by interest income that the government receives .

although net interest costs are typically reported separately in budgetary estimates and projections , as a formal matter they could be considered part of mandatory spending as they are paid on the basis of a permanent authorization .

the budget categories of discretionary , mandatory / direct , and net interest are often referred to as bea categories .

the evolution of social insurance and other mandatory programs reflects the influence of a complex array of social forces and events acting over the course of many decades , although many of the key policy responses were decided in the middle third of the 20 th century .

some specific historical events , such as wars and severe economic depressions , can be linked to changes in some federal programs .

more gradual social trends , such as urbanization , industrialization , higher rates of migration , rising incomes , labor conditions , the broadening of market ties across the national and world , expansions and contractions of electoral franchise , and improved longevity also played important roles in changing american society , as well as influencing the structure and role of the federal government .

from the early 19 th century to the early 20 th century , the united states was transformed from a largely agricultural and rural nation to a mostly urban and industrial one .

moreover , in the post - civil war decades , the federal government gained wider legal and regulatory authorities , although those activities accounted for a small fraction of federal outlays and employment .

not until after world war i , however , did social expenditures , apart from veterans' pensions and other benefits , make up an appreciable portion of the federal budget .

the great depression that commenced in late 1929 prompted deeper changes in how the federal government addressed social challenges .

this section outlines public demands for federal responses to national challenges and social forces that may have contributed to the establishment of federal mandatory programs .

a fuller description of those forces is beyond the scope of this report , although more extensive descriptions of those events , social movements , and policy responses are cited in the notes .

the onset of the great recession at the end of 2007 prompted congress to take a series of responses intended to counteract a steep drop - off in private economic activity and to mitigate the financial distress felt by many households .

the great recession affected mandatory spending primarily in three ways .

first , many households saw incomes fall or had spells of unemployment , which increased the number of people eligible for benefits provided through mandatory programs .

second , legislation enacted in 2008 to rescue or stabilize financial institutions resulted in outlays that were considered mandatory because those measures were established through authorizing , rather than appropriations , legislation .

third , about one - third ( 33.9% ) of the budgetary costs of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) were classified as mandatory spending .

the scale and growth of mandatory spending raises several challenges for congress , in addition to issues raised by the operation and design of programs funded by mandatory spending .

if congress sought to address fiscal imbalances , it would be difficult to avoid either significant changes in mandatory spending programs or federal revenue policy .

discretionary spending , according to current projections , is slated to continue shrinking as a share of the federal budget and as a share of gdp .

further reductions in discretionary spending could help narrow fiscal imbalances , although those reductions are unlikely to be large enough to close fiscal gaps without other policy changes .

net interest costs , the remaining portion of the federal outlays , reflect federal debt levels and interest rates .

policymakers could impose higher tax rates or introduce new types of taxes , such as a federal vat , to support higher mandatory spending in the future .

higher tax levels , however , could affect economic performance , unless measures were designed to enhance the efficiency of the tax system .

policymakers could also pare back mandatory spending by restricting eligibility for benefits or lowering benefit levels , or through measures that limited excess cost growth in the health care and other sectors that supply goods and services that the government buys .

limiting eligibility and benefits could affect some vulnerable households , while past efforts to control health care costs have had mixed success .

some argue that providing higher levels of public support to the elderly is justified on equity grounds because future economic growth will raise living standards of younger generations .

as economic growth rates have lagged below historical norms in recent years , such arguments may have become less compelling .

future changes in demographics and in the social structure of the u.s. population could affect support for funding of social insurance and other mandatory spending programs .

some political scientists have documented increasing levels of social and political polarization in recent decades , while economists have noted increasing levels of income and wealth inequality .

those trends may have complex effects on future policy decisions regarding the structure and extent of mandatory spending that would be difficult to predict .

some budget experts have proposed changes in congressional budget procedures that would encourage congress to assess and adjust mandatory spending as well as tax expenditures on a periodic basis .

within current budgetary procedures , the budget reconciliation process provides one way to adjust mandatory spending that avoids certain procedural hurdles .

in the 1980s reconciliation was used extensively to modify mandatory spending programs .

changes in how congress reauthorizes programs or agencies would also affect mandatory spending .

congress also faces a choice whether to focus on reforms of specific programs or to seek a "grand bargain" that would include diverse budgetary and tax policy changes in a single legislative package .

broad packages of proposals may have the advantage that more instruments are available to address distributional concerns , so that sacrifices can be shared in ways that support comprise .

the 2010 bowles - simpson commission and the 2011 joint select committee on deficit reduction considered sweeping changes to the federal budget , but were unable to craft proposals with broad support in congress .

focusing on a narrower set of programs may have the advantage of allowing more careful consideration of how changes would affect beneficiaries , taxpayers , other levels of government , and other stakeholders .

many mandatory programs have complex financial and administrative structures , and many programs involve state and local governments .

in particular , some argue that potential reforms of social security should be considered apart from broader budgetary discussions because the program's finances were designed to derive from earmarked payroll taxes , rather than from general revenues .

mandatory programs may differ in how difficult they are to change .

the technical challenges of modifying a program that operates mainly through cash transfers without the involvement of state governments , such as social security , may be relatively straightforward compared to the technical challenges of modifying programs that are jointly administered with states , or which interact with the health care system .

in the 19 th century , the federal government protected its citizens from a much narrower set of risks .

social insurance programs established in the 20 th century have helped shield individuals and families from some of the risks of ill health , disability , poverty , unemployment , and old age .

some have raised concerns that risks borne by households have risen since the 1980s , while others contend that federal fiscal imbalances pose risks for households in the future .

over the past century , congress has balanced concerns for social protection with the need to maintain federal finance in a prudent manner , and to minimize adverse effects on economic incentives .

some contend greater social protections warrant an expansion of mandatory programs and spending .

others argue that paring back some social programs would motivate individuals to mitigate risks using their own resources , and that a reduction in mandatory spending would improve the federal government's fiscal condition .

how narrowly or broadly to target mandatory spending programs is a related policy choice .

more narrowly targeted eligibility or benefit criteria can help direct scare resources to individuals and families most in need .

sharply drawn eligibility or benefit criteria , however , can lead to unequal treatment of families or persons in nearly similar situations .

moreover , the phaseout of benefits — such as when benefits are reduced when a household's income rises above a certain threshold — can increase implicit marginal tax rates on affected households , which may affect incentives to work .

more gradual phaseouts of benefits can mitigate those effects , but raise program costs and may deliver benefits to families or persons who might not need federal assistance .

some researchers have noted that mandatory spending programs , such as social security , were designed to minimize the use of income thresholds to engender broader public support .

congress also faces choices on the pace of reforms intended to bring federal finances closer to a sustainable basis .

sudden changes in income support or social insurance programs , however , can disrupt household's financial plans .

sudden changes in tax policies likewise can impose severe adjustment costs on business and households .

delays in addressing those fiscal imbalances , aside from countercyclical measures , allow the scale of fiscal challenge to grow and may require even more painful adjustments — either in expenditure reductions , revenue increases , or some combination of those measures — at some future date .

