the united states has a long history of importing foreign temporary workers to fill jobs that are low skilled or do not require much formal education .

these workers are sometimes referred to as guest workers .

in the past , guest workers were used to address u.s. worker shortages during times of war .

notably , the controversial bracero program , which began during world war ii and lasted until 1964 , brought several million mexican agricultural workers into the united states .

today , the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) provides for the temporary admission of agricultural and nonagricultural workers to the united states through the h - 2a and h - 2b visa programs , respectively .

these programs , which are subject to detailed recruitment and other requirements , seek to meet the legitimate temporary labor needs of employers while providing protections to u.s. and foreign workers .

the difficulty in balancing the needs of employers and workers in guest worker programs is reflected in ongoing debates about such programs .

some view guest worker programs as a beneficial source of legal workers and call for their reform and expansion .

others view them , in their current forms , as "inherently abusive" and argue that if they are to be allowed to continue operating , they must be thoroughly overhauled .

this report covers the h - 2a agricultural guest worker program and the h - 2b nonagricultural guest worker program .

it explores the statutory and regulatory provisions that govern each program , focusing in particular on the much - debated labor certification process .

it discusses past and present legislative efforts to reform the h - 2a and h - 2b programs and to create new guest worker visas , and identifies and analyzes key policy considerations to help inform future congressional action .

the ina enumerates categories of aliens , known as nonimmigrants , who are admitted to the united states for a temporary period of time and specific purpose .

nonimmigrant visa categories are identified by letters and numbers , based on the sections of the ina that authorize them .

among the major nonimmigrant visa categories is the "h" category for temporary workers .

it includes h - 2a and h - 2b visas for guest workers , as well as visas for higher - skilled temporary workers .

the ina , as originally enacted in 1952 , authorized an h - 2 nonimmigrant visa category for foreign agricultural and nonagricultural workers who were coming temporarily to the united states to perform temporary services ( other than those of an exceptional nature requiring distinguished merit and ability ) or labor .

the 1986 immigration reform and control act ( irca ) amended the ina to subdivide the h - 2 program into the current h - 2a agricultural worker program and h - 2b nonagricultural worker program and to detail the admissions process for h - 2a workers .

the h - 2a and h - 2b programs are administered by u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) and the employment and training administration ( eta ) of the department of labor ( dol ) .

while there are many differences between the h - 2a and h - 2b programs , the process of bringing in workers under either one entails the same steps .

employers who want to hire workers through either program must first apply to dol for labor certification .

after receiving labor certification , a prospective h - 2a or h - 2b employer can submit an application , known as a petition , to dhs to bring in foreign workers .

if the application is approved , foreign workers who are abroad can then go to a u.s. embassy or consulate to apply for an h - 2a or h - 2b nonimmigrant visa from the department of state ( dos ) .

if the visa application is approved , the worker is issued a visa that he or she can use to apply for admission to the united states at a port of entry .

the h - 2a visa allows for the temporary admission of foreign workers to the united states to perform agricultural labor or services of a seasonal or temporary nature .

it is governed by provisions in the ina and by regulations issued by dhs and dol .

h - 2a workers may perform "agriculture" or "agricultural labor," as these terms are defined in certain laws , and other specified agricultural activities , including the pressing of apples for cider on a farm , logging , and range herding and livestock production .

the h - 2b visa provides for the temporary admission of foreign workers to the united states to perform temporary nonagricultural service or labor , if unemployed u.s. workers cannot be found .

foreign medical graduates coming to perform medical services are explicitly excluded .

h - 2b workers are largely low skilled , but the h - 2b program is not limited to workers of a particular skill level , and over the years the h - 2b visa has been used to bring in a variety of workers .

according to dol labor certification data , the top h - 2b occupation in recent years in terms of the number of positions certified has been landscaping and groundskeeping worker .

other top occupations include forest and conservation worker , amusement and recreation attendant , and maid and housekeeping cleaner ( see appendix b for data on h - 2b labor certifications by occupation ) .

since the 1990s , a variety of legislative proposals have been put forward concerning guest workers .

some proposals would reform existing programs , while others would establish new guest worker programs for agricultural and nonagricultural workers .

over the years , some proposals have been introduced in congress as stand - alone bills , while others have been part of larger comprehensive immigration reform measures .

major guest worker reform legislation was last considered in the 113 th congress .

during that congress , the senate passed a comprehensive immigration reform bill that would have established new temporary agricultural and nonagricultural worker visas , reformed the h - 2b visa , and phased out the h - 2a visa .

in addition , the house judiciary committee reported a bill in the 113 th congress to establish a new agricultural worker visa to replace the h - 2a visa .

more recent guest worker bills have proposed changes to the existing h - 2a and h - 2b visas .

for example , legislation on the h - 2a visa introduced in the 114 th and 115 th congresses would variously enact statutory provisions concerning , among other requirements , temporary need , u.s. worker recruitment , wages , and housing .

a bill on the h - 2b visa , as introduced in the 115 th congress , would establish a permanent exemption from the h - 2b statutory numerical limit for returning workers and make other changes to h - 2b visa requirements .

legislative action on guest worker programs in recent years has focused on the h - 2b visa , specifically on the statutory cap and h - 2b regulatory provisions .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) included an h - 2b returning worker provision , providing that a returning h - 2b worker who had been counted against the 66,000 cap in fy2013 , fy2014 , or fy2015 would not be counted again in fy2016 .

another h - 2b provision in p.l .

114-113 provided employers in the seafood industry who had approved h - 2b petitions with additional time ( beyond the approved start date ) to bring in workers .

this provision is also included in the 2015 dhs / dol interim final rule on h - 2b employment .

p.l .

114-113 further specified how h - 2b prevailing wages were to be determined and required that the dhs regulatory definition of h - 2b temporary need ( i.e. , generally employer need of one year or less ) be used for purposes of h - 2b admission .

in addition , it included other h - 2b - related language that prohibited the use of funds in the act to enforce the definitions of corresponding employment and the three - fourths guarantee , or to implement certain dol enforcement provisions , in the 2015 dhs / dol interim final rule .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l .

115-31 ) contains the same provisions as p.l .

114-113 on h - 2b employers in the seafood industry , h - 2b prevailing wages , h - 2b temporary need , and certain definitions in the 2015 dhs / dol h - 2b interim final rule .

it , however , contains different language on the h - 2b statutory cap .

it provides that after consultation with the secretary of labor , and upon the determination that the needs of american businesses cannot be satisfied in fy2017 with available u.s. workers , the dhs secretary may increase the number of aliens who may receive an h - 2b visa in fy2017 ( above the annual statutory cap ) by not more than the highest number of h – 2b nonimmigrants who participated in the h – 2b returning worker program in any fiscal year in which returning workers were exempt from such numerical limitation .

as of the date of this report , dhs and dol have not indicated how they will implement this language .

guest worker programs generally try to achieve two goals simultaneously: to be responsive to legitimate employer needs for temporary labor and to provide adequate protections for u.s. and foreign temporary workers .

dol explicitly addressed the idea of balancing the needs of employers and workers in the supplementary information accompanying a 2011 proposed rule on the h - 2b visa: although the department still seeks to maintain an efficient system , it has in this new rule struck a balance between reducing processing times and protecting u.s. worker access to these job opportunities .

the balancing of broad guest worker program goals is reflected , in practice , in the particular provisions that h - 2a and h - 2b proposals include on a range of component policy considerations , such as program administration , the labor market test , and wages , among others .

many policymakers assert that the h - 2a and h - 2b visa programs are not adequately meeting employers' labor needs and / or are not adequately protecting u.s. and foreign workers , although their particular criticisms vary widely .

in past years , proposed solutions have taken the form of reforms to the h - 2a and h - 2b visas as well as new guest worker visa programs .

in the current climate , pursuing reforms to existing visa programs seems to be the course more policymakers are likely to follow .

appendix a. dol h - 2a and h - 2b labor certifications by state appendix b. dol h - 2b labor certifications by occupation in fy2015 , dol approved 5,112 h - 2b labor certification applications .

for these applications , dol approved requests for a total of 101,765 h - 2b positions .

typically , a majority of h - 2b requests certified by dol are for workers in a few occupations .

in fy2015 , as shown in table b - 1 , more than half the certified positions were in three occupations , and 76% of certified positions were in 10 occupations .

one occupation , landscaping & groundskeeping worker , accounted for 41% of the total number of h - 2b positions certified .

appendix c. h - 2a and h - 2b visa issuances appendix d. background information on h - 2a and h - 2b regulations h - 2a rules the h - 2a visa program is governed by a dhs final rule issued in 2008 and a dol final rule issued in 2010 .

a separate dol final rule issued in 2015 applies to h - 2a employment in the herding or production of livestock on the range .

background in 2008 , during the george w. bush administration , dhs and dol published final rules to significantly amend their respective h - 2a regulations .

the agencies issued these rules to streamline the h - 2a program in the aftermath of unsuccessful congressional efforts to enact comprehensive immigration reform legislation with guest worker provisions .

the dol rule was controversial .

prior to its issuance , the labor certification process had been a fully supervised certification - based process , in which federal or state officials reviewed an employer's actual efforts or documentation to ensure compliance with program requirements .

the 2008 rule replaced this supervised process with an attestation - based process , in which prospective h - 2a employers had to attest in their applications , under threat of penalties , that they complied with h - 2a program requirements .

under the obama administration , the 2008 dhs rule was retained , but the 2008 dol rule was replaced with a new h - 2a final rule issued in 2010 .

in the supplementary information accompanying the proposed version of this replacement rule , dol cited concerns about employer noncompliance with program requirements under the 2008 rule .

it explained the need for new rulemaking , in part , as follows: the department , upon due consideration , believes that the policy underpinnings of the 2008 final rule , e.g .

streamlining the h – 2a regulatory process to defer many determinations of program compliance until after an application has been fully adjudicated , do not provide an adequate level of protection for either u.s. or foreign workers .

the 2010 dol h - 2b final rule reversed changes made by the 2008 rule to the h - 2a labor certification process and reestablished the type of compliance - demonstration process that had been in effect prior to the 2008 rule .

h - 2b rules the h - 2b visa program is governed by a dhs rule issued in 2008 and a dhs / dol rule issued in 2015 .

a companion dhs / dol rule issued in 2015 revised the methodology for calculating prevailing wage rates under the h - 2b program .

background mirroring regulatory actions taken on the h - 2a program , dhs and dol under the bush administration published final rules to significantly amend their respective h - 2b regulations in 2008 .

under the dol h - 2b rule , which streamlined the labor certification process , determinations about h - 2b program compliance were made only after a labor certification application had been adjudicated .

the obama administration retained the dhs h - 2b rule but wanted to replace the dol rule .

to that end , dol published a new h - 2b proposed rule in 2011 .

in this proposed rulemaking , dol took the position that the 2008 rule did not provide sufficient protections for u.s. or foreign workers .

it further described problems of noncompliance: [i]n the first year of the operation of the attestation - based system our experience indicates that employers are attesting to compliance with program obligations with which they have not complied , and that employers do not appear to be recruiting , hiring and paying u.s. workers , and in some cases the h - 2b workers themselves , in accordance with established program requirements .

dol issued a replacement h - 2b final rule in 2012 that required employers to show compliance with recruitment and other requirements in advance of dol making a determination on the labor certification application .

this rule , however , never became operative due to court action .

a key issue in the litigation was whether dol had the authority to promulgate regulations for the h - 2b program .

in april 2015 , dol and dhs issued a new interim final rule on h - 2b employment jointly "to ensure that there can be no question about the authority for and validity of the regulations in this area. .

according to the agencies , the 2015 rule is "virtually identical" to the dol 2012 final rule .

