the skills , knowledge , and credentials obtained through education are widely believed to be connected to positive occupational and economic outcomes .

in recent decades , considerable attention has been devoted to improving educational attainment levels of students with disabilities .

several federal policies have aimed to require educators to pay greater attention to the educational progress and attainment of students with disabilities , and many others provide for a variety of supports with the goal of improving levels of attainment .

data collection efforts have also been launched to allow for better tracking of relevant trends .

this report discusses policies aiming to promote educational attainment and examines trends in high school graduation and college enrollment for students with disabilities .

it begins with a discussion of the laws related to the education of students with disabilities at the secondary and postsecondary levels .

subsequent sections discuss the existing data on transition - aged students with disabilities , what is currently known about such students , and federal legislation and other factors that may have contributed to changes in students with disabilities' high school graduation rates and postsecondary enrollment over time .

the report offers a brief overview of what is currently known about the u.s. population of students with disabilities in secondary and postsecondary education .

it focuses on data gathered in conjunction with federal programs and federally funded studies of nationally representative samples of students with disabilities .

it does not attempt to provide an overview or review of existing research on transition - aged students with disabilities or to provide an in - depth examination of the differences between the rights of and services afforded to students with disabilities at the secondary and postsecondary levels .

the next sections of the report provide an overview of the education and civil rights laws that aim to support students with disabilities as they work toward completing high school and potentially transition into further educational pursuits .

federal data on students with disabilities transitioning from secondary to postsecondary education include both data reported from public high schools to ed , and federally funded studies and datasets examining students with disabilities transitioning from secondary to postsecondary education and enrolled in postsecondary education .

this section will examine what is currently known about transition - aged students with disabilities from federal data , and the limitations of that data .

high school graduation and college enrollment have increased considerably for all students in recent decades .

the increased rates of students with disabilities graduating from high school with a regular diploma and continuing on to postsecondary education may be part of the trends seen in the general population of transition - aged students .

the appeal of higher earnings or self - sufficiency may be a factor in the increasing educational attainment of students with and without disabilities .

relatedly , the increase in unemployment among 16 to 24 year olds in the years immediately after the 2007-2009 recession may have factored both in declining high school dropout rates and in increasing postsecondary enrollment rates during those years .

in addition , changes in the postsecondary landscape , such as increased access to non - selective two - year and less than two - year programs , may have encouraged more students to pursue postsecondary education .

in addition to the potential factors impacting the overall population of transition - aged students , several congressional actions may have contributed specifically to the increasing percentages of students with disabilities graduating from high school with a regular diploma ( figure 1 ) and enrolling in postsecondary education .

p.l .

101-476 ( idea ; 1990 ) introduced requirements that all students' ieps contain a statement of needed transition services by the time those students turn 16 years old , and that the students be invited to attend and participate in all iep meetings where their transition goals are discussed .

p.l .

101-476 marked the first time that iep teams were required to set goals for what students would do in their postsecondary lives and determine the services needed to help them attain those goals .

p.l .

101-476 also included two new disability categories: autism and traumatic brain injury ( tbi ) .

both categories have grown significantly in terms of raw numbers and the percentage of students with disabilities served , with the growth in the autism category being particularly pronounced .

autism is now the fourth largest category of children served under the idea , accounting for nearly 10% of all children with ieps .

according to ed data , more than two - thirds of students with autism ( 68% ) and three - quarters of students with tbi ( 75% ) graduated from high school with a regular diploma in sy2014-2015 .

p.l .

105-17 ( idea ; 1997 ) required children with ieps to participate in statewide assessments and the general education curriculum .

the bill required all students' ieps to relate their iep programming to their achievement in the general education curriculum .

in addition , under this act states were required to establish performance goals and indicators for students with ieps and include students with ieps in statewide assessments and alternative assessments .

p.l .

107-110 ( nclb ; 2001 ) required states to implement accountability systems tracking the academic progress of different subgroups of students , including students with disabilities , toward meeting state developed educational standards .

the nclb contained high - stakes accountability provisions , which emphasized holding all students , including students with disabilities , to the same standards ; closing gaps between different groups of students ; and expecting all students to reach proficiency in reading and mathematics .

the nclb's accountability provisions required that specific attention be paid to academic progress and graduation rates of students with disabilities .

p.l .

108-446 ( idea ; 2004 ) increased accountability requirements by revising state performance goals and requiring that students with disabilities be included in all state and district - wide assessments , including assessments required under the esea .

in addition to the trio sss program and ctp programs for students with intellectual disabilities , established in earlier amendments to the hea , the heoa established a new competitive ctp grant program , which operates on a limited scale , called model transition programs for students with intellectual disabilities into higher education ( tpsid ) .

tpsid grants fund ihes in partnering with one or more leas and create model transition programs from secondary to postsecondary education for students with intellectual disabilities .

