f ederal budget decisions express the priorities of congress and reinforce its influence on federal policies .

making budgetary decisions for the federal government is a complex process and requires the balance of competing goals .

the recent economic recession adversely affected federal budget outcomes through revenue declines and spending increases .

the federal budget recorded a deficit of 9.8% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) in fy2009 , the largest value since world war ii .

subsequent improvement of the economy and implementation of policies designed to lower spending have improved the short - term budget outlook .

in fy2016 , the federal budget recorded a deficit of 3.2% of gdp , which was still significantly higher than the average deficit since fy1947 ( 2.0% of gdp ) .

over the next several years , projections of a continued decline in discretionary spending are more than offset by increases in both mandatory spending and net interest payments , leading to a rise in federal deficits .

increases in the long - term cost of federal retirement and health care programs and debt servicing costs each contribute to upward pressure on federal spending levels .

operating these programs in their current form may pass on substantial economic burdens to future generations .

congress and the president may consider proposals for deficit reduction if fiscal issues remain a key item on the legislative agenda .

this report summarizes issues surrounding the federal budget , examines policy changes relevant to the budget framework for fy2018 , and discusses recent major policy proposals included in the president's fy2018 budget .

it concludes by addressing major short - and long - term fiscal challenges facing the federal government .

each fiscal year , congress and the president engage in a number of practices that influence short - and long - run revenue and expenditure trends .

this section describes the budget cycle and explains how budget baselines are constructed .

budget baselines are used to measure how legislative changes affect the budget outlook and are integral to evaluating these policy choices .

congress has enacted several pieces of legislation in recent years with significant ramifications for the federal budget .

the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) increased the debt limit and required deficit reduction ( ultimately implemented through across - the - board spending cuts ) and caps on discretionary budget authority .

subsequent revisions to the spending reductions established in the bca were enacted through the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( atra ; p.l .

112-240 ) , the bipartisan budget act of 2013 ( bba 2013 ; p.l .

113-67 ) , and the bipartisan budget act of 2015 ( bba 2015 ; p.l .

114-74 ) .

atra also made several changes to the federal tax code , making some previously temporary reductions in individual income tax rates permanent , allowing some tax cuts to expire , and making other changes .

meanwhile , the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) made a number of changes to a group of tax provisions known as "tax extenders," permanently incorporating some provisions into the tax code and temporarily extending others through the 2016 or 2019 tax years .

finally , the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l .

115-31 ) provided continuing appropriations for the remainder of fy2017 , while bba 2015 allowed for reinstatement of the statutory debt limit in march 2017 .

the trump administration submitted its fy2018 budget to congress on may 23 , 2017 .

the president's budget lays out the administration's views on national priorities and policy initiatives .

congress has also begun consideration of the fy2018 budget .

ongoing budgetary challenges remain , which may result in congressional action .

issues related to deficit reduction and the long - term budget outlook may continue to dominate the policy debate .

increased spending on entitlement programs , as currently structured , will likely contribute to rising deficits and debt , placing ever - increasing focus on how to achieve fiscal sustainability over the long term .

various budget issues may feature prominently in near - term congressional debates .

discussions over fy2018 discretionary appropriations legislation may be held in advance of the beginning of the fiscal year ( or afterwards in the case of supplemental or continuing appropriations ) .

congress may also choose to revisit the deficit reduction measures imposed by the bca , as amended , ahead of fy2018 , which include discretionary caps on defense and nondefense budget authority through fy2021 and spending reduction measures on certain mandatory programs through fy2025 .

congress elected to lift the discretionary caps ( allow for more spending ) in each year from fy2013 through fy2017 relative to their values established in the bca .

each of those modifications increased annual caps on defense and nondefense spending by equal measures , which is sometimes described as the "parity principle. .

congress may also choose to modify the statutory debt limit .

treasury is currently implementing extraordinary measures to stay under the debt limit , which was reinstated in march 2017 .

extraordinary measures were previously adopted in march 2015 .

coupled with short - run budget surpluses in march and april of that year ( which result primarily from the receipt of annual income tax returns ) , those measures were estimated to be exhausted in early november 2015 , or shortly after the most recent debt limit suspension .

the latest cbo budget forecast projects a larger nominal budget deficit in fy2017 ( $559 billion ) than the federal deficit in fy2015 ( $466 billion ) .

such an increase may reduce the length of time extraordinary measures would postpone a binding debt limit relative to what was experienced in 2015 .

the federal government faces long - term budget challenges .

occasional budget deficits are not necessarily problematic .

deficit spending can allow governments to smooth outlays and revenues to shield taxpayers and program beneficiaries from abrupt economic shocks in the short term , while also temporarily boosting gdp when the economy is underperforming .

persistent deficits , however , lead to growing levels of federal debt that may lead to higher interest payments and may also have adverse macroeconomic consequences in the long term , including slowing investment and lowering economic growth .

since the debt cannot grow faster than gdp indefinitely , large deficits will eventually need to be reduced through increases in taxes , reductions in spending , or both .

some measures of fiscal solvency in the long term indicate that , under current policy , the united state faces major future imbalance , specifically as it relates to rising retirement and health care costs and the likely impact on government - financed health care spending .

existing deficit reduction policies like the bca have improved recent and near - term deficits but do not make significant changes to the parts of the budget that are projected to grow the fastest in the long - run .

therefore , many budget analysts believe that additional deficit reduction is required to put the budget on a sustainable path over the long term .

cbo's current law baseline projects inflation - adjusted deficits that are greater than the postwar average in each year of their most recent 10-year baseline .

cbo , gao , and the trump administration agree that the current mix of federal fiscal policies is unsustainable in the long term .

the nation's aging population , combined with rising health care costs per beneficiary , may keep federal health costs rising faster than per capita gdp .

cbo projected in march 2017 that under current policy , federal spending on health programs ( including medicare , medicaid , chip , and exchange subsidies ) would grow from 5.5% of gdp in fy2017 to 8.8% of gdp in fy2047 .

a 2017 gao report on fiscal health also cited health spending as a source of concern .

though these forecasts are highly uncertain , it seems probable that spending on these programs will rise as a share of gdp over time .

in addition , growing debt and rising interest rates are projected to cause interest payments to consume a greater share of future federal spending .

cbo projects that under current law , spending to service the federal debt ( net interest payments ) will grow rapidly , from 1.4% of gdp in fy2017 to 5.2% of gdp in fy2047 .

gao's recent long - term fiscal simulations , under an alternative policy scenario , projected that debt held by the public as a share of gdp would exceed the post - world war ii historical high in the next 15 to 25 years .

keeping future federal outlays at 20% of gdp , or approximately at its historical average , and leaving fiscal policies unchanged , according to cbo projections , would require drastic reductions in all spending other than that for medicare , social security , and medicaid , or reining in the costs of these programs .

under cbo's extended baseline , maintaining the debt - to - gdp ratio at today's level ( 77% ) in fy2047 would require an immediate and permanent cut in non - interest spending , increase in revenues , or some combination of the two in the amount of 1.9% of gdp ( or about $380 billion in fy2018 alone ) in each year .

maintaining this debt - to - gdp ratio beyond fy2047 would require additional deficit reduction .

if policymakers wanted to lower future debt levels relative to today , the annual spending reductions or revenue increases would have to be larger .

for example , in order to bring debt as a percentage of gdp in fy2046 down to its historical average over the past 50 years ( 40% of gdp ) , spending reductions or revenue increases or some combination of the two would need to generate net savings of roughly 3.1% of gdp ( or $620 billion in fy2018 alone ) in each year .

the alternative to decreased spending as a means of deficit reduction is to increase revenues through modifications to the federal tax system .

recently discussed reforms include the "a better way proposal" released by house speaker paul ryan in june 2016 and recent tax reform goals published by the trump administration .

congressional scorekeepers have not yet evaluated the budgetary effects of those proposals , though in each case the authors have expressed a desire for the reforms to be "revenue neutral," or to keep total revenue projections unchanged over the 10-year budget window .

while tax reform proposals may intend to address other policy goals , those that are revenue neutral are therefore unlikely to significantly alter the long - run budgetary outlook .

in the long - run , increases in federal debt are constrained by the amount of remaining "fiscal space," or the amount of government borrowing that creditors are willing to finance .

the amount of fiscal space available depends on both the current size of the debt and how fast it is increasing relative to gdp .

the latter depends on the size of deficits , the government's borrowing rate , and how quickly the economy is growing .

with continuously increasing debt levels , at some point debt would become so large that investors would no longer be willing to finance deficits and fiscal space would be exhausted .

there is great uncertainty about when investors would stop financing federal borrowing .

because interest rates are presently lower than their historical averages , there is little concern that the federal government is in danger of running out of fiscal space in the short run .

cbo documents the congressional budget office ( cbo ) provides data and analysis to congress throughout the budget and appropriations process .

each january , cbo issues a budget and economic outlook that contains current - law baseline estimates of outlays and revenues .

in march , cbo typically issues an analysis of the president's budget submission with revised baseline estimates and projections .

these documents can be delayed as a result of the legislative agenda or if the president's budget is off schedule .

in late summer , cbo issues an updated budget and economic outlook with new baseline projections .

in these documents , cbo sets a current - law baseline as a benchmark to evaluate whether legislative proposals would increase or decrease outlays and revenue collection .

baseline estimates are not intended to predict likely future outcomes , but to show what spending and revenues would be if current law remained in effect .

cbo typically evaluates the budgetary consequences of most legislative proposals and the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) evaluates the consequences of revenue proposals .

cbo also releases other periodic publications focusing on the future fiscal health of the united states .

in its publication the long - term budget outlook , cbo makes projections on the state of the federal budget over the next 75 years .

cbo discusses spending and revenue levels and the related issues that it expects will arise under different policy assumptions .

in its budget options volumes , cbo provides specific policy options and the impact they will have on spending and revenues over a 10-year budget window .

cbo also provides arguments for and against enacting each policy .

omb documents the president's budget contains five major volumes: ( 1 ) the budget , ( 2 ) historical tables , ( 3 ) analytical perspectives , ( 4 ) appendix , and ( 5 ) supplemental materials .

these documents lay out the administration's projections of the fiscal outlook for the country , along with spending levels proposed for each of the federal government's departments and programs .

the historical tables volume also provides significant amounts of budget data , much of which extend back to 1962 or earlier .

along with the administration's budget documents , the department of the treasury also releases its green book , which provides further detail on the revenue proposals that are contained in the budget .

