o n february 16 , 2016 , house speaker paul ryan announced the creation of six committee - led task forces to formulate proposals .

the tax reform task force was led by ways and means committee chairman kevin brady .

on june 24 , 2016 , speaker ryan released the tax reform task force blueprint , or the better way tax reform .

for the individual income tax , the plan would broaden the base , lower the rates , and alter some of the elements related to family size and structure .

for business income , the current income tax would be replaced by a cash - flow tax rebated on exports and imposed on imports , with a top rate of 20% for corporations and 25% for individuals .

the proposal would also repeal estate and gift taxes .

the repeal of the affordable care act taxes is not in the better way tax reform proposal , but these taxes along with subsidies are addressed in the house - passed american health care act of 2017 ( h.r .

1628 ) .

the border adjustment ( tax on imports and rebate on exports ) has garnered a lot of attention and , along with international tax issues in general , was the subject of a hearing before the ways and means committee .

a recent announcement by congressional and administration leaders indicated that border tax adjustments would be dropped from future tax plans .

the effect of eliminating the border tax adjustment will be discussed in the relevant sections .

note that the blueprint is a general outline rather than a detailed proposal , with many features not fully determined .

this report reviews the plan as reported in that document .

the inclusion of additional features could alter this analysis .

this report describes current law and the proposed changes .

it discusses economic efficiency , distributional and equity issues , administrative and compliance issues , revenue effects , and other tax - related issues .

this section describes the changes in the individual income tax , the treatment of unincorporated business , the corporate tax , and the repeal of estate and gift taxes .

gains in economic efficiency are a traditional objective of tax reform .

efficiency gains have often been conflated with economic growth , but the concepts are different .

efficiency gains arise from an improved allocation of resources whereas economic growth arises from increases in labor and capital .

the efficiency objective is to maximize well - being ( referred to as utility in economics terms ) .

the two are related to some of the measures but viewed differently .

for example , if a marginal tax rate cut increases labor supply the growth effect is the value of additional output , but the efficiency gain is the increased income minus the loss in the value of leisure or unpaid work ( such as child care ) .

increased work always adds to economic growth but does not necessarily add to efficiency or well - being .

labor supply is affected by income and substitution effects .

when effective rates are cut , a rise in income allows individuals to consume both more goods and leisure , and thus reduces work effort .

the substitution effect causes goods to be cheaper and encourages more work .

only the substitution effect and the marginal rate relate to efficiency gain ( reducing the distortion between the consumption of goods , financed by working , and the consumption of leisure ) .

similarly , an increase in the rate of return has two conflicting effects on savings: a higher rate of return means that individuals can consume more both in the present and the future ; consuming more in the present means a reduction in savings .

a higher rate of return also encourages the substitution of future consumption for present consumption , increasing savings .

the effect on savings also , however , depends on the timing of tax payments .

to the extent , for example , that consumption taxes shift tax payments to the future ( when assets may be drawn down in retirement and used to consume ) , a taxpayer should save more to finance those future tax payments .

whereas growth effects depend on income and substitution effects , and thus on both average and marginal rates , efficiency effects depend on marginal effective tax rates , for both labor and capital .

as with labor , the efficiency gain from reducing marginal tax rates on capital income is not the amount of consumption it allows in the future , but the difference in the value of that consumption compared to foregone present consumption .

several distributional consequences arise in considering the blueprint .

this section discusses four issues: ( 1 ) distribution across income classes ( vertical equity ) , ( 2 ) horizontal equity ( or the treatment of taxpayers with the same abilities to pay ) , ( 3 ) intergenerational distribution ( through the cash - flow tax and its effects on assets ) , and ( 4 ) international distribution ( through the exchange rate effects of the border tax adjustment on assets ) .

the tpc , tax foundation , and akk have estimated the blueprint's revenue effects , although the tpc included repeal of the affordable care act taxes and the tax foundation and akk did not .

akk also excluded the effects of the estate tax .

these revenue losses are significant .

all three studies also reported effects after macroeconomic feedback .

none of the revenue estimates reflects the elimination of the border adjustment , which is estimated to add $1.2 trillion to the ten year cost .

the tpc estimates a revenue loss of $3,100.9 billion for the first 10 years and $2,225.6 billion for the second 10 years .

if the affordable care act taxes are excluded , the cost is $2,297.6 billion in the first 10 years and $795.6 billion in the second 10 years .

 ( the repeal of these taxes cost $803.1 billion in the first 10 years and $1,430.0 billion in the second 10 years. ) .

of these , the individual income tax costs are $1,219.0 billion in first 10 years and $303.9 billion in second 10 years , or less than half .

structural elements ( rates , standard deduction , itemized deductions , personal exemptions , child and dependent credits , and alternative minimum tax ) are close to revenue neutral , losing $95.9 billion in first 10 years but gaining $202.4 billion in the second 10 years .

these results are consistent with the findings of limited changes from current law in the previous section on distribution and horizontal equity .

most of the losses on the individual side are from the treatment of business and investment income .

the maximum tax rate on business income and expensing plus the disallowance of net interest deductions loses $1,050.3 billion in first 10 years and $221.9 billion in the second 10 years .

the timing difference reflects the pattern of expensing whose revenue loss ( assuming depreciation on existing assets is continued ) loses significant revenue initially and then a smaller amount over time , plus the disallowance of net interest deductions , which gains more revenue over time as more loans are covered .

the more generous treatment of capital gains , dividends , and interest results in losses of $497.8 billion in the first 10 years and $848.6 billion in the second 10 years .

tpc also includes other tax expenditures assumed at a gain of $385.2 billion in the first 10 years and $515.7 billion in the second 10 years .

corporate revenue losses are $890.7 billion in the first 10 years and $192.5 billion in the in second 10 years .

as with the case of business income , the significant decline in revenue loss over the two periods is due to the pattern of expensing and disallowance of net interest deductions .

there is also a small offset from the deemed repatriation of foreign source income ; without that one - time gain , the loss in the first 10 years would be $1,062.4 billion .

the border adjustment accounts for a significant offset to loses , gaining $1,179.6 billion in the first 10 years and $1,689.3 billion in the second 10 years .

the estate and gift tax repeal costs $187.4 billion in the first 10 years and $299.1 billion in the second 10 years .

the tax foundation estimated a revenue loss of $2,418 billion in the first 10 years , with $981 billion from the individual income tax , $1,197 billion in corporate income taxes , and $240 billion in estate and gift taxes .

the tax foundation also finds the structural change in the individual income tax change to be roughly revenue neutral , losing $104 billion in the first 10 years , thus also indicating that most of the revenue loss from the individual taxes arises from the treatment of business and investment incomes .

akk estimate a loss of $212 billion annually without identifying a time period .

the estimate do not include the affordable care act taxes or transition effects ( such as the cost of depreciating old capital and the allowance of interest deductions on existing debt ) , although it appears that the model does not include debt .

the estate tax repeal is also not included in the model .

the akk model does not appear to have other forms of capital , such as that of unincorporated businesses and owner - occupied housing .

for a dynamic score , the tpc's keynesian / neoclassical growth model shows a negligible change in revenue cost in the first 10 years from economic feedback effects and a 21% increase in the second 10 years , whereas the life cycle model shows a 2% offset in the first 10 years and a revenue loss that is 51.5% larger than the static loss in the second 10 years .

the tax foundation finds a 92% offset .

akk find a revenue gain of $38 million annually and thus a revenue offset of 118% , although they once again stress that these estimates appear to represent an upper bound on wage growth .

note that the tpc's estimate , although it includes the effects of crowding out , does not include the much larger costs of interest payments on the debt .

the tax foundation's estimate reflects neither .

the revenue shortfalls , likely to be significant because the tax foundation's estimate reflects large supply side and tax rate effects and no crowding out , are a major challenge for the tax reform proposals , given the already unsustainable nature of the debt .

the revenue losses would be more serious in the short run without the border tax adjustment , although , as noted above , this revenue could be thought of as a loan and not affect the longer - term burdens of the revenue shortfall .

many elements of the blueprint could produce simplification in tax administration and compliance .

on the individual income tax side , the reduction in the share of taxpayers who itemize will be the major simplification , eliminating the need to keep records ( particularly with charitable deductions ) , although there are potential simplifications if education and retirement benefits are consolidated .

the repeal of the estate and gift taxes would end tax planning surrounding those taxes .

the cash - flow treatment will simplify business accounting by eliminating the need to depreciate assets , although transition rules could extend the period that depreciation must be calculated .

firms would no longer need international tax planning to shift profits from u.s. jurisdictions into tax havens with low or no taxes because disallowance of net interest deductions would remove earnings stripping through leveraging and the destination - based treatment would remove profit shifting through transfer pricing .

u.s. firms would no longer be interested in moving their headquarters for tax reasons , and thus no longer engage inefficient mergers to do so .

without the border adjustment , however , profit shifting would be reduced by the lower - tax rate and disallowance of interest deductions , but increased when using the more important source of profit shifting , transfers of intangibles , due to a territorial tax .

with a territorial tax , profits shifted out of the united states under a production - based tax would have a larger benefit because they would never be taxed .

incentives to invert would be reduced substantially , but not entirely eliminated .

although the blueprint introduces some significant simplification , new administrative costs and complexities arise .

a full exploration of these issues is beyond the scope of this report ; however , the following are the main issues that have been under discussion .

many of them relate to the border adjustment and would no longer be of concern without that adjustment .

several other issues may be of concern to policymakers and are briefly highlighted below .

the blueprint's border adjustments may be found to be illegal tariffs and export subsidies by the world trade organization ( wto ) .

this determination is largely a legal matter which , according to some experts , is unlikely to be influenced by economic issues .

thus , although economic analysis indicates that as long as both the taxation of imports and exclusion of exports occur at the same rate , border adjustments do not influence trade , this point may not be taken into consideration .

even if it were , the lack of refundability of export subsidies could bring this issue into question .

most lawyers considering this issue appear to believe that the border adjustments will not be legal , especially the tax imposed on imports by disallowing deductions .

similarly , there are issues about the new tax coverage under the existing income tax treaties .

if the tax is treated as an income tax and thus falls under these treaties' rules , it would violate income tax treaties .

one of those violations would be imposing an import tax on sellers without a permanent establishment in the united states , which is not allowed under current treaties .

although the issues as to whether the tax complies with wto and tax treaties are legal , the consequences would be economic .

if the wto rules are violated there would need to be major changes to the tax law ( either abandoning destination basis or converting the tax into a true value - added tax ) or being subject to penalties , such as countervailing duties .

changing to a different basis of taxation would present issues for state and local income tax systems and their enforcement .

most states use the federal income tax as the base for their own taxes .

for businesses , the movement to expensing would require states to either adopt the same rules or make numerous adjustments to require depreciation and interest deductions , to allow deductions for imports , and deny exclusion of export revenues .

enforcement would become more difficult .

individual income taxes ( outside of pass - through income ) would be less radically changed , although the significant reduction in the number of itemizers could have revenue consequences for the states .

if most of these non - itemizers now move to the state standard deduction , which may have been less generous than itemizing at the state level because most states add back state income taxes , revenues could be lost .

states would also have to determine their own conformity with federal itemized deductions .

to the extent that the states and localities retained a traditional income tax base , the simplification for businesses from cash - flow taxes would no longer be realized , because these measures would have to be calculated for state income tax purposes .

some arguments have been made that large publicly traded firms are more sensitive to the effects on profits in their financial accounts in making decisions to undertake investment .

this concern raises issues for the destination - based cash - flow tax .

the first is whether the tax will be treated as an income tax , with the expensing provisions treated as temporary timing provisions that do not change profits ( because profits reflect deferred tax liabilities ) , or as a consumption tax , in which the tax is treated as a sales tax and profits rise .

if treated as an income tax , arguments have been made that expensing will not provide the type of incentive discussed in the sections on investment and growth .

most economists have difficulties with this argument because it means that firms are not maximizing profits .

a value - added tax is normally imposed on real income ( sales of goods and services ) and not financial income .

the blueprint , modified from an income tax , includes financial income .

for example , it appears that net interest income will be included in the base ( and thus the only change for deductions is when net interest payments are present ) .

if financial transactions are included in the tax base ( including not only interest , but capital gains , royalties , and other items ) then should the border adjustments also apply ? .

these are questions that may remain to be answered .

growth model estimating the long - run growth effects begins with a production function: q=a ( ak1-1s ) +1-al ( 1-1s ) ) 1 / ( 1-1s ) where q is output , a and a are constants , k is capital , l is labor , and s is the factor substitution elasticity .

maximizing profits subject to the payments for capital and labor yields the two first order conditions: qk= a - s a1-1s - s ( r1-t+d ) s and ql= a - s a1-1s - s ws where r is the after tax rate of return , t is the effective tax rate on capital income , d is the economic depreciation rate , and w is the wage rate .

labor supply is a function of after - tax wages: l=b ( w ( 1-ta ) ) - ei ( w ( 1-tm ) es where b is a constant , ta is the average tax rate on wage income , tm is the marginal tax rate on wage income , ei is the absolute value of the income elasticity , and es is the absolute value of the substitution elasticity .

the equation for r is based on the steady state equilibrium that the savings equals investment and thus the savings rate times output equals the growth rate times the capital stock .

the savings rate is in turn a constant elastic function of the rate of return , thus: c rerq = gk where c is a constant , g is the ( constant ) growth rate , and er is the savings rate elasticity with respect to the after tax return .

to solve the model , substitute the value of k and l from equations ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) into equation ( 1 ) to derive the relationship between r and w. also combine equations ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) to express the capital - labor ratio as a function of relative prices .

there is a set of five equations and five unknowns , which are differentiated and combined to yield the percentage change in output ( which is a function of the percentage change in inputs of capital and labor , which are in turn determined by tax rate changes ) .

the analysis yields a percentage change in output dq / q , which is a function of the changes in the tax rate on capital income , the average tax rate on labor income and the marginal tax rate on labor income: dqq=αs+es - ei ( 1- α ) vdt1-t+eidta ( 1-ta ) - estm ( 1-tm ) where α is the share or capital income v=er ( r1-t ) / ( sr1-t+er r1-t+d ) because this model applies to small changes , to get a better approximation of discrete changes , the initial tax rate is set at the midpoint of the old and new tax rates .

calculating stock market effects this simplified formula does not include debt and interest payments , but these terms would disappear in any case .

the calculations used a weighted average of debt and equity costs to determine the real after tax return , r , but there was virtually no difference if the higher equity return were used .

the value of stock per dollar of the existing capital stock begins with the annual flow of profits net of reinvestment ( or dividends ) : π=c ( 1-u ) - d+g+d+g uζ where π is net profit , c is gross profit before depreciation , u is the statutory tax rate , d is the depreciation rate , g is the growth rate , and ζ is the value of depreciation discounted at the nominal growth rate ( the value of depreciation deductions as a percent of investment ) .

if profits grow with the inflation rate p and the real growth rate g , and are discounted at the nominal interest rate ( r+p ) , where r is the real after tax discount rate , the value of an indefinite stream of profits net of investment is: ( 9 ) v=c1-u - d+g+d+guζ / [r - g ) to determine c , use the standard user cost of capital , which relates gross profit to the after tax discount rate , economic , depreciation , tax depreciation , and the tax rate , for an investment that breaks even: ( 10 ) c= ( r+d ) ( 1-uz ) ( 1-u ) where z is the present value of tax depreciation deductions ( which is discounted at the nominal interest rate , r+p ) .

substituting ( 10 ) into ( 9 ) results in: ( 11 ) v=r+d1-uz - d+g1-uζ / ( r - g ) or ( 12 ) v=1-[r+duz - d+guζ] / ( r - g ) calculation of ζ is the same as the calculation of z , except that r is replaced by g. if depreciation is economic depreciation d / ( r+d ) for z and d / ( d+g ) for ζ , the value of v is 1 , as the values in the numerator of the second term in ( 12 ) cancel out .

also if assets are expensed so that both z and ζequal 1 , the value is ( 1-u ) .

calculations were done for each type of asset ( equipment , public utility structures , nonresidential structures , residential structures , and intangibles ) .

the value of p was set at 0.02 , g at 0.03 , u at slightly below 0.35 ( 0.334 ) for equipment , nonresidential structures , and intangibles to reflect the production activities deduction , and 0.35 otherwise , and r at .05538 , reflecting a weighted average of debt and equity .

