on january 21 , 2019 , venezuela's government - aligned supreme court issued a ruling declaring the national assembly illegitimate and its rulings unconstitutional .

 ( see " lead - up to maduro's january 2019 inauguration and aftermath ," below. ) .

on january 21 , 2019 , venezuelan military authorities announced the arrest of 27 members of the national guard who allegedly stole weapons ( since recovered ) as they tried to incite an uprising against the government .

 ( see " lead - up to maduro's january 2019 inauguration and aftermath ," below. ) .

on january 15 , 2019 , venezuela's national assembly declared that president maduro had usurped the presidency .

the legislature also established a framework for the formation of a transitional government led by juan guaidó of the popular will ( vp ) party , the president of the national assembly who was elected on january 5 , 2019 , to serve until presidential elections can be held ( per article 233 of the constitution ) .

in addition , the legislature approved amnesty from prosecution for public officials who facilitate the transition .

 ( see " lead - up to maduro's january 2019 inauguration and aftermath ," below. ) .

on january 13 , 2019 , venezuela's intelligence service detained , and then released , juan guaidó .

two days prior , guaidó had said he would be willing to assume the presidency on an interim basis until new elections could be held ; he also called for national protests to occur on january 23 , 2019 .

 ( see " lead - up to maduro's january 2019 inauguration and aftermath ," below. ) .

on january 10 , 2019 , the u.s. department of state issued a statement condemning maduro's "illegitimate usurpation of power" and vowing to "work with the national assembly ... in accordance with your constitution on a peaceful return to democracy. .

 ( see " u.s. policy ," below. ) .

on january 10 , 2019 , the organization of american states ( oas ) passed a resolution rejecting the legitimacy of nicolas maduro's new term .

 ( see appendix b , below. ) .

on january 10 , 2019 , president nicolas maduro began a second term after a may 2018 election that has been deemed illegitimate by the democratically elected , opposition - controlled national assembly and much of the international community .

 ( see " foreign relations ," below. ) .

on january 8 , 2019 , the u.s. department of the treasury imposed sanctions on seven individuals and 23 companies involved in a scheme that stole $2.4 billion through manipulation of venezuela's currency exchange system under authority provided in executive order ( e.o. ) .

13850 .

 ( see " targeted sanctions related to antidemocratic actions , human rights violations , and corruption ," below. ) .

on december 17 , 2018 , a group of investors demanded the venezuelan government pay off the interest and principal of a defaulted $1.5 billion bond , the first step in a potential legal process by creditors to recover their assets .

 ( see " prospects for 2019 ," below. ) .

on december 14 , 2018 , el nacional , venezuela's last independent newspaper with national circulation , stopped publishing its print edition after 75 years .

the move ame after numerous advertising restrictions , lawsuits , and threats from the venezuelan government .

 ( see " human rights," below. ) .

on december 14 , 2018 , the united nations launched an appeal for $738 million to support refugees and migrants from venezuela in 2019 .

 ( see " humanitarian situation ," below. ) .

venezuela , long one of the most prosperous countries in south america with the world's largest proven oil reserves , continues to be in the throes of a deep political , economic , and humanitarian crisis .

whereas populist president hugo chávez ( 1998-2013 ) governed during a period of generally high oil prices , his successor , nicolás maduro of the united socialist party of venezuela ( psuv ) , has exacerbated an economic downturn caused by low global oil prices through mismanagement and corruption .

according to freedom house , venezuela has fallen from "partly free" under chávez to "not free" under maduro , an unpopular leader who has violently quashed dissent and illegally replaced the legislature with a national constituent assembly ( anc ) elected under controversial circumstances in july 2017 .

president maduro won reelection in early elections held in may 2018 that were dismissed as illegitimate by the united states , the european union ( eu ) , the g - 7 , and a majority of countries in the western hemisphere .

u.s. relations with venezuela , a major oil supplier , deteriorated during chávez's rule , which undermined human rights , the separation of powers , and freedom of expression .

u.s. and regional concerns have deepened as the maduro government has manipulated democratic institutions ; cracked down on the opposition , media , and civil society ; engaged in drug trafficking and corruption ; and refused most humanitarian aid .

efforts to hasten a return to democracy in venezuela have failed thus far .

president maduro's convening of the anc and early presidential elections have triggered international criticism and led to sanctions by canada , the eu , panama , switzerland , the united states , and potentially others .

this report provides an overview of the overlapping political , economic , and humanitarian crises in venezuela , followed by an overview of u.s. policy toward venezuela .

human rights organizations and u.s. officials have expressed concerns for more than a decade about the deterioration of democratic institutions and threats to freedom of speech and press in venezuela .

human rights conditions in venezuela have deteriorated even more under president maduro than under former president chávez .

abuses have increased , as security forces and allied armed civilian militias ( collectivos ) have been deployed to violently quash protests .

in august 2017 , the united nations office of the high commissioner for human rights ( unochr ) issued a report on human rights violations perpetrated by the venezuelan security forces against the protestors .

according to the report , credible and consistent accounts indicated that "security forces systematically used excessive force to deter demonstrations , crush dissent , and instill fear. .

the u.n. report maintained that many of those detained were subject to cruel , degrading treatment and that in several cases , the ill treatment amounted to torture .

unochr called for an international investigation of those abuses .

in june 2018 , unochr issued another report documenting abuses committed by units involved in crime fighting , the scale of the health and food crisis , and the continued impunity in cases involving security officers who allegedly killed people during the protests .

other selected human rights reports from 2017-2018 include the venezuelan human rights group foro penal and human rights watch maintain that more than 5,300 venezuelans were detained during the protests .

together , the organizations documented inhumane treatment of more than 300 detainees that occurred between april and september 2017 .

in february 2018 , the inter - american commission on human rights ( iachr ) released its third report on the situation of human rights in venezuela .

the report highlighted the violation of the separation of powers that occurred as president maduro and the judiciary interfered in the work of the legislature and then replaced it with a constituent assembly .

it then criticized state limits on social protests and freedom of expression and said that the government "must curtail the use of force against demonstrators. .

in march 2018 , the state department's country report on human rights practices for 2017 found that "human rights deteriorated dramatically" in 2017 as the government tried hundreds of civilians in military courts and arrested 12 opposition mayors for their "alleged failure to control protests. .

in may 2018 , an independent panel of human rights experts added a legal assessment to a report containing information and witness testimonies gathered by the oas recommending that the international criminal court ( icc ) should investigate credible reports that the venezuelan government committed crimes against humanity .

these reports published by international human rights organizations , the u.s. government , u.n. entities , and the oas / iachr reiterate the findings of provea , one of venezuela's leading human rights organizations .

in its report covering 2017 ( published in june 2018 ) , provea asserts that 2017 was the worst year for human rights in venezuela since the report was first published in 1989 .

in addition to violating political and civil rights , provea denounces the maduro government's failure to address the country's humanitarian crisis , citing its "official indolence" as causing increasing deaths and massive emigration .

for other sources on human rights in venezuela , see appendix c .

in september 2017 , several countries urged the u.n. human rights council to support the high commissioner's call for an international investigation into the abuses described in the u.n.'s august 2017 report on venezuela .

in june 2018 , the high commissioner for human rights urged the u.n. human rights council to launch a commission of inquiry to investigate the abuses it documented in that and a follow - up report .

it referred the report to the prosecutor of the icc .

on september 26 , 2018 , the u.n. human rights council adopted a resolution on venezuela expressing "its deepest concern" about the serious human rights violations described in the june 2018 report , calling upon the venezuelan government to accept humanitarian assistance and requiring a unochr investigation on the situation in venezuela to be presented in 2019 .

in addition to the unochr , former venezuelan officials , the oas , and neighboring countries have asked the icc to investigate serious human rights violations committed by the maduro government ; the icc prosecutor opened a preliminary investigation in february 2018 .

in november 2017 , former attorney general luisa ortega presented a dossier of evidence to the icc that the police and military may have committed more than 1,800 extrajudicial killings as of june 2017 .

in the dossier , ortega urged the icc to charge maduro and several officials in his cabinet with serious human rights abuses .

an exiled judge appointed by the national assembly to serve on the "parallel" supreme court of justice also accused senior maduro officials of systemic human rights abuses before the icc .

on september 26 , 2018 , the governments of argentina , canada , chile , colombia , paraguay , and peru requested an investigation of venezuela's actions by the icc — the first time fellow states party to the rome statute asked for an investigation into the situation of another treaty member .

for decades , venezuela was one of south america's most prosperous countries .

venezuela has the world's largest proven reserves of oil , and its economy is built on oil .

oil traditionally has accounted for more than 90% of venezuelan exports , and oil sales have funded the government budget .

venezuela benefited from the boom in oil prices during the 2000s .

president chávez used the oil windfall to spend heavily on social programs and expand subsidies for food and energy , and government debt more than doubled as a share of gross domestic product ( gdp ) between 2000 and 2012 .

chávez also used oil to expand influence abroad through petroc aribe , a program that allowed caribbean basin countries to purchase oil at below - market prices .

although substantial government outlays on social programs helped chávez curry political favor and reduce poverty , economic mismanagement had long - term consequences .

chávez moved the economy in a less market - oriented direction , with widespread expropriations and nationalizations , as well as currency and price controls .

these policies discouraged foreign investment and created market distortions .

government spending was not directed toward investment to increase economic productivity or diversify the economy from its reliance on oil .

corruption proliferated .

when nicolás maduro took office in 2013 , he inherited economic policies reliant on proceeds from oil exports .

when oil prices crashed by nearly 50% in 2014 , the maduro government was ill - equipped to soften the blow .

the fall in oil prices strained public finances .

instead of adjusting fiscal policies through tax increases and spending cuts , the maduro government tried to address its growing budget deficit by printing money , which led to inflation .

the government also tried to curb inflation through price controls , although these controls were largely ineffective in restricting prices , as supplies dried up and transactions moved to the black market .

meanwhile , the government continued to face a substantial debt burden , with debt owed to private bondholders , china , russia , multilateral lenders , importers , and service companies in the oil industry .

initially , the government tried to service its debt , fearing legal challenges from bondholders .

to service its debt , it cut imports , including of food and medicine , among other measures .

in august 2018 , the trump administration imposed sanctions restricting venezuela's ability to access u.s. financial markets , which exacerbated the government's fiscal situation .

by late 2017 , the government had largely stopped paying its bondholders , and maduro announced plans to restructure its debt with private creditors .

it also restructured its debt with russia .

growing numbers of people continue to leave venezuela for urgent reasons , including insecurity and violence ; lack of food , medicine , or access to essential social services ; and loss of income .

as the pace of arrivals from venezuela has quickened , neighboring countries , particularly colombia , are straining to absorb a population that is often malnourished and in poor health .

according to a 2017 national survey on living conditions , the percentage of venezuelans living in poverty increased from 48.4% in 2014 to 87% in 2017 .

poverty has been exacerbated by shortages in basic consumer goods , as well as by bottlenecks and corruption in the military - run food importation and distribution system .

basic food items that do exist are largely out of reach for the majority of the population due to rampant inflation .

between 2014 and 2016 , venezuela recorded the greatest increase in malnourishment in latin america and the caribbean , a region in which only eight countries recorded increases in hunger .

according to caritas venezuela ( an organization affiliated with the catholic church ) , 15% of children surveyed in august 2017 suffered from moderate to severe malnutrition and 30% showed stunted growth .

venezuela's health system has been affected severely by budget cuts , with shortages of medicines and basic supplies , as well as doctors , nurses , and lab technicians .

some hospitals face critical shortages of antibiotics , intravenous solutions , and even food , and 50% of operating rooms in public hospitals are not in use .

according to the venezuelan program of education - action in human rights ( provea ) , a 2018 national hospital survey , 88% of hospitals lack basic medicines and 79% lack basic surgical supplies .

in addition , a june 2018 pan - american health organization ( paho ) report estimated that some 22,000 doctors ( 33% of the total doctors that were present in 2014 ) and at least 3,000 nurses had emigrated .

in february 2017 , venezuela captured international attention following the unexpected publication of data from the country's ministry of health ( the country had not been releasing such data since 2015 ) .

the report revealed significant spikes in infant and maternal mortality rates .

by 2017 , the infant mortality rate in venezuela was reportedly 79% higher than it had been in 2011 , according to world bank data .

paho's june 2018 report also documented the spread of previously eradicated infectious diseases like diphtheria ( detected in july 2016 ) and measles ( detected in july 2017 ) .

malaria , once under control , is also spreading rapidly , with more than 400,000 cases recorded in 2017 ( a 198% increase over 2015 ) .

increasing numbers of people have also reportedly died from hiv / aids in venezuela due to the collapse of the country's once well - regarded hiv treatment program and the scarcity of drugs needed to treat the disease .

observers are concerned that the lack of access to reliable contraception may hasten the spread of sexually transmitted diseases , unwanted pregnancies , and dangerous clandestine abortions .

the world health organization ( who ) is reportedly helping the government purchase and deliver millions of vaccines against measles , mumps , and rubella .

nevertheless , doctors and health associations have urged the u.n. entity to provide more assistance and exert more pressure on the government to address the health crisis .

moreover , while president maduro has publicly rejected offers of international humanitarian assistance , in november 2018 , the u.n. central emergency response fund ( cerf ) allocated $9.2 million for venezuela to be provided through u.n. entities , such as the u.n. children's fund ( unicef ) , who , and unhcr .

this emergency humanitarian funding is to support projects providing nutritional support to children under five years old , pregnant women and lactating mothers at risk , and emergency health care and other aid for the vulnerable , including the displaced and host communities in venezuela .

the maduro government has maintained venezuela's foreign policy alliance with cuba and a few other leftist governments in latin america , but the country's ailing economy has diminished its formerly activist foreign policy , which depended on its ability to provide subsidized oil to 17 other caribbean basin countries .

president maduro has increasingly relied on financial backing from china and russia .

unlike under chávez , an increasing number of countries have criticized authoritarian actions taken by the maduro government , brought concerns about venezuela to regional and global organizations , and implemented targeted sanctions against its officials .

since more than 50 countries did not recognize the results of the may 2018 presidential elections and do not consider his current presidency legitimate , maduro is likely to face increasing international isolation .

the oas has voted not to recognize the legitimacy of maduro's current term , mirroring the u.s. and eu positions .

paraguay has broken diplomatic ties with the maduro government and peru has recalled its last diplomat from caracas and pledged not to permit venezuelan officials to travel through its territory .

other countries may follow suit .

venezuela's foreign relations have become more tenuous as additional countries have sanctioned its officials .

in september 2017 , canada implemented targeted sanctions against 40 venezuelan officials deemed to be corrupt ; it added another 14 individuals , including president maduro's wife , following the may elections .

in november 2017 , the eu established a legal framework for targeted sanctions and adopted an arms embargo against venezuela to include related material that could be used for internal repression .

these actions paved the way for targeted eu sanctions on seven venezuelan officials in january 2018 .

on june 25 , 2018 , the council of the eu sanctioned 11 additional individuals for human rights violations and undermining democracy and called for new presidential elections to be held .

those sanctions will remain in place through late 2019 .

in march 2018 , panama and switzerland sanctioned venezuelan officials .

additional sanctions by these countries are possible now that they consider maduro's mandate illegitimate .

the united states historically has had close relations with venezuela , a major u.s. foreign oil supplier , but friction in relations increased under the chávez government and has intensified under the maduro regime .

for more than a decade , u.s. policymakers have had concerns about the deterioration of human rights and democratic conditions in venezuela and the lack of bilateral cooperation on counternarcotics and counterterrorism efforts .

u.s. officials have expressed increasing concerns regarding colombian criminal and terrorist groups in venezuela .

u.s. democracy and human rights funding , which totaled $15 million in fy2018 , and political support have bolstered democratic civil society in venezuela .

u.s. humanitarian assistance is supporting venezuelans who have fled to neighboring countries .

the united states has employed various sanctions in response to concerns about the activities of the venezuelan government or venezuela - linked individuals and entities .

targeted sanctions escalated after president maduro usurped the power of the national assembly by holding constituent assembly elections on july 30 , 2017 .

in the wake of the may 2018 elections that the united states and much of the international community deemed illegitimate , the trump administration has sought to increase pressure on the maduro government in order to hasten a return to democracy in venezuela .

the administration has ratcheted up targeted sanctions on venezuelan officials accused of corruption , antidemocratic actions , or human rights abuses under executive order ( e.o. ) .

13692 ( issued by president obama in 2015 ) and on venezuela - linked individuals and entities for drug trafficking .

president trump issued three executive orders restricting the government and pdvsa's ability to access the u.s. financial system ( e.o .

13808 ) , barring u.s. purchases of venezuela's new digital currency ( e.o .

13827 ) , and prohibiting u.s. purchases of venezuelan debt ( e.o .

13835 ) .

e.o .

13850 , issued in november 2018 , created a framework to sanction those who operate in venezuela's gold sector or those deemed complicit in corrupt transactions involving the government .

following president maduro's second inauguration , secretary of state michael pompeo pledged to "use the full weight of u.s. economic and diplomatic power to press for the restoration of venezuelan democracy. .

national security adviser john bolton lent support to national assembly leader juan guaidó's decision "to invoke protections under venezuela's constitution and declare that maduro does not legitimately hold the country's presidency. .

vice president pence has also lent his support to guaidó .

according to u.s. officials , forthcoming u.s. actions could limit or prohibit petroleum trade with venezuela .

some analysts maintain that oil sanctions could hasten the regime's demise , whereas others caution that such sanctions could inflict further suffering on the venezuelan people .

for some time , analysts have debated how long president maduro can retain his grip on power amid a deepening economic and humanitarian crisis and how best to help hasten a return to electoral democracy in venezuela .

despite his reelection and inauguration to a second term , president maduro faces increasing threats to his control over the country .

under the leadership of a little - known figure , juan guaidó of the vp party , the national assembly has issued a direct challenge to the legitimacy of maduro's presidency .

maduro still controls the military , but recent arrests of high - level military officials have signaled dissent within the forces .

it remains to be seen how they will respond to the national assembly's approval of a framework for the formation of a transition government and an amnesty law for any military members who support that transition .

it is yet unclear whether and under what circumstances juan guaidó would accept calls for him to declare himself interim president and how maduro and the international community would respond to such a development .

the trump administration has worked bilaterally and multilaterally to increase pressure on the maduro government while also providing assistance to neighboring countries hosting more than 3 million venezuelans who have fled the country .

in addition to ratcheting up targeted sanctions , the administration has implemented broader sanctions limiting venezuela and pdvsa's access to the u.s. financial market .

until now , the administration had stopped short of implementing even stronger measures , such a ban on petroleum trade with venezuela , partially out of concern that this could worsen the country's humanitarian crisis .

vice president pence and secretary of state pompeo have condemned maduro's term as illegitimate , recognized the national assembly as the only legitimate institution in the country , and lent support to juan guaidó and the national assembly .

while some have urged the administration to take more aggressive measures even though they could contribute to unrest in the country , others have maintained that support for a negotiated solution is the best course of action .

the 116 th congress may consider a number of measures to address the deteriorating situation in venezuela and its impact on the broader latin american region .

congress is likely to continue to fund and oversee foreign assistance for democracy and human rights programs to bolster civil society in venezuela as well as humanitarian assistance to venezuelans in neighboring countries .

congress could consider a measure to authorize u.s. humanitarian assistance as well .

other measures may be introduced to adjust the immigration status of venezuelans living in the united states or to provide certain venezuelans temporary protected immigration status .

congress may consider taking additional steps to try to influence the venezuelan government's behavior in promoting a return to democracy through additional sanctions or other policies .

oversight issues may examine the role of external actors operating in venezuela ( such as russia and china ) and the impact of the crisis in venezuela on the broader region .

should a change in government occur , congress may authorize additional support for reconstruction of the country .

appendix a .

legislative initiatives in the 115 th congress enacted legislation and approved resolutions p.l .

115-31 ( h.r .

244 ) .

consolidated appropriations act , 2017 .

introduced january 4 , 2017 , as the honoring investments in recruiting and employing american military veterans act of 2017 ; subsequently , the bill became the vehicle for the fy2017 appropriations measure known as the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 .

house agreed to senate amendments ( 309-118 ) may 3 , 2017 ; senate agreed to house amendment to senate amendments ( 79-18 ) may 4 , 2017 .

president signed into law may 5 , 2017 .

the explanatory statement accompanying the law recommends providing $7 million in democracy and human rights assistance to venezuelan civil society .

p.l .

115-141 ( h.r .

1625 ) .

consolidated appropriations act , 2018 .

originally introduced march 20 , 2017 , as the targeted rewards for the global eradication of human trafficking act , in march 2018 , the bill became the vehicle for the fy2018 omnibus appropriations measure known as the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 .

house agreed ( 256-167 ) to an amendment to the senate amendment march 22 , 2018 ; senate agreed ( 65-32 ) to the house amendment to the senate amendment march 23 , 2018 .

president signed into law march 23 , 2018 .

the law requires not less than $15 million in democracy and rule of law assistance to venezuelan civil society .

p.l .

115-232 ( h.r .

5515 ) .

john s. mccain national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2019 .

introduced april 13 , 2018 .

house passed ( 351-66 ) may 24 , 2018 .

senate passed ( 85-10 ) june 18 , 2018 , substituting the language of s. 2987 , the john s. mccain national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2019 .

conference report ( h.rept .

115-874 ) filed july 25 , 2018 ; house agreed ( 359-54 ) to the conference july 26 and senate agreed ( 86-10 ) august 1 , 2018 .

signed into law august 13 , 2018 .

in the conference report , the conferees directed the director of the defense intelligence agency to submit a report to several key committees on security cooperation between the russian federation and cuba , nicaragua , and venezuela .

h.res .

259 ( desantis ) .

introduced april 6 , 2017 ; reported out of the house foreign affairs committee july 27 , 2017 , approved by the house december 5 , 2017 .

the resolution expressed concern about the multiple crises that venezuela is facing ; urged the venezuelan government to hold elections , release political prisoners , and accept humanitarian aid ; supported oas efforts , including a potential temporary suspension of venezuela from the organization if the government does not convene elections and release political prisoners in a timely manner ; and encouraged president trump to prioritize resolving the crisis in venezuela , including through the use of targeted sanctions .

s.res .

35 ( cardin ) .

the resolution expresses support for a dialogue that leads to respect for venezuela's constitutional mechanisms and a resolution to the multiple crises the country faces , as well as for oas efforts to invoke the inter - american democratic charter .

the resolution urges full u.s. support for oas efforts and calls for u.s. agencies to hold venezuelan officials accountable for violations of u.s. law and international human rights standards .

introduced february 1 , 2017 .

agreed to in the senate february 28 , 2017 .

select additional legislative initiatives h.r .

2658 ( engel ) .

venezuela humanitarian assistance and defense of democratic governance act of 2017 .

introduced may 25 , 2017 ; amended and reported out of the house foreign affairs committee september 28 , 2017 ; approved by the house on december 5 , 2017 .

the bill would have directed the state department and usaid to deliver a strategy within 90 days of the enactment of the act on how they will work through ngos in venezuela or in neighboring countries to channel basic medical supplies and services , food and nutritional supplements , and related technical assistance needed to assist the venezuelan people ; supported oas efforts to invoke the inter - american democratic charter ; secured a presidential statement from the united nations urging the government of venezuela to allow the delivery of humanitarian relief ; required a report by the secretary of state , acting through the bureau of intelligence and research , on venezuelan officials involved in grand corruption , and encourage the imposition of sanctions on those individuals ; amended p.l .

113-278 to broaden the activities for which venezuelans can be sanctioned to include engaging in undemocratic practices or public corruption , extend the date for imposing sanctions through 2022 , and urge the administration to encourage other countries to sanction those individuals ; expressed the sense of the house that the president should take all necessary steps to prevent rosneft from gaining control of u.s. energy infrastructure .

required a strategy within 90 days on how u.s. assistance would be coordinated with those of other donors ; called on the united states to advocate and , if possible , support an oas election observation mission to venezuela when it is appropriate ; and required a report on other countries' activities in venezuela ( russia , china , iran , and cuba ) within 180 days of enactment .

s. 1018 ( cardin ) venezuela humanitarian assistance and defense of democratic governance act of 2017 .

s. 1018 was introduced may 3 , 2017 ; referred to the committee on foreign relations .

this bill would have included many of same provisions as h.r .

2658 .

in addition to requiring a strategy on how u.s. humanitarian assistance would be coordinated , s. 1018 would have authorized $10 million in humanitarian assistance for venezuela and would require the secretary of state to provide a strategy on how that assistance would be provided ; authorized $9.5 million for coordinated democracy and human rights assistance after the secretary of state submits a strategy on how the funds would be implemented and would make $500,000 available to support any future oas electoral missions to the country ; and prioritized continued u.s. support to caribbean countries that have been dependent on venezuela for energy .

s. 3486 ( menendez ) venezuela humanitarian relief , reconstruction , and rule of law act of 2018 .

s. 3486 contains many of the same provisions of h.r .

2658 .

introduced december 12 , 2018 , referred to the committee on foreign relations .

in addition to requiring a strategy on how u.s. humanitarian assistance would be coordinated , the bill would have authorized $40 million in additional humanitarian assistance and required the state department to convene a donor's conference on venezuela ; provided support for international efforts to hold venezuelan officials accountable for crimes against humanity ; authorized $15 million for democratic actors and civil society ; required the departments of state , treasury , and justice to lead international efforts to recover assets stolen by corrupt venezuelan officials ; advanced planning for the economic reconstruction of venezuela , contingent upon a change in governance in the country ; required more intelligence reporting on venezuelan officials' roles in drug trafficking and corruption , as well as the role of foreign actors in venezuela ; expanded u.s. sanctions on government officials , drug trafficking , and money laundering ; required the state department to work with other latin american governments to develop their own sanctions regimes ; and , codified existing crypto currency sanctions .

appendix b .

organization of american states action on venezuela on may 31 , 2016 , organization of american states ( oas ) secretary - general luis almagro invoked the inter - american democratic charter — a collective commitment to promote and defend democracy — when he called ( pursuant to article 20 ) on the oas permanent council to convene an urgent session on venezuela to decide whether "to undertake the necessary diplomatic efforts to promote the normalization of the situation and restore democratic institutions. .

secretary - general almagro issued a report concluding that there were "serious disruptions of the democratic order" in the country .

the permanent council met on june 23 , 2016 , to receive the report , but did not take any further action .

a group of 15 oas member states issued two statements ( in june and august 2016 ) supporting dialogue efforts but also urging the venezuelan government to allow the recall referendum process to proceed .

on november 16 , 2016 , the oas permanent council adopted a declaration that encouraged the maduro government and the mud "to achieve concrete results within a reasonable timeframe" and to "avoid any action of violence" that could threaten the process .

as dialogue efforts failed to advance , many observers contended that the maduro government had used such efforts as a delaying tactic .

secretary - general almagro published a second report to the permanent council in march 2017 calling on the venezuelan government to undertake measures to resume the constitutional order , including holding general elections without delay , or face a possible suspension from the oas .

it concluded by calling on oas member states to apply article 21 of the inter - american democratic charter to suspend venezuela from the organization if the venezuelan government fails to address the report recommendations positively .

an affirmative vote of two - thirds of the member states ( 23 ) in a special session of the general assembly would be necessary to suspend venezuela from the organization .

in the aftermath of the supreme court's march 2017 action , the permanent council met in a special meeting called by 20 oas members on april 3 , 2017 , and approved a resolution by consensus expressing "grave concern regarding the unconstitutional alteration of the democratic order" in venezuela .

the body also resolved to undertake additional diplomatic initiatives as needed "to foster the restoration of the democratic institutional system. .

on april 26 , 2017 , the oas permanent council voted to convene a meeting of the region's ministers of foreign affairs to discuss the situation in venezuela .

nineteen countries voted in favor of convening the meeting .

however , some countries objected to potential statements or actions ( such as a temporary suspension from the oas ) opposed by the venezuelan government based on the organization's principles of nonintervention and respect for national sovereignty .

on may 31 , 2017 , the oas convened a meeting of consultation of ministers of foreign affairs to discuss the situation in venezuela .

after much debate , the foreign ministers failed to approve a resolution to address the crisis .

some countries supported a draft resolution put forth by canada , panama , peru , mexico , and the united states , which called upon the venezuelan government and the opposition to take a series of steps but also offered humanitarian assistance and willingness to create a "group or other mechanism of facilitation to support a new process of dialogue and negotiation. .

other countries supported a resolution offered by the caribbean community ( caricom ) calling for dialogue and the creation of an external group to support dialogue between the government and the opposition without the specific preconditions on the government included in the other draft resolution .

oas member states were unable to reach consensus .

foreign ministers reconvened during the oas general assembly in mexico in june 2017 .

at those meetings , 20 countries voted in favor of adopting the aforementioned resolution put forth by peru ( and backed by the united states ) on venezuela , six countries voted no , and eight abstained .

the foreign ministers could reconvene to continue that meeting at any time .

in september and november 2017 , the oas general secretariat facilitated public hearings chaired by an international panel of experts it invited to analyze whether the maduro government had committed crimes against humanity .

victims , legislators , mayors , judges , members of the armed forces , civil servants , human rights defenders and others participated .

on february 23 , 2018 , 19 of 34 member states voted in favor of a resolution by the permanent council calling on the venezuelan government to reconsider convening early presidential elections and to accept humanitarian assistance .

while the resolution received more than the simple majority of votes ( 18 ) needed to be approved , 15 countries voted against the resolution , abstained , or were not present .

on may 29 , 2018 , the panel of experts convened by the oas published its findings that "reasonable grounds exist to believe that crimes committed against humanity have been committed in venezuela" in a report that has been submitted to the icc .

on june 5 , 2018 , 19 of 34 member states voted in favor of a resolution stating that the electoral process in venezuela "lacks legitimacy" and authorizing countries to take "the measures deemed appropriate," including sanctions , to assist in hastening a return to democracy in venezuela .

in september 2018 , the oas secretary - general announced the creation of a new working group to analyze venezuelan migration issues .

from november 19-21 , 2018 17 oas member states sent representatives to examine humanitarian conditions along the colombia - venezuela border , including ambassador carlos trujillo of the united states .

on january 10 , 2019 , 19 of 34 member states voted "to not recognize the legitimacy of nicolas maduro's new term as of the 10 th of january of 2019. .

the resolution also urged all member states to adopt any measures they can to hasten a return to democracy in venezuela , call for new presidential elections in venezuela with international observers , respond to the humanitarian needs of venezuelan migrants , and demand the release of political prisoners .

appendix c. online human rights reporting on venezuel .

