in june 2016 , house speaker paul ryan proposed a destination - based cash flow tax ( dbcft ) , a type of national consumption tax , as part of the "a better way" tax reform blueprint .

one component of the dbcft proposal is the implementation of a border adjustment .

were the united states to adopt a dbcft with a border - adjustment tax ( or bat ) it would only tax production that is consumed in the united states — domestically produced goods and services sold abroad would not be taxed .

this treatment would be a departure from the current corporate income tax system .

the proposed change has attracted considerable interest from policymakers and the general public in determining the relative costs and benefits of a switch to a dbcft and the accompanying bat .

although there are many important issues surrounding a bat that would require careful consideration before implementation , the response of exchange rates is one that has received substantial attention .

standard economic theory predicts that under certain conditions exchange rates would react to a bat in a way that would leave exports and imports unchanged .

that is , exchange rate movements would offset the effects of the tax , leaving the u.s. trade balance unaltered .

some observers , however , have speculated that such a response may not occur in a timely fashion or that exchange rate movements may not completely offset the tax .

if either of these two situations were to occur , or if impact across industries was asymmetric , there could be implications for u.s. businesses and consumers , and as a result , the u.s. trade balance .

this report provides a basic framework for understanding how and why exchange rates could respond to a bat .

it first describes a bat and uses several examples to illustrate how one works .

it then summarizes the standard economic theory of how exchange rates should respond to a bat , as well as the arguments against the theoretical predictions .

finally , this report reviews the existing literature that has empirically investigated the relationship between exchange rates and bat systems in other countries .

information on other issues related to taxes with a border adjustment or that share economic features similar to the "a better way" proposal may be found in the following crs products: crs in focus if10583 , border - adjusted taxes: a primer , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r44342 , consumption taxes: an overview , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed .

a border adjustment is typically a component of a national consumption tax ( including the dbcft ) that applies differently to imports into a country and exports out of a country .

the border - adjustment system that has appeared in recent congressional debates would impose a 20% tax on all goods and services imported into the united states and would impose no tax on exports .

additionally , american companies that produced and sold their goods in the united states would also be subject to the 20% tax .

such a tax is often referred to as being "destination based" because the levy of the tax would depend on where the goods or services are consumed ; at home or abroad .

were the united states to adopt a destination - based system of taxation , only those goods and services consumed in the united states — whether produced domestically or abroad — would be subject to the tax .

while the exact mechanics can differ depending on the particular destination - based system adopted , any such system will require a process of "adjusting" business taxes at the border to ensure imports are subject to tax and exports are not .

a few general examples may clarify how a bat functions .

in each of the examples below , it is assumed that the tax rate would be 20% , the tax would apply broadly to all domestic consumption , and that it would be fully adjustable at the border .

the examples below begin with the simplest cases of how the tax would apply and then explore more complicated situations .

direct empirical evidence of exchange - rate responses to the dbcft is limited by the fact that such a tax has not been implemented in other countries .

some evidence of exchange - rate responses to border adjustments is available through the international experience with the value - added taxes ( vat ) , which is another type of consumption tax levied on the difference between firm sales and purchases from other firms .

vats often use border adjustments to ensure that such taxes apply exclusively and comprehensively to jurisdictional consumption .

theory would predict that border adjustments for uniform bats and vats would have matching predicted effects on exchange rates and balances of trade .

nevertheless , several complications related to both the practicalities of tax policy shifts and of global markets may limit the usefulness in applying empirical vat exchange rate evidence to a u.s .

bat .

the first limitation of existing empirical evidence is that uncertainty in the timing of exchange rate responses to border tax adjustments may make it difficult to empirically isolate the "true response" to a given policy .

for example , exchange rates may respond to a bat upon enactment as the shift from proposal to law induces behavioral changes .

however , exchange rates may also respond before enactment if individuals and firms are forward looking and try to capitalize on any opportunities in foreign exchange markets .

moreover , market participants may not fully respond to the new tax until its mechanics are understood after implementation , allowing for further responses after enactment .

second , implementation of border - adjusted taxes elsewhere has often been accompanied by other changes in tax and spending policies .

in those cases , any exchange - rate evaluation of the border - adjusted tax may require estimation or assumptions of the economic response to other policy changes .

this adds an additional layer of difficulty and uncertainty in isolating exchange - rate and trade - balance responses to a border adjustment .

third , some recent implementations of border adjustment have been in countries with economies that have a smaller global impact than that of the united states .

that difference could change the likelihood or degree to which potential sources of interference with full exchange - rate adjustment take effect in each case .

for instance , exchange - rate changes may have a significant impact in countries whose debt is denominated in u.s. dollars but with assets in their own currencies , which could have subsequent effects on financial markets .

other potential obstacles to full exchange - rate adjustment do not depend on the size of the economy and would be unaffected by this distinction .

finally , some recent introductions and modifications of vats have occurred in economies where the local currency is fixed against another currency ( in some cases the dollar ) .

these countries are described as having fixed exchange rates and cannot be used to evaluate border adjustments because the adjustment mechanism for trade flows is not possible .

even countries that do not fix their currency may have exchange rates that are less flexible due to currency unions and international trading patterns .

a notable example of this is in the set of countries that use the euro ( which include many oecd countries mentioned below ) , which would limit exchange rate responses to border adjustments in those countries since a large portion of their trade is likely conducted with countries that use the same currency .

the existing literature includes some studies that are broadly supportive of a full and timely exchange - rate response to vats .

de mooij and keen ( 2013 ) used data for 30 organization for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) countries from 1965 through 2009 to estimate the effect of vats on trade balances .

the authors made adjustments to address potential complicating factors in the estimation process , including separation of countries into categories based on the flexibility of their exchange rates .

they found that vat implementation had no significant effect on a country's trade balances in most specifications ( particularly in countries with flexible exchange rate regimes ) , measured both in the short and long run , which is consistent with a full exchange - rate response to border - adjusted taxation .

the authors note that timing and compliance issues are important factors in determining the ultimate short - run effects of tax reform .

desai and hines ( 2001 ) analyzed market reactions to threatened action by the european union against the united states regarding foreign sales corporations .

the threatened action would have eliminated a tax incentive afforded u.s. exporters , and thus provided an opportunity to observe market responses to the possibility of a tax policy shift .

they observed immediate exchange - rate movements consistent with trade - based exchange - rate determination .

other research has found evidence suggestive of a full vat exchange - rate response in the long run but with less clarity in short - term adjustments and industry - specific effects .

keen and syed ( 2006 ) used oecd country data from 1967 to 2003 to analyze the effect of vats on export performance .

the results of some empirical models indicated that there were no effects on net exports in either the short or long run , while other models found a short - term reduction in net exports that disappeared over time .

nicholson ( 2010 ) used data from 1997 to 2008 to examine the effect of vats on trade behavior across industries in 29 oecd countries .

the author finds that border - adjusted taxation reduces trade volumes of both exports and imports .

those results differ across industries , however , with beverage , tobacco , and leather industries increasing net import behavior while natural resource and apparel industries are induced to increase net exports .

freund and gagnon ( 2017 ) examine the effect of consumption taxes on trade behavior using oecd data from 1980 to 2015 .

their preliminary results support the notion of a long - term exchange - rate adjustment in the direction predicted by theory , but does not offer insights on the short - term response .

replacing the current corporate income tax system with a dbcft with a bat would be an unprecedented shift in u.s. tax policy .

while such a significant change would bring with it some uncertainty , economists tend to agree that any tax - induced advantage for u.s. exports or tax - induced costs on u.s. imports would be offset by adjustments to the exchange - rate value of the dollar .

in other words , if the dollar appreciation occurs as economic theory predicts , there should be no changes in the trade balance resulting from tax .

one unanswered question is how fast the adjustments would occur .

although other countries have introduced border adjustments as part of a supplemental vat , it is unclear if the findings of empirical studies of these countries would apply to the largest economy in the world .

additionally , there are a number of other issues that may need to be addressed .

for example , some have raised concerns that the structure of the current dbcft proposal would not be permitted under wto rules or bilateral tax treaties ( an issue that is beyond the scope of this report ) .

there is also a concern that large exporting companies may generate significant tax losses as the result of the adjustment .

although the "a better way" tax reform plan would allow for losses to be carried forward , some exporters may find it difficult to generate sufficient taxable income to offset those losses .

lastly , other parts of any tax reform package could influence exchange rates or the trade balance in a way that counteracts or reinforces those effects predicted by traditional economic theory on border adjustments .

