the william d. ford direct loan ( direct loan ) program is authorized under title iv , part d of the higher education act of 1965 ( hea ) and is the primary federal student loan program .

it makes available loans to undergraduate and graduate students and the parents of dependent undergraduate students to help them finance postsecondary education expenses .

four types of loans are offered: direct subsidized loans ; direct unsubsidized loans ; direct plus loans ; and direct consolidation loans , through which borrowers may combine multiple loans into a single loan .

the office of federal student aid ( fsa ) , within the u.s. department of education ( ed ) , administers the direct loan program .

in total , ed manages an outstanding loan portfolio of approximately $1.3 trillion , making it one of the largest financial institutions in the nation .

direct loan program loans make up approximately $963.5 billion ( 74% ) of ed's loan portfolio .

prior to the establishment of the direct loan program , the primary federal student loan program was the federal family education loan ( ffel ) program .

under the ffel program , loan capital was provided to borrowers from private lenders and the federal government guaranteed lenders against loss through borrower default .

ffel program loans were originated by private lenders , and state and nonprofit guaranty agencies received federal funds to play the lead role in administering many aspects of the program , such as providing assistance in preventing delinquent borrowers from going into default .

authorization for the direct loan program was enacted under the student loan reform act of 1993 , part of the omnibus reconciliation act of 1993 ( p.l .

103-66 ) .

the program was established with the goal of streamlining the student loan delivery system .

at that time , the ffel program involved numerous parties from both the private and public sectors and concerns had arisen about the program structure being difficult to monitor and cumbersome to borrowers and schools .

when enacted , the direct loan program was originally intended to gradually expand and replace the ffel program ; however , provisions calling for a full transition from the ffel program to the direct loan program were repealed under the higher education amendments of 1998 ( p.l .

105-244 ) .

for nearly two decades , both the ffel and direct loan programs operated simultaneously and institutions of higher education ( ihes ) were able to participate in the program of their choice .

in 2010 , the safra act , part of the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-152 ) , terminated the authority to make new ffel program loans .

under the direct loan program , the federal government essentially serves as the banker by providing loans to students and their families using federal capital ( i.e. , funds from the u.s. treasury ) .

the federal government is also the owner of the loans and assumes the risk of loss through borrower default .

although the federal government is the lender and owner of direct loans , several parties perform key functions in administering the program: the office of federal student aid ( fsa ) — fsa is a performance - based organization within ed that is the primary entity responsible for developing the administrative and financial management policies and functions for the federal title iv student financial aid programs .

fsa responsibilities are set forth in section 141 of the hea and include contracting for systems to support the programs ; providing customer service , training , and user support for the administration of the programs ; and ensuring the integrity of the programs .

institutions of higher education — ihes involved in administering the direct loans are those schools at which students are using the program's loans to help finance their cost of attendance .

ihes help verify borrower eligibility to borrow direct loans , perform need analysis calculations and package student aid for current and prospective students , originate and disburse loans , report student enrollment information to ed , and make loan refunds to students and / or ed in specified situations .

loan servicers — loan servicers are nonfederal entities that are hired as contractors to perform loan servicing , accounting , and delinquency processing work .

some of their key responsibilities include processing payments , communicating with borrowers about the status of their loans , and providing information about direct loan benefits and features ( eg , deferment and repayment plan options ) .

private collection agencies ( pcas ) — pcas are nonfederal entities that are hired as contractors to perform loan collection activities when borrowers default on their federal student loans .

some of their key responsibilities include locating and contacting delinquent borrowers and attempting to collect payment on defaulted loans .

this report discusses the major statutory and regulatory provisions and subregulatory guidance pertaining to the administration of the direct loan program .

although the administrative requirements for multiple title iv student aid programs ( eg , pell grant ) may be similar to or overlap with direct loan program requirements , unless otherwise noted this report will only discuss such requirements in the context of the direct loan program .

the report begins by outlining fsa's broad role in developing administrative processes for the program .

after that , it is organized in a manner that follows the "lifecycle" of a direct loan , highlighting key processes and parties involved in the various phases of the program's administration .

these phases begin when a student's application for federal student aid is submitted and processed and continue through loan origination , disbursement , and repayment — and in some instances , default management .

processes , policies , and guidance related to the administration of the direct loan program are subject to regular change or adjustment ; the descriptions herein are accurate as of the date of publication of this report .

the u.s. department of education's office of federal student aid ( fsa ) is tasked with administering the title iv federal student aid programs , including the direct loan program .

although fsa generally does not administer many of the day - to - day functions of the direct loan program ( eg , loan disbursement , loan servicing ) , it is responsible for implementing policies and procedures to enable them .

this section of the report provides an overview of several duties fsa is responsible for carrying out to enable the operation of the direct loan program .

this section of the report discusses key aspects of direct loan program administration from the time students complete and submit the free application for federal student aid ( fafsa ) through the time that direct loans are disbursed to borrowers .

the key parties involved in this phase of the process are the following: fsa , which develops and maintains the fafsa , contracts for the operation and maintenance of information technology systems , and provides oversight of title iv participating ihes and third - party servicers ; ihes , which verify student eligibility for loans , asses students' levels of need for financial assistance and package financial aid , disburse funds ( received from fsa ) to students and parent borrowers , provide loan counseling to students , and periodically report to the national student loan data system ( nslds ) to confirm students' enrollment / aid eligibility status ; and / or third party servicers , which may perform any or all of the administrative duties of an ihe as a contractor for it .

third - party servicers must agree to comply with all statutory and regulatory provisions applicable to the administration of the direct loan program .

in many ways , third - party servicers' and ihes' responsibilities with respect to administering the direct loan program may be similar or the same ; thus , hereinafter this report will only refer to ihes .

after a borrower's first direct loan is disbursed , it is assigned by fsa to a loan servicer , which performs a variety of direct loan program administrative functions as an fsa contractor .

this section of the report discusses key aspects of direct loan program administration after direct loans have been disbursed to borrowers .

the key parties involved in this phase of the process are the following: fsa , which solicits and awards contracts for loan servicing and monitors the effectiveness and operation of the contracted loan servicers , and loan s ervicers , which perform myriad loan servicing functions such as collecting payments on direct loans , processing applications for direct loan deferments or forbearance , and performing default prevention activities .

if a borrower defaults on his or her direct loan , a variety of actions may be taken by fsa and its contractors to attempt to reinstate it as a loan in active repayment and recover payment on it .

this section of the report discusses administrative processes undertaken if a borrower defaults on his or her direct loan .

the key parties involved in the process are the following: fsa , which solicits bids and awards contracts for the debt management and collection system ( dmcs ) and for private collection agencies ( pcas ) .

fsa also monitors the effectiveness and operation of the contracted dmcs and pcas .

d ebt m anagement and c ollection s ervices , which is a system operated by a contractor that stores , retrieves , and edits debtor information ; generates official correspondence to debtors from fsa , pcas , and other interested parties ; and processes payments on defaulted loans .

to support dmcs , the default resolution group ( drg ) serves as the contact center for dmcs and manages and oversees fsa's collection efforts on defaulted loans , makes the first attempt at collecting on defaulted loans , and collects payments on certain loan accounts via dmcs .

private collection agencies , which perform tasks to recover payment on outstanding loans from borrowers who defaulted .

as stated earlier , although the hea provides that a borrower defaults on a direct loan when he or she fails to make required payments on the loan for 270 days , in practice , a borrower is not operationally treated as being in default on his or her direct loan until the loan has been transferred to dmcs .

both statute and regulations specify numerous potential consequences of default for borrowers , which include demand of payment of all principal and interest due in full , as well as collection costs ; reports to consumer reporting agencies ; and ineligibility for additional title iv federal student aid and certain loan benefits and privileges .

fsa has several debt collection options it may utilize to collect on defaulted direct loans and to potentially bring borrowers out of default .

these can be classified as voluntary options ( when a borrower agrees to make payments on the loan ) and involuntary options ( when the federal government takes action to collect payment from a borrower ) .

table 2 depicts the voluntary and involuntary methods fsa may use to collect payment on defaulted loans .

both the default resolution group ( drg ) and pcas ( and to a limited extent , loan servicers ) may use one or more of the methods described in table 2 to attempt to collect defaulted direct loans .

statutory and regulatory provisions provide little guidance regarding the precise sequence in which these methods are to be applied .

in general , the drg and pcas are not required to take these steps in a particular sequential order , and whether one or more of the methods is pursued depends on each individual borrower's specific circumstances .

ways in which the drg and pcas undertake each of these functions are discussed in the following sections ; however , some generalizations can be made about the processes drg and pcas use to collect defaulted direct loans: 1 .

rehabilitation is the most frequently used method to collect defaulted direct loans and to bring a borrower out of default .

loan consolidation is the second most frequently used method .

2 .

litigation is the last option used when attempting to collect defaulted direct loans and is used in a very small number of cases .

3 .

it is possible that multiple payment collection options could be utilized simultaneously ( eg , a borrower's income could be garnished via an administrative wage garnishment and they could enter into a loan rehabilitation agreement with a pca ) .

the dmcs and drg , pcas , and fsa all participate in debt resolution activities to attempt to bring borrowers out of default and to collect payment on defaulted direct loans .

this section of the report describes some typical functions performed by each party .

as described previously , the dmcs is a contracted system that performs myriad debt collection and other functions on default loans .

the drg serves as the contact center for dmcs .

after a defaulted loan is transferred to dmcs from a loan servicer , dmcs generates a letter advising a borrower that he or she can avoid assignment of the defaulted loan to a pca by either entering into a voluntary repayment agreement or by providing proof that the debt is legally unenforceable .

if a borrower does not complete either of these actions within 60 days , the defaulted loan may be assigned to one of several contracted pcas , which complete a variety of tasks related to attempting to bring borrowers out of default and collecting payment on defaulted loans ( discussed below ) .

in certain instances , the fsa may decide not to assign a borrower's account to a pca , such as if the amount owed is less than $500 .

in these cases , the loan will remain in dmcs .

in instances in which a pca has been unsuccessful in collection on a defaulted loan , the pca may be required to return the loan to dmcs for assignment to another pca .

for those borrower accounts held by dmcs , drg may perform many of the typical debt collection activities performed by a pca , such as identifying accounts eligible for rehabilitation and identifying accounts eligible for administrative resolution , such as loan discharge due to death or total and permanent disability .

in addition , the dmcs processes all payments made by defaulted borrowers on their loans , regardless of whether a loan has been assigned to a pca .

it also reports loan status to nslds , and reports loans and loan status to consumer reporting agencies .

in many instances , if a borrower becomes more than 360 days delinquent on his or her direct loan , the account is assigned to one of several pcas with which fsa has contracted to perform myriad debt resolution functions .

these include determining whether a borrower account is eligible for administrative resolutions , such as loan discharge due to death or total and permanent disability ; attempting to obtain voluntary payment from a borrower by , for instance , negotiating reasonable repayment schedules with a borrower for potential loan rehabilitation ; and determining whether a borrower account is eligible for some involuntary payment methods , such as administrative wage garnishment .

unlike with loan servicing , a variety of federal statutes and regulations dictate many facets of federal debt collection in general and ed debt collection , via pcas , specifically .

for instance , the federal claims collections standards set forth the standards federal agencies use in the "collection , offset , compromise , and the suspension or termination of collection activity for civil claims for money , funds , or property," and ed regulations contain requirements that specifically pertain to debt collections undertaken by ed .

in addition , the fair debt collections practices act prescribes standards that debt collectors in general must follow , which are intended to eliminate abusive debt collection practices .

finally , fsa's contracts with pcas provide more detail than its contracts with federal loan servicers regarding specific tasks to be performed ; however , pcas are given some discretion to determine how to complete those tasks .

this portion of the report provides a broad overview of the common functions performed by pcas when performing debt collection tasks .

the first section describes payment collection tasks pcas perform and the second section describes other administrative functions they perform .

because pcas must meet numerous statutory , regulatory , and contract requirements , but are given some discretion in determining how to meet them , the information presented in this section is intended to be illustrative and not comprehensive in nature .

in addition , the exact tasks and functions performed by pcas vary depending on the precise circumstances of each borrower account allocated to them .

pcas' primary function is to collect payment on defaulted direct loans , and they have a variety of options available to them to do so .

the precise conditions under which any of the collection options are available to pcas depends on each borrower's individual circumstances ; however , in general , pca debt collection tasks can be summarized in the following manner: pcas typically first attempt to determine whether a borrower's account is eligible for an administrative resolution .

this could include determining whether a borrower is eligible for discharge of his or her loan due to death , total and permanent disability , or meeting certain loan forgiveness program requirements ( eg , stafford loan forgiveness for teachers ) and determining whether a borrower's account is eligible for collection suspension due to incarceration .

if these options are unavailable , typically pcas will then attempt to contact the borrower and offer him or her voluntary options for debt resolution , including negotiating a "reasonable and affordable" payment schedule , which could include rehabilitation or consolidation .

depending on individual borrower circumstances , a pca may also offer a compromise of loan payment or determine whether a borrower is eligible for administrative wage garnishment .

in addition to the process of negotiating with borrowers and collecting payments on defaulted federal student loans , pcas complete the following tasks: locating ( including skip - tracing activities ) and contacting defaulted borrowers and providing information to them relating to the consequences of loan default and borrower options for addressing default ; providing requested copies of loan records to borrowers if an offset of benefits with the top is initiated ; preparing accounts for litigation , including conducting research to determine a borrower's ability to pay and notifying a borrower of intent to litigate ; and returning accounts to fsa for failure to convert the account to active repayment status ( at which point , the defaulted loan may be transferred to a new pca ) or to prepare an account for an administrative resolution .

in addition to managing contracts that support fsa's debt collection activities ( discussed below ) , fsa may refer a borrower's case to the department of justice for litigation , or may certify borrower accounts as eligible for the u.s. department of the treasury's treasury offset program ( top ) and refer such accounts to the top .

the top is a centralized offset program that collects delinquent debts owed to federal agencies by withholding all or a portion of payments of certain federal benefits ( eg , social security benefits , federal income tax refunds ) and remitting those payments to the relevant federal agency to satisfy an individual's debt .

hea section 456 authorizes ed to enter into contracts with third - party entities to perform debt collection activities .

operating under this general authority , fsa currently maintains contracts with multiple pcas , and contracts were most recently awarded to seven pcas in december 2016 .

this section of the report discusses compensation and how accounts are allocated to the pcas awarded contracts in 2016 , as the older pca contracts will be phased out .

similar to federal student loan servicing contracts , contracts with pcas base compensation on their overall performance .

however , unlike loan servicing contracts , pcas are paid either a commission based on the dollar amount of outstanding defaulted loans collected or a flat fee , depending on the collection method used .

a pca may receive a commission equal to 15.2% of the total amount collected on a loan ( including principal , interest , collection costs , and other fees ) via regular payments and administrative wage garnishment and 2.75% of the final pay - off value if a defaulted loan is consolidated if a borrower established a satisfactory repayment plan prior to certification of the new consolidation loan .

pcas are paid a flat fee of up to $1,710 per loan rehabilitation and $150 for administrative resolutions ( eg , loan discharge due to death or total and permanent disability ) .

during the first few months of the 2016 pca contracts , fsa will transfer a fixed number of borrower accounts to each pca .

however , after the first several months of the contracts , to incentivize pcas to perform adequately under their contracts , new accounts will be allocated to pcas based on their ability to meet fsa - specified performance metrics .

this will be known as the contractor performance monitoring and evaluation ( cpme ) system .

using cpme , fsa will quarterly score each pca based on its performance using specified metrics , and new accounts will be allocated proportionally based on the total score of all pcas .

to determine new account allocations , first fsa will calculate a base allocation ( ba ) score , using the following metrics: borrowers resolved and dollars collected .

pcas failing to meet a minimum threshold score will be ineligible to receive new accounts in the approaching allocation .

next , fsa will calculate a service quality ( sq ) score for each pca .

the sq scores will be based on each pca's call counseling compliance and borrower satisfaction and will be used to adjust ( either upward or downward ) each pca's ba score .

this adjusted ba score will be known as the adjusted allocation score .

as with the ba score , pcas failing to meet a minimum sq score will be ineligible to receive new accounts in the upcoming allocation .

finally , new borrower accounts will be allocated based on each pca's adjusted allocation score as compared to all pcas' adjusted allocation scores .

in addition to fsa's use of the cpme for account allocations to pcas , it uses a variety of other tools to oversee pcas' debt collection activities and ensure adequate pca performance .

for instance , the 2016 pca contracts establish evaluation scores that will be calculated quarterly for each pca .

these scores will represent each pca's performance with respect to the above - described metrics as compared against all other pcas and will be considered by fsa , along with other relevant information ( eg , compliance with federal and state laws governing collection activity , security risks , and violations ) when reporting each pca's past performance to contractor past performance databases .

in addition , fsa issues guidance to pcas to assist them in day - to - day operations and conducts monitoring activities , such as reviewing borrower complaints against pcas and evaluating pcas' interactions with borrowers via phone - call monitoring .

over the past several years , concerns have been raised that fsa may not be adequately monitoring and effectively responding to pca performance .

for instance , gao found that although fsa monitors pca phone calls with borrowers , it has not consistently completed the review of such calls .

moreover , for those calls reviewed , gao found a range of issues raising concerns about pcas' treatment of borrowers for which fsa failed to ensure corrective action on the part of the pcas , including providing inaccurate or misleading information about loan rehabilitation requirements and other options to borrowers .

gao concluded that by failing to effectively monitor and respond to pca performance issues , fsa may miss opportunities to target oversight and improve program performance .

final implementation of the 2016 pca contracts may help to address some of these issues .

