t he unemployment insurance ( ui ) system has two primary objectives: ( 1 ) to provide temporary , partial wage replacement for involuntarily unemployed workers and ( 2 ) to stabilize the economy during recessions .

in support of these goals , several ui programs provide benefits for eligible unemployed workers .

in general , when eligible workers lose their jobs , the joint federal - state unemployment compensation ( uc ) program may provide up to 26 weeks of income support through regular uc benefit payments .

uc benefits may be extended for up to 13 weeks or 20 weeks by the extended benefit ( eb ) program if certain economic situations exist within the state .

currently , although the uc and eb programs are both authorized , no state is in an active eb period .

for information on the expired emergency unemployment compensation 2008 ( euc08 ) program , which provided additional unemployment benefits depending on state economic conditions from july 2008 to december 2013 , see crs report r42444 , emergency unemployment compensation ( euc08 ) : status of benefits prior to expiration .

the sequester order required by the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) and implemented on march 1 , 2013 ( after being delayed by p.l .

112-240 ) , affected some but not all types of unemployment insurance expenditures .

regular uc , ucx , and ucfe payments are not subject to the sequester reductions .

eb , euc08 ( when it available ) , and most forms of administrative funding are subject to the sequester reductions .

please see crs report r43133 , the impact of sequestration on unemployment insurance benefits: frequently asked questions , for additional information on the impact of sequestration on ui benefits and sequestration for fy2013 and fy2014 .

please see crs report r43993 , unemployment insurance: legislative issues in the 114th congress for additional information on the implications of the sequester order for fy2015 and fy2016 .

if a recession is deep enough and if state unemployment tax ( suta ) revenue is inadequate for long periods of time , states may have insufficient funds to pay for uc benefits .

federal law , which requires states to pay these benefits , provides a loan mechanism within the utf framework that an insolvent state may opt to use to meet its uc benefit payment obligations .

states must pay back these loans .

if the loans are not paid back quickly ( depending on the timing of the beginning of the loan period ) , states may face interest charges , and states' employers may face increased net futa rates until the loans are repaid .

as of november 13 , 2018 , the virgin islands owed $68.5 million to the federal accounts within the utf .

the president's budget for fy2019 proposes changes to several aspects of the ui system .

it would create a new required standard for state account balances within the utf .

the president's fy2019 budget also proposes to make funding for reemployment services and eligibility assessments ( resea ) permanent beginning in 2020 , and to make these assessments mandatory for 50% of uc beneficiaries .

additionally , the proposal would create a new benefit entitlement for paid parental leave financed through state unemployment taxes .

finally , the president's budget for fy2019 proposes a set of additional integrity measures , including offsetting social security disability insurance ( ssdi ) benefits for concurrent receipt of ui benefits .

representative david mckinley introduced the manufacturing economic recovery act of 2017,  h.r .

3702 .

the bill , among other items , would create a permanent work opportunity tax credit for hiring a full - time employee in a manufacturing facility located in the united states and include an increased credit for hiring individuals receiving unemployment compensation .

delegate eleanor holmes norton introduced the reducing long - term unemployment act,  h.r .

4470 .

the bill would suspend employment and railroad retirement taxes for employers who hired unemployed individuals through 2018 .

the aggregate reduction in taxes from such suspension would be limited to $5,000 per employee .

representative james renacci sponsored  h.r .

1091 , the flexibility to promote reemployment act .

the bill would make a number of changes to the state uc demonstration projects created by the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-96 ) .

the bill would extend the time period that the ( now - expired ) state demonstration projects could be approved by dol through december 31 , 2021 ( p.l .

112-96  authorized these demonstration projects through december 31 , 2015 ) , as well as expanded the existing authority for state uc demonstration projects by authorizing 10 states per year to conduct approved demonstration projects ( the original , expired authority was only for 10 states total ) .

h.r .

1091 would also revise state uc demonstration project requirements , including removing a requirement that any direct disbursements paid to employers for hiring uc claimants not exceed an individual's uc weekly benefit amount and requiring that dol approve state applications for uc demonstration projects based on the order of receipt .

additionally , the bill would transfer the responsibility for the state uc demonstration project impact evaluation from the states , as under the now - expired demonstration authority , to dol and would require a specific procedure for termination of the state uc demonstration project by dol .

senator jeff merkley and representative jared polis introduced s. 987 and h.r .

3314 , the 100 by '50 act , respectively .

among other provisions , these bills would allow states to provide additional , temporary , federally funded ui benefits to individuals who have exhausted all ui benefits ( regular uc benefits and any other ui benefit available — eg , eb benefits ) ; who are certified as workers adversely affected by a transition away from fossil fuels and into clean and renewable energy by the year 2050 ; and who are receiving certain adjustment assistance provided through this proposal .

representative earl carter sponsored h.r .

3330 , the ensuring quality in the unemployment insurance program ( equip ) act .

the bill would allow states to require any uc applicant to complete a substance abuse risk assessment .

if the applicant had been deemed high - risk , the applicant would have to pass a controlled substances test to receive uc benefits .

those who did not pass the test would be ineligible for benefits for 30 days and then would have to be retested to determine eligibility .

representative steve russell sponsored h.r .

2861 , the hire military service members act .

the bill would require the department of defense to withhold payments to the states for ucx benefits if the stat e imposes professional licensing requirements that do not accept certain professional credentials related to military training and skills ( i.e. , credentials obtained under a program specified by 10 u.s.c .

§2015 or in a similar program ) .

