human rights conditions in the people's republic of china ( prc ) long have been a central issue in u.s. - china relations .

the two governments' different perceptions of human rights are an underlying source of mutual misunderstanding and mistrust .

frictions over human rights issues affect other issues in the bilateral relationship , including those related to economics and security .

china's weak rule of law and restrictions on the internet affect u.s. companies doing business in the prc .

people - to - people exchanges , particularly educational and academic ones , and collaboration among u.s. and prc nongovernmental organizations ( ngos ) are hampered by periodic chinese government campaigns against "western values" and restrictions on foreign ngos , as well as on the freedoms of speech , association , and assembly .

for some u.s. policymakers , human rights conditions in china represent a test of the success of overall u.s. policy toward the prc .

they argue that the u.s. policy of cultivating diplomatic and economic ties with china has failed to promote meaningful political reform and improvements in human rights , and that without progress in these areas , china's foreign policy is likely to become more aggressive , and mutual trust and cooperation in other areas of the bilateral relationship will remain difficult to achieve .

they contend , furthermore , that the long - standing , overarching policy of u.s. engagement with china , which they say focuses on other u.s. interests , particularly economic ones , at times acts at cross purposes with u.s. efforts to support human rights .

others opine that u.s. economic engagement with china has helped to strengthen the communist regime through the legitimacy and resources that economic development has provided , and thereby lessened the impetus for fundamental political reform .

other experts , by contrast , maintain that u.s. engagement has helped to accelerate economic and social transformations that create the necessary conditions for political reform and improvements in rights protections in china , particularly over the long term .

they add that change in china's human rights policies will come mostly from within , and that washington has little direct leverage over such developments and beijing's actions .

since the end of the 1980s , following the 1989 military suppression of prodemocracy demonstrators in and around tiananmen square in beijing , successive u.s .

administrations have employed broadly similar strategies for promoting human rights in china .

some analysts have referred to the u.s. foreign policy approach of promoting human rights and democracy in china through diplomatic and economic engagement , without directly challenging communist party rule , as a strategy of seeking china's "peaceful evolution. .

prc leaders long have been suspicious of any u.s. efforts that they perceive as part of a long - term plan to subvert their rule through "peaceful evolution. .

president bill clinton favored an approach that he and members of his administration called "constructive engagement" — furthering diplomatic and economic ties while pressing for open markets , human rights , and democracy — calling it "our best hope to secure our own interest[s] and values and to advance china's. .

president george w. bush also came to view u.s. engagement as the most effective means of promoting u.s. interests as well as freedom in the prc .

both bush and president barack obama emphasized that china's respect for international human rights norms would benefit china's own success and stability .

the obama administration attempted to forge bilateral cooperation on many fronts , while "managing differences" with china on issues including human rights .

then - secretary of state hillary clinton described the administration's human rights policy as one of "principled pragmatism. .

this approach was based upon the premise that tough but quiet diplomacy is both less disruptive to the overall relationship and more effective in producing change than public censure .

nonetheless , the obama administration publicly criticized china's human rights policies on many occasions .

some human rights groups and policymakers have criticized the trump administration's "transactional" focus on u.s. security and economic interests in foreign affairs , while appearing to downplay human rights issues or preferring to raise them quietly .

they criticized secretary of state rex tillerson for not appearing in person as his predecessors had done to publicly announce the release of the department of state's annual country reports on human rights practices in march 2017 , and the trump administration for not signing a joint letter , signed by 11 other countries , that denounced china over its alleged torture of detained human rights lawyers and activists .

in a speech to state department employees on may 3 , 2017 , tillerson stated that "guiding all of our foreign policy actions are our fundamental values: our values around freedom , human dignity , the way people are treated. .

he also stated , "if we condition too heavily that others must adopt this value that we've come to over a long history of our own , it really creates obstacles to our ability to advance our national security interests , our economic interests. .

some observers criticized this approach .

in an opinion piece published on may 8 , 2017 , for example , senator john mccain stated: in a recent address to state department employees , secretary of state rex tillerson said conditioning our foreign policy too heavily on values creates obstacles to advance our national interests.... to view foreign policy as simply transactional is more dangerous than its proponents realize .

depriving the oppressed of a beacon of hope could lose us the world we have built and thrived in .

it could cost our reputation in history as the nation distinct from all others in our achievements , our identity and our enduring influence on mankind .

our values are central to all three .

in march 2017 , tillerson , on his first official trip to china , stated in closing remarks that he was there to forge a "constructive and results - oriented relationship between the united states and china" and that he "made clear that the united states will continue to advocate for universal values such as human rights and religious freedom. .

senators ben cardin and marco rubio , in a letter to the secretary of state , noted that tillerson made "only one public mention of human rights concerns in the context of the bilateral relationship" during his visit to beijing , and urged him to make human rights a "top priority" in discussions with prc officials during the meeting between president trump and president xi in april 2017 at mar - a - lago .

secretary tillerson , in a briefing to reporters following the trump - xi meeting , stated that during the talks , which some observers described as "coldly transactional," trump "noted the importance of protecting human rights and other values deeply held by americans. .

while no mention was made of specific issues , tillerson added that human rights "occupied a core of all of our discussions. .

the issue of human rights , however , was not listed among the "four pillars" of the new u.s. - china comprehensive dialogue that was established during the discussions .

during his march 2017 visit to beijing , secretary tillerson reportedly pressed chinese officials on the case of u.s. citizen sandy phan - gillis , who had been detained in china since march 2015 on espionage charges .

a few weeks after the april 2017 meeting between trump and xi , phan - gillis , a business consultant and cultural ambassador from houston who had made frequent trips to china , was sentenced by prc authorities to three - and - a - half years in prison and then deported to the united states .

some observers believe that the case of phan - gillis may signal a shift in u.s. human rights policy that may emphasize u.s. citizens detained in china and focus less on chinese dissidents and prisoners of conscience .

in february 2017 , u.s. officials reportedly assisted the family of chinese human rights attorney xie yang , whose youngest daughter is a u.s. citizen by birth , as his wife and two daughters were attempting to leave thailand for the united states .

the u.s. government has employed an array of efforts and tactics aimed at promoting human rights , democracy , and the rule of law in china .

the effects of these efforts primarily have been evident along the margins of the prc political system .

congressional policy tools include open letters to the administration and to chinese leaders in support of human rights or critical of prc policies ; hearings ; funding for foreign assistance programs in china and u.s. - based groups that promote human rights ; meetings with chinese dissidents and human rights lawyers ; raising human rights issues during official visits to china ; and sanctions .

executive branch options include diplomatic negotiations and formal dialogues focused on human rights issues ; public diplomacy programs ; international broadcasting ; and coordination of international pressure .

another high - profile practice is the issuance of congressionally mandated country reports , including reports on human rights , religious freedom , and trafficking in persons .

many analysts have observed that china's leaders have become less responsive to international pressure on human rights in recent years .

other experts , however , have emphasized that the treatment of some prominent chinese dissidents and rights activists by prc authorities may have been less severe than it might otherwise have been in part as a result of international attention and pressure .

the prc government is led by the chinese communist party ( ccp ) , whose rule is referenced in the preamble to china's constitution .

the prc constitution provides for many civil and political rights , including , in article 35 , the freedoms of speech , press , assembly , association , and demonstration .

other provisions in china's constitution and laws circumscribe or condition these rights and freedoms , however , and the state restricts these freedoms in practice .

china's leaders typically view these rights as subordinate to their own authority and to the policy goals of maintaining state security and social stability , promoting economic development , and providing for economic and social rights .

they assert that perspectives on human rights vary according to a country's level of economic development and social system , implying that human rights are not "universal," in contrast to statements by some u.s. government officials that have emphasized "universal rights. .

prc leaders frequently denounce foreign criticisms of china's human rights record and policies as interference in china's sovereign , internal affairs .

nearly 30 years after the 1989 demonstrations for democracy in beijing and elsewhere in china and the subsequent military crackdown , the communist party remains firmly in power , through both coercive measures and highly publicized efforts to improve governance .

many chinese citizens have attained living standards , educational and travel opportunities , access to information , and a level of global integration that few envisioned in 1989 .

little progress , however , has been made in most areas of political freedom and civil liberties .

china's leaders have rejected institutional reforms that they perceive might undermine the ccp's monopoly on power , and continue to respond forcefully to signs and instances of autonomous social organization , independent political activity , and social instability .

they seek to prevent the development of linkages among individuals , social groups , and geographical regions that they perceive as having potential political impact .

the government maintains severe restrictions on unsanctioned religious , ethnic , and labor activity and groups , political dissidents , and human rights lawyers .

government authorities have imposed harsh policies against tibetans , uyghurs , and practitioners of falun gong .

as ccp general secretary and state president xi jinping took over the reins of power in 2012 and early 2013 , there was a period of cautious optimism and discussion in intellectual circles in china about the need for political reform and how to address these issues .

however , xi has carried out a crackdown on political dissent and civil society , reversing what appeared to some observers to be a trend toward increased tolerance of mild criticism of government policies , the exchange of some news and opinion on social media , some advocacy by nongovernmental organizations ( ngos ) , and legal actions against officials on behalf of some aggrieved citizens .

many citizens who had openly discussed political issues , engaged in political or social activism , attempted to defend dissidents or human rights activists in court , or tried to expose some corrupt officials have been punished .

xi's focus on national security and the perception of civil society as a threat to communist party rule appear to be driven in part by the daunting political challenges that he faces , including persistent political corruption ; a slowing national economy ; rising popular expectations ; severe environmental pollution ; unrest in tibet and violent clashes in xinjiang ; and the growing popular attraction to organized religions , which some of china's leaders contend may undermine their authority .

in some ways , the prc central government has continued to demonstrate a measure of responsiveness toward popular and expert opinion , reflecting a style of rule that some experts refer to as "responsive authoritarianism" or "consultative authoritarianism," and what prc leaders refer to as "consultative democracy. .

the ccp has striven to meet the demands and expectations of many chinese citizens for competent and accountable governance and fair application of the laws , while some policymaking processes have become more inclusive .

in recent years , the prc government has implemented some legal and institutional reforms aimed at preventing some rights abuses and making the government more transparent and responsive .

the state has limited repressive measures largely to selected key individuals and groups , although the scope of those targeted has widened under president xi .

many citizens continue to enjoy "everyday freedoms" and appear to remain supportive of the regime .

although public protests in china are common , they largely are focused upon local economic and environmental issues rather than national political ones .

debates about what policies the u.s. government should pursue in order to promote human rights in china tend to revolve around the following principal sets of questions: to what extent should the u.s. government expend time and resources promoting human rights in other countries , including china ? .

how do such efforts relate to and advance u.s. interests and policy objectives ? .

which human rights issues and developments in china most warrant u.s. attention , and why ? .

should human rights issues be prioritized ? .

how might improvements in some human rights lead to improvements in other human rights ? .

approaches to promoting human rights vary .

some are more ( or less ) confrontational , public , or punitive .

which approaches have been more effective in promoting human rights in china ? .

how have u.s. approaches changed over time ? .

what is the range of possible policy tools for promoting human rights in china ? .

which options are the most effective , and over what time frame are they most effective ? .

how much importance should the united states attach to multilateral efforts to promote human rights in china ? .

should international approaches be focused on the united nations , or be coordinated directly with like - minded governments ? .

how are possible u.s. human rights policies constrained , if at all , by other u.s. policies and interests related to china ? .

how are they constrained , if at all , by the institutions and mechanisms that form the basis of u.s. - china relations ? .

should the united states' interest in human rights be the subject of negotiation , and , if so , should the united states be willing to match improvements in china's human rights conditions with actions valued by china ? .

in what areas might such matching "action for action" be explored ? .

should the u.s. government press china to abide by international human rights standards and covenants in a separate bilateral human rights dialogue , or as part of other dialogues ? .

some human rights advocates argue that promoting human rights in china should be viewed as a national interest and elevated to first order importance in u.s. policy toward china .

they contend that u.s. foreign policy should be more values - focused , and that other areas of the bilateral relationship , such as security and trade , would benefit from prioritizing human rights .

some experts recommend a "whole - of - government" approach , whereby human rights policy is coordinated among all agencies dealing with china , and suggest that the administration and congress work together to consider legislative and other measures .

they favor placing human rights conditions upon beijing before satisfying china's desire for international cooperation in many areas , and imposing sanctions when necessary .

other specialists contend that open censure and efforts to place human rights - related conditions upon further development of the bilateral relationship have not been very effective .

they suggest that it is more useful , particularly in the long run , to take a more cooperative and flexible approach toward promoting human rights in china .

in this way , u.s. policies to promote human rights in the prc are less likely to meet resistance among ccp hardliners and more likely to find agreement among chinese governmental and nongovernmental leaders who also may be pursuing human rights and related objectives .

a less confrontational approach , they add , is also more compatible with the myriad ongoing forms of u.s. engagement and cooperation with china .

they urge u.s. policymakers to seek common ground with their chinese counterparts and to appeal as much as possible to china's own interests on human rights issues .

the following are possible steps put forward by a diverse group of experts that the u.s. government and other actors could take , or that congress could mandate or otherwise require , to promote human rights in the prc .

the u.s. government has attempted to put some of these recommended policies and efforts into practice .

for a discussion of u.s. government human rights activities related to china , see " u.s. efforts to advance human rights in china ," below .

support congressional hearings , legislation , resolutions , letters , and statements expressing concerns about human rights developments in china and individuals and groups persecuted in china for exercising internationally recognized human rights that are protected in the prc constitution .

increase u.s. government support for rule of law , civil society , and political participation programs in china .

provide funding to the national endowment for democracy to support human rights and democracy groups based in the united states and hong kong .

support nongovernmental actors , including umbrella organizations that coordinate the efforts of disparate groups focused on human rights issues in china .

formulate a code of conduct for u.s. civil society organizations , including think tanks , universities , and cultural - exchange entities , for interacting with chinese officials and policies when faced with human rights restrictions .

provide financial assistance to dissidents and victims of religious and ethnic persecution in china and chinese political and religious refugees .

support research and documentation of human rights conditions and abuses in china .

link u.s. economic and human rights policies .

impose restrictions upon chinese trade and investment ties with the united states unless human rights conditions improve .

link permanent normal trade relations ( pntr ) status and low import tariffs with improvements in human rights conditions in china .

challenge chinese security regulations and restrictions on internet use as barriers to trade under the world trade organization ( wto ) .

tighten u.s. export controls in response to human rights violations or reduce the export of u.s. technologies and services that can be used to violate human rights , such as internet , surveillance , and law enforcement products and equipment .

encourage u.s. companies in china to speak out against policies that affect both business interests and human rights .

impose sanctions on china and prc officials in response to chinese human rights abuses .

deny u.s. visas to , or freeze the u.s. banks accounts of , chinese officials responsible for severe human rights violations ( see " global magnitsky act ," below ) .

apply provisions of the international religious freedom act that deny u.s. visas to foreign officials responsible for particularly severe violations of religious freedom .

impose penalties on prc officials for human rights violations , including placing holds on their foreign bank accounts .

suspend u.s. engagement and exchanges with china's ministry of justice and ministry of public security until all human rights lawyers are released from detention or prison or their constitutional rights are restored .

suspend u.s. engagement and exchanges with chinese officials from provinces where egregious incidents of religious persecution have been reported .

noting the rise in detentions of some u.s. citizens and green card holders in china , some advocacy groups urge the state department to issue a travel advisory , warning u.s. citizens and green card holders that there is a risk of arbitrary detention if they travel to china .

invoke the principle of reciprocity as a means of promoting human rights in china .

demand that u.s. journalists , academics , and media outlets enjoy the same level of access to china that chinese journalists , academics , and media outlets have in the united states .

call for mutual treatment in issuing visas for journalists and oppose the prc government's denial of visas to u.s. and other foreign journalists who write critically of ccp leaders or sensitive policy issues .

grant the prc an additional consulate in the united states if and only if the prc government agrees to a u.s. consulate in lhasa , tibet .

raise human rights in bilateral interactions .

raise human rights issues , not only in state department - led dialogues and meetings with chinese officials , but also in discussions and meetings led by other u.s. departments and agencies .

support a separate u.s. - china human rights dialogue .

make official human rights discussions more transparent , and open them up to include representatives from civil society , including human rights organizations .

include civil society representatives in human rights discussions .

bolster international efforts .

support collective statements and resolutions critical of chinese human rights policies in the united nations and other international fora .

field a larger and more active u.s. delegation at the united nations human rights council ( unhrc ) .

hold china to its unhrc universal periodic review commitments .

coordinate with asian and european democracies in engaging in diplomatic and other forms of pressure on the chinese government to improve human rights conditions .

back internet freedom efforts .

increase funding to the department of state and broadcasting board of governors for the development of software applications that enable chinese internet users to circumvent censorship .

support efforts aimed at enabling chinese audiences to circumvent internet censorship and access voice of america ( voa ) and radio free asia ( rfa ) online programming .

oppose the prc government's efforts to promote the concept of "internet sovereignty," by which each country applies its own rules on issues of internet freedom .

strengthen public diplomacy .

provide greater funding for voa and rfa broadcast and online programs in mandarin , cantonese , tibetan , uyghur , and english .

strengthen the international visitor leadership program , which brings established and potential leaders from china to the united states for short - term stays that include study tours in the areas of government , media , education , economics , environment , labor , and rule of law .

less than one year into the 2012 leadership transition that brought xi jinping to power , prc authorities began to carry out a clampdown on political dissent , free expression , and civil society .

while the prc government has engaged in many cycles of reform and repression in the nearly three decades since the 1989 tiananmen military crackdown , recent security measures have been striking for their scope and severity , say observers .

xi's policies have included detentions and arrests of hundreds of human rights attorneys , investigative journalists , prominent bloggers , members of ethnic minorities , and civil society leaders .

freedom house reported that in china , which it deems to be among the bottom 20 "unfree" countries in the world , "[a] renewed push for party supremacy and ideological conformity has undermined rule of law reforms and curtailed civil and political rights. .

in may 2013 , the ccp issued a classified directive ( document no .

9 ) identifying seven "false ideological trends , positions , and activities," largely aimed at the media and liberal academics .

according to the document , topics to be avoided in public discussion include universal values , constitutional democracy , freedom of the press , civil society , civil rights , an independent judiciary , and criticism of the ccp .

in 2016 , a liberal journal , yanhuang chunq iu , under pressure from conservatives within the communist party , ceased publication .

for 25 years , the periodical reportedly had been a mouthpiece for political reformers and exercised relative independence , as long as it did not broach the most sensitive political topics .

a former editor stated that its patrons in the party "had grown politically weak under the current leadership. .

in january 2017 , beijing authorities shut down two websites run by a liberal chinese think tank , reportedly after its founder criticized the supreme people's court's top judge for publicly rejecting the ideal of judicial independence .

in the past decade , the impact of nongovernmental organizations , also known in china as "social organizations" or "civil society organizations," has grown .

the prc government increasingly has contracted the public provision of social services to ngos , and nonstate entities have played a small but growing role in social advocacy and policy input .

environmental groups were at the forefront of civil society development , and some of them were met with resistance or repression by state authorities .

other types of social organizations have emerged in the areas of public health , education , rural development , legal aid , and policy research .

china has over 650,000 registered ngos , according to the ministry of civil affairs , while the number of unregistered ngos ranges from 1 million to 7 million .

in addition , in 2016 , several thousand foreign ngos operated in china , of which about 1,000 had an established presence and 4,000-6,000 engaged in short - term projects , according to official and unofficial chinese sources .

in 2013 , the prc government announced that the process by which domestic ngos could register to operate would be simplified , allowing them to apply directly to the bureau of civil affairs to acquire legal status without also obtaining an official sponsor or supervisory unit .

the government released draft legislation allowing direct registration for some types of ngos in 2016 .

many experts view civil society broadly — the nonstate , nonbusiness component or "third sphere" of society that includes ngos , grass - roots groups , religious congregations , academia , trade unions , political and other organizations — as a vital agent through which human rights and democracy are defended and exercised .

under xi jinping , the prc government increasingly has tried to manage civil society , which he and other leaders apparently view as a potential security threat , while attempting to harness its value .

many individuals and ngos working in areas previously deemed acceptable or even praiseworthy by the government have faced growing restrictions .

many u.s. - based and other international ngos in china , particularly those engaged in rule of law programs and social advocacy work , have faced increasing scrutiny , and new regulations have placed additional constraints on foreign ngos .

although the number of civil society organizations may still be growing , according to one expert , the "space in which civil society may operate is actually shrinking. .

in january 2016 , state security officers detained and then deported peter dahlin , a swedish national who had cofounded the beijing - based chinese urgent action working group , which provided legal aid and trained chinese rights defenders .

in a later interview , dahlin stated , "i think the era for effecting change in china seems to be over for now for ngos. .

at the end of the fourth plenum of the ccp's 18 th party congress , held in october 2014 , the ccp central committee issued a communique proclaiming that it was essential to "comprehensively advance the law - based governance of the country," including the need to "improve the system for ensuring independent and impartial exercise of judicial and procuratorial powers in accordance with the law. .

the statement , however , also stressed that "[u]pholding the party's leadership is fundamental to socialist rule of law...." although the prc government under xi jinping has furthered the development of the law in some areas related to human rights and civil society , such as criminal justice , domestic violence , and philanthropy , it largely has developed the law to strengthen ccp rule .

the national people's congress ( npc ) has passed new laws that appear to strengthen the role of the state over a wide range of social activities in the name of national security , place additional restrictions on defense lawyers , and authorize greater government controls over the internet and ethnic minority groups .

according to one analyst , "under xi jinping the government is creating a more coherent legal framework to enforce the preservation of the party - state. .

in january 2016 , the ambassadors of the united states , canada , germany , japan , and the european union , in a "rare joint response," signed a letter to china expressing concerns about the new laws .

the letter stated , "while we recognize the need for each country to address its security concerns , we believe the new legislative measures have the potential to impede commerce , stifle innovation , and infringe on china's obligation to protect human rights in accordance with international law. .

the following sections discuss prominent human rights concerns that frequently have been raised by human rights organizations and some members of congress .

the bullet points below provide selected examples of ongoing human rights issues in china , some of which are discussed at greater length elsewhere in this report .

for more detailed descriptions of human rights topics , see the congressional - executive commission on china , annual report 201 6 and the department of state , country reports on human rights practices for 2016 .

the prc government has attempted to reduce rights violations in some of these areas .

however , the lack of checks on state power and the ccp's subordination of the law to its objective of maintaining its authority and "social stability" continue to lead to human rights abuses and violations of china's own constitution .

jerome cohen , an expert on chinese law and politics , suggests that although china has made progress in some legal areas , fundamental human rights problems endure: the lesson of the past twenty - five years seems to be that economic and social progress , enactment of better legislation , improvements in legal institutions , and reformist official policy statements do not guarantee either the enjoyment of civil and political rights or the protection of political and religious activists and their lawyers against the arbitrary exercise of state and party power .

congress and successive administrations have developed an array of means for promoting human rights and democracy in china , often deploying them simultaneously .

principal policy tools include open criticism of prc human rights policies and practices ; quiet diplomacy ; hearings ; foreign assistance ; support for dissident and prodemocracy groups in china and the united states ; sanctions ; bilateral dialogue ; internet freedom efforts ; public diplomacy ; and the coordination of international pressure .

in the past year , human rights advocates praised two milestone u.s. efforts aimed at promoting human rights globally and in china: legislation that would impose penalties upon foreign individuals considered to have committed egregious human rights violations and a collective international statement critical of china's human rights record .

congress has played a prominent role in u.s. human rights policy toward china .

related congressional activities include sponsoring legislation , holding hearings , and authorizing reports that call attention to human rights abuses globally and in the prc ; writing letters to the administration and to prc leaders in support of human rights in china , chinese prisoners of conscience , and ethnic minority groups ; and members and staff raising human rights issues while on official travel to china .

in 2017 , the cecc and the africa , global health , global human rights , and international organizations subcommittee of the house committee on foreign affairs held hearings on the plight of detained chinese rights lawyers and their families and on liu xiaobo .

during the 114 th congress , subcommittees of the house committee on foreign affairs held hearings on global religious freedom , organ harvesting in china , and prc influence on academic freedom in u.s. universities .

the cecc has held over 10 hearings on a range of topics related to human rights in china since 2014 .

the tom lantos human rights commission held hearings on tibet in 2015 and 2017 and on the united nations human rights council in 2016 .

the cecc , tom lantos human rights commission , u.s. commission on international religious freedom , and other congressional and congressionally mandated bodies and fora investigated , publicized , and reported on human rights conditions in the prc .

in december 2016 , congress passed the global magnitsky human rights accountability act , as part of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 ( p.l .

114-328 ) .

some human rights activists reportedly have begun to collect information on prc officials who allegedly have committed egregious human rights violations , in order to invoke sanctions under the new law .

the act , hailed as "groundbreaking" by its supporters , was named after russian lawyer sergei magnitsky , who in 2008 spoke out against russian government corruption and died in prison one year later .

the law grants the president authority to prohibit or revoke u.s. entry visas to foreign individuals deemed guilty of targeting whistle - blowers , and freezing or prohibiting those individuals' u.s. property transactions .

the act allows the president to impose such sanctions on foreign persons for whom credible evidence exists showing that they are responsible for extrajudicial killings , torture , or other gross violations of internationally recognized human rights , committed against individuals in any foreign country who seek to expose illegal activity carried out by government officials or promote internationally recognized human rights and freedoms .

the u.s. government does not provide assistance to chinese government entities or directly to chinese ngos .

the direct recipients of state department and usaid grants have been predominantly u.s. - based nongovernmental organizations ( ngos ) and universities .

u.s. foreign assistance efforts in china primarily have aimed to promote sustainable development and environmental conservation and preserve indigenous culture in tibetan areas in china and to support human rights , democracy , rule of law , and environmental programs in the prc .

between 2001 and 2016 , the united states government provided an estimated $78 million for tibetan programs ; $77 million for rule of law and environmental efforts in the prc ; $220 million for programs administered by the department of state's bureau of democracy , human rights , and labor ( drl ) ; and $6.2 million for criminal justice reform .

drl has administered programs that support the development of the legal profession , civil society , government transparency , public participation in government , and internet freedom .

some policymakers assert that the u.s. government should not support foreign assistance programs in china because the prc has significant financial resources of its own and can manage its own development needs .

other critics argue that u.s. democracy and governance programs have had little effect in china .

some human rights activists state that some u.s. stakeholders involved in assistance programs may refrain from supporting tougher u.s. approaches toward china's human rights abuses in order to protect their programs and policy interests .

some proponents of u.s. programs in china point out that u.s. assistance does not provide support to the prc government , and contend that u.s. programs benefit u.s. interests , and they operate in areas where the prc government has lacked sufficient capacity or commitment .

others assert that u.s. efforts in the prc have responded to broad public interest and support , helped to build foundations for the rule of law and civil society , promoted the protections of some rights , and tempered the effects of periodic political crackdowns .

established in 1983 , the national endowment for democracy ( ned ) is a private , nonprofit foundation "dedicated to the growth and strengthening of democratic institutions around the world. .

funded primarily by an annual congressional appropriation , ned has played an active role in promoting human rights and democracy in china since the mid - 1980s .

a grant - making institution , the endowment has supported projects carried out by grantees that include its core institutes ; chinese , tibetan , and uyghur human rights and democracy groups based in the united states and hong kong ; and a small number of ngos based in mainland china .

ned grants for china and tibetan programs have averaged about $6.7 million per year during the past decade .

this support was provided using ned's regular congressional appropriations ( an estimated $170 million in fy2016 ) , apart from some additional congressionally directed funding .

program areas include the following: rule of law ; public interest law ; civil society ; prisoners of conscience ; rights defenders ; freedom of expression ; internet freedom ; religious freedom ; government accountability and transparency ; political participation ; labor rights ; promoting understanding of tibetan , uyghur , and other ethnic concerns in china ; public policy analysis and debate ; and rural land rights .

china is subject to some u.s. economic sanctions in response to its human rights conditions .

their effects , however , have been limited and largely symbolic .

many u.s. sanctions imposed upon china as a response to the 1989 tiananmen military crackdown are no longer in effect .

remaining tiananmen - related sanctions suspend overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) programs and restrict export licenses for u.s .

munitions list ( usml ) items and crime control equipment .

originally imposed under the tiananmen sanctions , the u.s. government maintains restrictions on u.s. exports of crime control and detection equipment to the prc due to china's designation as a "country of particular concern" for religious freedom .

foreign operations appropriations legislation also may impose restrictions or conditions .

for example , u.s. representatives to international financial institutions by law may support projects in tibet only if they do not encourage the migration and settlement of non - tibetans into tibet or the transfer of tibetan - owned properties to non - tibetans , due in part to the potential for such activities to erode tibetan culture and identity .

in addition , countries , such as china , that the department of state designates as "tier 3" in its trafficking in persons report may be subject to restrictions on u.s. assistance , in particular nonhumanitarian and nontrade - related foreign assistance .

the united states limits its support for international financial institution lending to china for human rights reasons .

other u.s. laws that can be invoked to deny foreign assistance on human rights grounds include sections 116 and 502b of the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( p.l .

87-195 ) .

the trump administration , invoking the kemp - kasten amendment , has ceased u.s. contributions to the united nations population fund ( unfpa ) , due to its determination that the unfpa supports prc family planning policies , which allegedly have involved coercive abortion and involuntary sterilization .

the obama administration provided funding to the unfpa under the kemp - kasten amendment .

at the same time , congress enacted legislation requiring that no u.s. funding to the unfpa could be used for a country program in china , and that for the unfpa to receive u.s. funding , it could not fund abortions .

the 19 th and most recent round of the u.s. - china human rights dialogue took place in washington , dc , in august 2015 .

beijing suspended the human rights dialogue in 2016 , possibly in response to the u.s. - led joint statement at the unhrc criticizing china's human rights record .

the issue of human rights is not among the "four pillars" of the new u.s. - china comprehensive dialogue that was established during talks between president trump and president xi in april 2017 .

secretary of state rex tillerson stated that human rights are "embedded in every discussion," and that "i don't think you have to have a separate conversation , somehow separate our core values around human rights from our economic discussions , our military - to - military discussions , or our foreign policy discussions. .

the u.s. - china human rights dialogue , established in 1990 , has never been fully embraced by beijing .

it is one of several government - to - government human rights dialogues between china and other countries ; china also conducts a human rights dialogue with the european union .

the obama administration participated in five rounds between 2010 and 2015 .

the prc government suspended the human rights dialogue in 2014 , presumably in retaliation for former president obama's meeting with the dalai lama , and in 2016 .

beijing previously had suspended the dialogue in 2004 after the george w. bush administration sponsored an unsuccessful u.n. resolution criticizing china's human rights record .

the chinese government has become increasingly resistant to making concessions on human rights through diplomatic engagement , and more assertive about raising human rights violations in the united states , according to experts .

since 2013 , prc officials rarely have accepted prisoner lists or requests for information on cases of concern from foreign governments .

the 19 th dialogue included a meeting with senior staffers of the senate foreign relations committee and a roundtable with human rights groups .

the roundtable reportedly marked the first time that a chinese delegation to the talks engaged critics from civil society .

then - assistant secretary of state for democracy , human rights , and labor tom malinowski expressed concerns regarding the crackdown on human rights lawyers and presented a list of over 100 "cases of concern. .

other issues reportedly raised by the u.s. side included china's new foreign ngo law , the campaign to remove crosses from christian churches in zhejiang province , repression in tibet and xinjiang , and restrictions on u.s. and other foreign journalists in china .

the prc delegation , led by li junhua , director - general of the department of international conferences and organizations of the prc ministry of foreign affairs , noted human rights problems in the united states , including racial discrimination , excessive use of force by police , and the "violation of the human rights of other countries through massive surveillance activities. .

during the obama administration , some experts criticized the human rights dialogue for providing both governments with opportunities for claiming progress on human rights in china through the talks themselves , without establishing benchmarks for progress , offering incentives for producing results , or imposing penalties for failing to do so .

they argued that separating the human rights dialogue from the main u.s. - china strategic and economic dialogue marginalized human rights issues , and reduced opportunities for linking human rights to other areas of the bilateral relationship .

critics also urged that the talks be more transparent and open to a greater number of stakeholders , particularly nongovernmental participants .

obama administration officials responded to critics by arguing that the human rights dialogue was an important means of regularly expressing u.s. positions on human rights , and not an arena for negotiation .

they argued that the talks enabled the u.s. government to focus on human rights within one forum , and did not preclude the raising of human rights in other fora .

even some critics of the dialogue have suggested that the talks nonetheless may effectively be used to press the prc government on human rights issues prior to bilateral summits and other events .

some u.s. - based human rights groups have contended that the dialogue "remains the best forum for raising the cases of imprisoned activists. .

some chinese rights activists believe that the dialogue has had long - term benefits through raising human rights awareness in china .

a related bilateral dialogue , the legal experts dialogue ( led ) , was launched in 2003 .

the obama administration convened the fourth round in 2011 , after a six - year hiatus .

the led brings together governmental and nongovernmental legal experts from the united states and china .

it is designed to serve as a forum to discuss the benefits and practical implementation of the rule of law .

the seventh led took place in beijing in october 2015 .

topics of discussion included chinese lawyers' access to clients , interrogation techniques used by police officers , and administrative law reforms .

the u.s. government has undertaken efforts to promote global internet freedom .

u.s. congressional committees and commissions have held hearings on the internet and china , including the roles of u.s. internet companies in china's censorship system , market access for u.s. internet companies , intellectual property rights , and cybersecurity .

the george w. bush administration established the global internet freedom task force , continued under the obama administration as the netfreedom task force , whose mission was to coordinate policy within the state department on internet freedom efforts .

the department of state's bureau of democracy , human rights , and labor administers global internet freedom programs in the following areas: countercensorship and secure communications technology ; training in secure online and mobile communications practices ; advocacy ; and policy research .

the primary target countries for such efforts , particularly censorship circumvention and secure communications programs , have been china and iran .

congress appropriated $13 million for drl internet freedom efforts in fy2016 .

the broadcasting board of governors ( bbg ) identifies china as one of five "critical areas" for investment in the area of international broadcasting .

voice of america ( voa ) and radio free asia ( rfa ) provide external sources of independent or alternative news and opinion to chinese audiences .

the two media services play small but unique roles in providing u.s. - style broadcasting , journalism , and public debate in china .

voa , which offers mainly u.s. and international news , and rfa , which serves as an uncensored source of domestic chinese news , often report on important world and local events .

voa "learning english" international news programs , aimed at intermediate learners of english , are popular with many young , educated , and professional chinese .

the prc government regularly jams and blocks voa and rfa mandarin , cantonese , tibetan , and uyghur language radio and television broadcasts and internet sites , while voa english services have received less interference .

voa and rfa have made efforts to enhance their internet services , develop circumvention or countercensorship technologies , and provide access to their programs on social media platforms such as weibo and wechat .

in 2014 , rfa mandarin launched a blog featuring a daily compilation of posts by chinese "celebrity bloggers" that had been deleted by state censors .

the 47-member united nations human rights council ( unhrc ) was created in 2006 to replace the u.n. commission on human rights ( unchr ) , which had been faulted for being unduly influenced by countries widely perceived as having poor human rights records .

the united states had sponsored several resolutions at the unchr criticizing china's human rights record , but none were successful ; china was able to thwart voting on nearly all such resolutions through "no - action motions. .

the prc continues to employ its soft power — diplomatic and economic influence — in global fora in order to reduce international pressure to improve its human rights conditions .

members of the unhrc are elected by a majority vote in the u.n. general assembly for three - year terms and may not be reelected for more than two consecutive terms .

the united states was elected to the human rights council in 2009 and was reelected in 2012 and 2016 .

china has been elected to the unhrc four times ( 2006 , 2009 , 2013 , and 2016 ) .

some members of congress have opposed china's membership on the unhrc .

as part of the restructuring related to the formation of the unhrc , the u.n. general assembly established the universal periodic review ( upr ) , a mechanism by which the human rights records of all u.n. members are assessed once every four years .

in addition , every member of the human rights council is required to undergo a review while a member .

the review is based upon reports compiled by the office of the high commissioner for human rights ( ohchr ) , including input from independent experts and ngos , and a report submitted by the state under review .

some observers complain that the upr process provides countries with poor human rights records with opportunities to criticize those with good records , the recommendations are nonbinding , and the input of ngos often is restricted .

supporters of the upr contend that it highlights human rights issues and produces pledges from countries under review to address them , and that the process is a more transparent and inclusive exercise than bilateral dialogues .

the first upr of china was conducted in 2009 and the second one was held in october 2013 .

during china's second upr , many u.n. member states urged china to ratify the international covenant on civil and political rights ( iccpr ) .

some countries called on china to ensure greater protections of the rights of ethnic minorities , particularly tibetans , uyghurs , and mongolians , although other countries supported china's ethnic policies .

austria , slovakia , and switzerland recommended that china facilitate a visit by the u.n. high commissioner for human rights .

the united states reportedly was the only participant in the upr dialogue to provide names of chinese citizens when raising the issue of human rights abuses against dissidents and civil society activists .

china's next periodic review is to take place in november 2018 .

of the recommendations made by the human rights council at its second upr , china adopted 204 of them and rejected 48 .

a number of recommendations that china rejected related to human rights activists , extrajudicial detention , freedom of belief , freedom of expression , and the rights of ethnic minorities .

prc officials asserted ethnic minority groups were treated fairly , adding that china's priority was to reduce poverty .

they stated that beijing was willing to work with other countries on human rights "as long as it was in the spirit of mutual respect. .

the prc government declined to set a timetable for ratifying the iccpr and agreed to meet with the u.n. high commissioner for human rights "at a mutually convenient time. .

china's national human rights action plan for 2016-2020 pledges to implement recommendations of its first and second uprs and to "conduct exchanges and cooperation" with the ohchr .

the network of chinese human rights defenders reported "large discrepancies" between china's 2013 promises and its implementation of upr recommendations .

the network found that 43 recommendations were partially implemented and only 3 were fully implemented .

the new york - based organization human rights in china ( hrc ) submitted a mid - term assessment in which it noted a "steep deterioration of rights" in the prc and provided recommendations to the prc government in order for it to meet its upr commitments .

hrc also made recommendations to u.n. member states to encourage china to comply with international human rights processes and meet universal human rights standards .

in march 2016 , a group of 12 countries , led by the united states , openly expressed serious concerns about human rights abuses in china at a gathering of the united nations human rights council .

the declaration was the first collective statement on china in the history of the council .

it expressed concerns about china's "deteriorating human rights record," including the arrests of rights activists , civil society leaders , and lawyers for "peacefully exercising their freedom of expression or for lawfully practicing their profession. .

115 th congress h.res .

445 : honoring the life and legacy of liu xiaobo ( meadows , introduced july 13 , 2017 ) .

h.con.res .

67 : urging the government of the people's republic of china to unconditionally release liu xiaobo , together with his wife liu xia , to allow them to freely meet with friends , family , and counsel and seek medical treatment wherever they desire ( smith ( nj ) , introduced june 28 , 2017 ) .

s.con.res .

21 : urging the government of the people's republic of china to unconditionally release liu xiaobo , together with his wife liu xia , to allow them to freely meet with friends , family , and counsel and seek medical treatment wherever they desire .

 ( rubio , introduced june 29 , 2017 ) .

h.r .

2537 : to designate the area between the intersections of international drive northwest and van ness street northwest and international drive northwest and international place northwest in washington , district of columbia , as "liu xiaobo plaza," and for other purposes ( meadows , introduced may 18 , 2017 ) .

s. 1187 : to designate the area between the intersections of international drive , northwest and van ness street , northwest and international drive , northwest and international place , northwest in washington , district of columbia , as "liu xiaobo plaza," and for other purposes ( cruz , may 18 , 2017 ) .

h.r .

1872 : reciprocal access to tibet act of 2017 ( mcgovern , introduced apri ; 4 , 2017 ) .

s. 821 : reciprocal access to tibet act of 2017 ( rubio , introduced april 4 , 2017 ) .

h.res .

65 : urging the president to seek an independent investigation into the death of tibetan buddhist leader and social activist tenzin delek rinpoche and to publicly call for an end to the repressive policies used by the people's republic of china in tibet ( capuano , introduced january 27 , 2017 ) .

114 th congress h.r .

4452 ( not passed ) : to designate the area between the intersections of international drive northwest and van ness street northwest and international drive northwest and international place northwest in washington , district of columbia , as "liu xiaobo plaza," and for other purposes ( meadows , february 3 , 2016 ) .

s. 2451 ( not passed ) : a bill to designate the area between the intersections of international drive , northwest and van ness street , northwest and international drive , northwest and international place , northwest in washington , district of columbia , as "liu xiaobo plaza," and for other purposes ( cruz , january 20 , 2016 ) .

h.res .

584 ( not passed ) : urging the president to seek an independent investigation into the death of tibetan buddhist leader and social activist tenzin delek rinpoche and to publicly call for an end to the repressive policies used by the people's republic of china in tibet ( capuano , january 11 , 2016 ) .

h.res .

343 ( passed on june 13 , 2016 ) : expressing concern regarding persistent and credible reports of systematic , state - sanctioned organ harvesting from non - consenting prisoners of conscience in the people's republic of china , including from large numbers of falun gong practitioners and members of other religious and ethnic minority groups ( ros - lehtinen , june 25 , 2015 ) .

h.res .

337 ( passed on 7 / 8 / 2015 ) : calling for substantive dialogue , without preconditions , in order to address tibetan grievances and secure a negotiated agreement for the tibetan people ( engel , june 24 , 2015 ) .

h.r .

2621 ( not passed ) : china human rights protection act of 2015 ( smith ( nj ) , june 2 , 2015 ) .

h.r .

2242 ( not passed ) : world press freedom act of 2015 ( smith ( nj ) , may 5 , 2015 ) .

h.r .

1112 ( not passed ) : reciprocal access to tibet act of 2015 ( mcgovern , february 26 , 2015 ) .

h.res .

105 ( not passed ) : calling for the protection of religious minority rights and freedoms worldwide ( bridenstine , february 11 , 2015 ) .

s.res .

69 ( not passed ) : a resolution calling for the protection of religious minority rights and freedoms worldwide ( inhofe , february 5 , 2015 ) .

s. 284 and h.r .

624 ( passed on 12 / 23 / 16 as part of s. 2943 , national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 [ p.l .

114-328 , §1261] ) : global magnitsky human rights accountability act: to impose sanctions with respect to foreign persons responsible for gross violations of internationally recognized human rights , and for other purposes ( cardin , january 28 , 2015 ; smith ( nj ) , january 30 , 2015 ) .

113 th congress h.r .

5379 ( not passed ) : china human rights protection act of 2014 ( smith ( nj ) , july 31 , 2014 ) .

s.res .

482 ( not passed ) : a resolution expressing the sense of the senate that the area between the intersections of international drive , northwest van ness street , northwest international drive , northwest and international place , northwest in washington , district of columbia , should be designated as "liu xiaobo plaza" ( cruz , june 24 , 2014 ) .

h.r .

4851 ( not passed ) : reciprocal access to tibet act of 2014 ( mcgovern , june 12 , 2014 ) .

h.res .

599 ( passed on 5 / 28 / 2014 ) : urging the government of the people's republic of china to respect the freedom of assembly , expression , and religion and all fundamental human rights and the rule of law for all its citizens and to stop censoring discussion of the 1989 tiananmen square demonstrations and their violent suppression ( smith ( nj ) , may 27 , 2014 ) .

s.res .

451 ( passed on 6 / 4 / 2014 ) : a resolution recalling the government of china's forcible dispersion of those peaceably assembled in tiananmen square 25 years ago , in light of china's continued abysmal human rights record ( barrasso , may 15 , 2014 ) .

s.res .

361 ( passed on 4 / 8 / 2014 ) : a resolution recognizing the threats to freedom of the press and expression in the people's republic of china and urging the government of the people's republic of china to take meaningful steps to improve freedom of expression as fitting of a responsible international stakeholder ( cardin , february 24 , 2014 ) .

h.res .

327 ( not passed ) : expressing the sense of the house of representatives regarding china's membership in the united nations human rights council ( unhrc ) ( bentivolio , august 2 , 2013 ) .

h.res .

281 ( not passed ) : expressing concern over persistent and credible reports of systematic , state - sanctioned organ harvesting from non - consenting prisoners of conscience , in the people's republic of china , including from large numbers of falun gong practitioners imprisoned for their religious beliefs , and members of other religious and ethnic minority groups ( ros - lehtinen , june 27 , 2013 ) .

h.res .

245 ( not passed ) : recognizing the 24 th anniversary of the tiananmen square massacre , calling for the release of dr. wang bingzhang , and for other reasons ( bentivolio , june 4 , 2013 ) .

