i n 2013 , president obama released a climate action plan ( cap ) to reduce greenhouse gases ( ghg ) emissions and to encourage adaptation to expected climate change .

subsequently , the obama administration implemented the cap pursuant to presidential powers and existing statutory authority .

the president , the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) , and other agencies issued various executive orders , guidance , and regulations to reduce ghg emissions from motor vehicles , new and existing power plants , facilities in the oil - and - gas sector , and other ghg - emitting sources and federal facilities .

on march 28 , 2017 , president trump signed executive order 13783 , which rescinds the cap and requires agencies to review their existing regulations and "appropriately suspend , revise , or rescind those that unduly burden" domestic energy production and use .

the executive order , entitled promoting energy independence and economic growth , rescinds or withdraws various obama administration orders and directions that were intended to address climate change and regulate ghg emissions , including the following: presidential orders / reports executive order 13653 , preparing the united states for the impacts of climate change ( nov. 1 , 2013 ) power sector carbon pollution standards , pres .

memo .

 ( june 25 , 2013 ) mitigating impacts on natural resources from development and encouraging related private investment , pres .

memo .

 ( nov. 3 , 2015 ) climate change and national security , pres .

memo .

 ( sept. 21 , 2016 ) the president's climate action plan ( june , 2013 ) climate action plan strategy to reduce methane emissions ( march 2014 ) agency guidance final guidance for federal departments and agencies on consideration of greenhouse gas emissions and the effects of climate change in national environmental policy act reviews , 81 fed .

reg .

51,866 ( aug. 5 , 2016 ) all technical documents related to the social cost of carbon agency orders all moratoria on federal land coal leasing activities related to order 3338 , discretionary programmatic environmental impact statement ( peis ) to modernize the federal coal program ( jan. 15 , 2016 ) the executive order also directs epa to review ghg regulations for power plants and methane regulations for existing oil and gas sources , and "as soon as practicable , suspend , revise , or rescind the guidance , or publish for notice and comment proposed rules suspending , revising , or rescinding those rules. .

because the evolution and scope of u.s. climate change regulation and litigation are extensive , this report will focus on existing federal laws and regulations and will not address international agreements or legislation related to climate change .

this report will provide a brief history of u.s. climate change regulation ; review the different types of regulation and legal actions that have been pursued in the national debate over ghgs ; examine selected legal issues and related litigation ; and address what these legal and regulatory developments mean for congress .

this report will focus on two types of ghg regulations: ( 1 ) laws that seek to reduce ghg emissions from stationary and mobile sources , and ( 2 ) laws that require that climate change effects be considered when the federal government takes certain actions .

this section will review examples of these types of regulations and related legal challenges .

federal courts often do not reach the merits of a climate change suit due to threshold procedural barriers , such as whether a plaintiff or petitioner has the right to bring a lawsuit in the first place or whether the court has jurisdiction over a type of claim .

to proceed to the merits of a case , a plaintiff must establish standing , a procedural threshold that has , at times , posed a difficult hurdle to overcome .

congress faces a number of questions regarding climate change regulation , policy , and litigation .

some early actions by the administration indicate it may seek additional time during the litigation process to consider how best to move forward in court .

agency actions resulting from compliance with the march 28 , 2017 , executive order , including delaying the effective date of rules or withdrawing previous determinations , will directly affect ongoing litigation .

resolution of the climate change lawsuits and legislation from congress have the potential to reshape ghg regulation in the united states and , with it , american environmental law .

