s ince the 1970s , policymakers have increasingly used the tax code to promote energy policy goals .

long - term energy policy goals include providing a secure supply of energy , providing energy at a low cost , and ensuring that energy production and consumption is consistent with environmental objectives .

a range of federal policies , including various research and development programs , mandates , and direct financial support such as tax incentives or loan guarantees , promotes various energy policy objectives .

this report focuses on tax incentives that support the production of or investment in various energy resources .

through the mid - 2000s , the majority of revenue losses associated with energy tax incentives were from provisions benefiting fossil fuels .

at present , the balance has shifted , such that the bulk of federal revenue losses associated with energy tax provisions are from incentives for renewable energy production and investment .

while there has been growth in the amount of energy from renewable resources , the majority of domestic energy produced continues to be from fossil energy resources .

this has raised questions regarding the value of energy tax incentives relative to production and the relative subsidization of various energy resources .

although the numbers in this report may be useful for policymakers evaluating the current status of energy tax policy , it is important to understand the limitations of this analysis .

this report evaluates energy production relative to the value of current energy tax expenditures .

it does not , however , seek to analyze whether the current system of energy tax incentives is economically efficient , effective , or otherwise consistent with broader energy policy objectives .

further , analysis in this report does not include information on federal spending on energy that is not linked to the tax code .

the following sections estimate the value of tax incentives relative to the level of energy produced using fossil and renewable energy resources .

before proceeding with the analysis , some limitations are outlined .

the analysis itself requires quantification of energy production and energy tax incentives .

once data on energy production and energy tax incentives have been presented , the value of energy tax incentives can be evaluated relative to current levels of energy production .

over time , there have been substantial shifts in the proportion of energy - related tax expenditures benefiting different types of energy resources .

figure 1 illustrates the projected value of energy - related tax incentives since 1978 .

energy tax provisions are categorized as primarily benefiting fossil fuels , renewables , renewable fuels , efficiency , vehicles , or some other energy purpose .

until the mid - 2000s , most of the value of energy - related tax incentives supported fossil fuels .

starting in the mid - 2000s , the cost of energy - related tax preferences supporting renewables increased .

some of this increase was attributable to provisions supporting renewable fuels , which have since expired .

from the 1980s through 2011 , most of the tax - related federal financial support for renewable energy was for renewable fuels , mainly alcohol fuels ( i.e. , ethanol ) .

the tax credits for alcohol fuels ( including ethanol ) expired at the end of 2011 .

starting in 2008 , the federal government incurred outlays associated with excise tax credits for biodiesel and renewable diesel .

under current law , the tax credits for biodiesel and renewable diesel expired at the end of 2017 .

thus , after fy2018 ( which includes the end of calendar year 2017 ) , there are no projected costs associated with tax incentives for renewable fuels .

expired tax incentives may be extended , however , as part of the "tax extenders. .

beginning in the mid - 2000s , the cost of energy tax incentives for renewables began to increase .

beginning in 2009 , the section 1603 grants in lieu of tax credits contributed to increased costs associated with tax - related benefits for renewable energy .

through 2014 , section 1603 grants in lieu of tax credits exceeded tax expenditures associated with the production tax credit ( ptc ) and investment tax credit ( itc ) combined .

the section 1603 grant option is not available for projects that began construction after december 31 , 2011 .

however , since grants are paid out when construction is completed and eligible property is placed in service , outlays under the section 1603 program continued through 2017 .

tax expenditures for the itc and ptc have increased substantially in recent years .

as a result of the extensions for wind and solar enacted in the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) , itc and ptc tax expenditures are projected to remain stable for several years .

under current law , the ptc will not be available to projects that begin construction after december 31 , 2019 .

however , since the ptc is available for the first 10 years of renewable electricity production , and the expiration date is a start - of - construction deadline as opposed to a placed - in - service deadline , ptc tax expenditures will continue after the provision expires .

the itc for solar , currently 30% , is scheduled to decline to 26% for property beginning construction in 2020 , and 22% for property beginning construction in 2021 , before returning to the permanent rate of 10% after 2021 .

thus , absent additional policy changes , the higher tax expenditures associated with the ptc and itc are expected to be temporary .

tax expenditures for tax incentives supporting energy efficiency increased in the late 2000s , but subsequently declined .

most of the increase in revenue losses for efficiency - related provisions was associated with tax incentives for homeowners investing in certain energy - efficient property .

the primary tax incentive for energy efficiency improvements to existing homes expired at the end of 2017 .

extension of expired tax incentives for energy efficiency would increase the cost of energy efficiency - related tax incentives .

as was noted above , many energy - related tax provisions , particularly those that support renewables , are temporary .

over time as these incentives phase out , tax expenditures associated with these provisions will decline .

this process may take some time .

for the ptc , for example , the credit is claimed during the first 10 years of qualifying production .

it is possible that qualifying production begins after the december 31 , 2019 , start - of - construction expiration date , meaning that tax expenditures for the ptc are expected to continue for at least the next decade .

u.s. department of the treasury tax expenditure estimates can be used to illustrate how expiring provisions affect the distribution of energy - related tax expenditures over time ( see figure 2 ) .

treasury and jct tax expenditure estimates differ in a number of ways .

the treasury provides tax expenditures over an 11-year budget window .

the jct uses a shorter 5-year window .

the jct and treasury also use different methodologies when preparing tax expenditure estimates , and have different classifications as to what provisions constitute tax expenditures .

thus , the tax expenditure estimates prepared by each entity are not directly comparable .

however , looking at treasury tax expenditure estimates over time can illustrate broader trends regarding which types of energy are receiving tax - related benefits .

in 2018 , according to treasury's tax expenditure estimates , tax expenditures supporting renewables totaled an estimated $8.4 billion .

by 2028 , that number is expected to decline to $3.5 billion .

the decline can be explained by the reduced tax expenditures for the ptc and itc as these provisions phase down or expire .

treasury estimates that tax expenditures supporting fossil fuels will total $2.2 billion in 2018 .

the treasury anticipates this number increasing over time , reaching an estimated $3.8 billion by 2028 .

the treasury estimates that the revenue losses associated with most permanent oil - and - gas tax incentives will increase over the next decade .

the energy sector is supported by an array of tax incentives reflecting diverse policy objectives .

as a result , the amount of tax - related federal financial support for energy differs across energy sectors , and is not necessarily proportional to the amount of energy production from various energy sectors .

the total amount of energy - related tax incentives is projected to decline under current law , although extensions of expired energy tax provisions , or other modifications to energy tax provisions , could change these figures .

over the longer term , the amount of tax - related support for the energy sector could decline if provisions are allowed to expire as scheduled under current law .

