there is no statutory definition of homeland security that reflects the breadth of the enterprise as currently understood .

although there is a federal department of homeland security , it is neither solely dedicated to homeland security missions , nor is it the only part of the federal government with significant responsibilities in this arena .

the department of homeland security ( dhs ) was established by the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) , which was signed into law on november 25 , 2002 .

the new department was assembled from components pulled from 22 different government agencies and began official operations on march 1 , 2003 .

since then , dhs has undergone a series of restructurings and reorganizations intended to improve its effectiveness and efficiency .

although dhs does include many of the homeland security functions of the federal government , several of these functions or parts of these functions remain at their original executive branch agencies and departments , including the departments of justice , state , defense , and transportation .

not all of the missions of dhs are officially "homeland security" missions .

some components have historical missions that do not directly relate to conventional homeland security definitions , such as the coast guard's environmental and boater safety missions , and congress has in the past debated whether fema and its disaster relief and recovery missions belong in the department .

some criminal justice elements could arguably be included in a broad definition of homeland security .

issues such as the role of the military in law enforcement , monitoring and policing transfers of money , human trafficking , explosives and weapons laws , and aspects of foreign policy , trade , and economics have implications for homeland security policy .

rather than trying to resolve the question of what should or should not be considered a part of homeland security , this report is a survey of issues that have come up in the context of homeland security policy debates .

after initial discussion of the definitions of homeland security , the homeland security budget , and the role of homeland security actors in the intelligence community , the report groups the issues into five general themes: counterterrorism and security management ; border security and trade ; disaster preparedness , response , and recovery ; cybersecurity ; and dhs management issues as each topic under these themes is introduced , the author of the section is listed , along with their contact information .

in many cases , a specific crs report is highlighted as a source of more detailed information .

this report is neither exhaustive nor exclusive in its scope , but representative of the broad array of issues likely to be taken up in one way or another by the 115 th congress in the coming months .

the report includes many issues that were touched upon in the 114 th congress through legislation or hearings , and remain unresolved .

some specific issues or issue areas are explored from a variety of perspectives in other crs work ( eg , issues with law enforcement , domestic policy , or national security aspects ) , and the reader is encouraged to reach out to crs directly or explore the crs website to take full advantage of the products available to them on these matters .

while this report may be updated , it should be viewed as an introduction , not a legislative tracker .

therefore , some issues currently under debate are not included as a focal item in this report , as the state of the debate is highly dynamic ( eg , the administration's proposed construction of a wall on the u.s. - mexico border ) , and other crs analytical products provide more current analysis than can practically be provided in a report of this breadth .

[author name scrubbed] , analyst in cybersecurity policy ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) cyberattacks pose a risk to the day - to - day processes of the u.s. economy and political system in a variety of ways , be it through disruption of economic activity , theft of intellectual property , compromise of critical infrastructure , espionage , or influence operations .

over the past decade , the united states has witnessed cyberattacks that have targeted both public sector and private sector data , sometimes stealing it , sometimes altering it , and sometimes denying access to it .

the frequency of these attacks , and their potential effect on the economy , on our national security , and on people's lives has driven cybersecurity issues to the forefront of the national homeland security conversation .

development of sound cybersecurity policy at all levels of government and in the private sector represents a significant challenge for policymakers .

given the technical nature of this issue and the impact of cybersecurity across the homeland security enterprise , this section of the report is less compartmentalized by sub - issue than other sections of this report .

instead , it seeks to lay a basis of understanding for the reader on the federal government's role in cybersecurity and begin to familiarize the reader with certain concepts currently in discussion , in order to facilitate understanding of the risks , challenges , and opportunities posed by information technology in the homeland security realm .

with that in mind , the section begins with a brief discussion about how cybersecurity may be defined , then examines how the federal government secures its networks and critical infrastructure with the involvement of dhs .

the next subsections examine the relationship of the public and private sector in providing cybersecurity , and how the federal government organizes its response to a "cyber incident" ( like disaster response ) .

a subsection discussing some specific technologies in the cybersecurity policy debate follows , and the section closes with some examples from the transportation security sector of how cybersecurity comes into play in ensuring stable operating environments .

[author name scrubbed] , specialist in homeland security policy and appropriations ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) one of the unresolved debates from the development of dhs was the extent of department management involvement in the functioning of departmental components .

some policy experts supported a strong management function , which would replace the leadership of the components , while others supported a smaller management function that allowed components to function freely in their areas of expertise much as they had before .

once the department was established , it became clear that a small management cadre could not provide adequate coordination of policy or oversight of the department .

the benefits of coordinated action by a large organization , including setting operational and budgetary priorities , were being lost due to the lack of strong leadership .

as its components continued to perform their missions , the department undertook efforts to establish a unified identity and way of doing business .

the term "one dhs" was used to describe these initiatives under tom ridge , the first secretary of the department , and the efforts continued through secretaries michael chertoff and janet napolitano .

on april 22 , 2014 , jeh johnson , the fourth secretary of dhs , issued a memorandum to dhs leadership , entitled "strengthening departmental unity of effort. .

this now - widely circulated memorandum set out an agenda to reform the department of homeland security way of doing business by implementing new analytical and decisionmaking processes to develop strategy , plan , and identify joint requirements .

these would bring component leadership together above the component level to ensure unity of effort across the department .

secretary johnson described it this way in a federal times interview: we've embarked on a unity of effort initiative that promotes greater coordination among department , greater centralized decision - making at headquarters , a more strategic approach to our budget building process , a more strategic departmentwide approach to our acquisition strategy .

it is clearly a balance .

within the department of homeland security there are components that long predated the department of homeland security .

and so what we are not asking components to do is to all act and behave together .

they are distinct cultures... .

but what we are asking and expecting our component leadership to do is participate with us in a more strategic approach to promote greater efficiency in how we operate , how we conduct ourselves , particularly in our budget process and in our acquisitions .

the memorandum laid out four areas of initial focus .

the first was to bring together senior leaders of the department in two groups: a senior leaders council to discuss "overall policy , strategy , operations and departmental guidance," and a deputies management action group ( dmag ) to "advance joint requirements development , program and budget review , acquisition reform , operational planning , and joint operations. .

the second area was to make improvements to the departmental management processes for investments .

specifically , incorporating strategic analysis and joint requirements planning into the annual budget development process , directing the dmag to develop and facilitate a component - driven joint requirements process , and reviewing and updating the dhs acquisition oversight framework .

the third was developing a stronger strategy , planning , and analytic capability within the office of policy .

the fourth was to improve coordination of cross - component operations .

bipartisan and bicameral support for these reforms was shown in several hearings during the 113 th and 114 th congresses .

both house and senate appropriations committee reports have included language supportive of the department's managerial reorganization , although there has been concern expressed about keeping congress informed about progress and consequences of reorganizations in the field .

several of the action items included in the memorandum were completed in 2014 , such as the establishment of a cost analysis division in the office of the chief financial officer in may 2014 .

the role of this division is to ensure life - cycle cost estimates are part of major acquisition plans .

dhs also completed development of a southern border and approaches campaign plan — a four - year strategic framework for joint operations securing the southern border of the united states .

at the end of the 114 th congress , title xix of the fy2017 national defense authorization act provided specific statutory authority to dhs for certain activities connected with the unity of effort initiative , including authorizing joint task forces and redefining the role of the former office of policy and renaming it the office of strategy , policy , and plans .

at the confirmation hearing for gen. john kelly , interest in management reform and the future of johnson's unity of effort initiative was apparent , with both general kelly and some senators praising the progress that had been made .

congress may debate the appropriate role of departmental level management at dhs , the level of engagement congress should have as reforms go forward , the progress of management reforms , and whether they are having the desired effect .

[author name scrubbed] , specialist in science and technology policy ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) in 2013 , congress directed dhs to review its programs relating to chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear threats and to evaluate "potential improvements in performance and possible savings in costs that might be gained by consolidation of current organizations and missions , including the option of merging functions of the domestic nuclear detection office ( dndo ) and the office of health affairs ( oha ) . .

the report of this review was completed in june 2015 .

in july 2015 , dhs officials testified that dhs plans to consolidate dndo , oha , and smaller elements of several other dhs programs into a new office , led by a new assistant secretary , with responsibility for dhs - wide coordination of chemical , biological , radiological , nuclear , and explosives ( cbrne ) "strategy , policy , situational awareness , threat and risk assessments , contingency planning , operational requirements , acquisition formulation and oversight , and preparedness. .

the fy2017 budget request reflected this proposed reorganization .

the budget proposed establishing a chemical , biological , radiological , nuclear , and explosives office containing the domestic nuclear detection office ( dndo ) , the office of health affairs ( oha ) , the cbrne threat awareness and risk assessment activities of the science and technology directorate , the cbrne functions of the office of policy and the office of operations coordination , and the office of bombing prevention from the national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) .

in the 114 th congress , the house passed h.r .

3875 , which would have implemented this proposed restructuring .

the senate did not pass a similar bill .

proponents of such a reorganization suggest that consolidating cbrne activities would create a stronger focus within the department and improve interagency and interdepartmental coordination for these activities .

however , skeptics of reorganization have questioned whether the benefits would outweigh the cost of disrupting current efforts , how well the differing agency cultures and missions would mesh , and why the new office would conduct research and development for nuclear defense but not biodefense .

[author name scrubbed] , specialist in homeland security policy and appropriations ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) for further information , see crs report r44661 , dhs appropriations fy2017: departmental management and operations .

when dhs was established in 2003 , components of other agencies were brought together over a matter of months , in the midst of ongoing budget cycles .

rather than developing a new structure of appropriations for the entire department , congress and the administration continued to provide resources through existing account structures when possible .

in h.rept .

113-481 , accompanying the house version of the fy2015 department of homeland security appropriations act , the house appropriations committee wrote: "in order to provide the department and the committees increased visibility , comparability , and information on which to base resource allocation decisions , particularly in the current fiscal climate , the committee believes dhs would benefit from the implementation of a common appropriation structure across the department. .

it went on to direct the dhs office of the chief financial officer "to work with the components , the office of management and budget ( omb ) , and the committee to develop a common appropriation structure for the president's fiscal year 2017 budget request. .

section 563 of division f of p.l .

114-113 ( the fy2016 department of homeland security appropriations act ) provided authority for dhs to submit its fy2017 appropriations request under the new common appropriations structure ( or cas ) , and implement it in fy2017 .

under the act , the new structure was to have four categories of appropriations: operations and support ; procurement , construction and improvement ; research and development ; and federal assistance .

most of the fy2017 dhs appropriations request categorized its appropriations in this fashion .

the exception was the coast guard , which was in the process of migrating its financial information to a new system .

dhs has also proposed realigning its programs , project , and activities ( ppa ) structure — the next level of funding detail below the appropriation level — possibly trying to align ppas into a mission - based hierarchy .

the senate appropriations committee did not make its recommendation using the new structure , instead drafting its annual dhs appropriations bill and report using the same structure as was used in fy2016 .

the house appropriations committee made its recommendation using the new structure .

sec .

130 of the continuing appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l .

114-223 ) included specific authority for dhs to obligate resources provided under the continuing resolution in a revised cas , and the trump administration's supplemental appropriations request for fy2017 indicated that the administration was continuing to organize dhs funding on that basis .

division f of p.l .

115-31 provided appropriations under a revised cas for all dhs components except the u.s. coast guard , which has faced a series of challenges in updating its financial management systems .

congress will consider whether the new cas provides the improved transparency it sought , whether the new ppa structure is sufficiently detailed , and also whether and how to integrate the coast guard into the new structures in the coming years .

[author name scrubbed] , specialist in homeland security policy and appropriations ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) for additional information , see crs report r42753 , dhs headquarters consolidation project: issues for congress .

the department of homeland security's headquarters footprint occupies more than 7 million square feet of office space in about 50 separate locations in the greater washington , dc , area .

this is largely a legacy of how the department was assembled in a short period of time from 22 separate federal agencies which were themselves spread across the national capital region .

the fragmentation of headquarters is cited by the department as a major contributor to inefficiencies , including time lost shuttling staff between headquarters elements ; additional security , real estate , and administrative costs ; and reduced cohesion among the components that make up the department .

to unify the department's headquarters functions , the department approved a $3.4 billion master plan to create a new dhs headquarters on the grounds of st. elizabeths in anacostia .

according to gsa , this is the largest federal office construction since the pentagon was built during world war ii .

$1.4 billion of this project was to be funded through the dhs budget , and $2 billion through the gsa .

thus far a total of over $2.5 billion has been appropriated for the project — $759 million for dhs and $1,548 million to gsa through fy2016 .

phase 1a of the project — a new coast guard headquarters facility — has been completed with the funding already provided by congress and is now in use .

in 2013 , a revised construction schedule was developed , projecting lower levels of appropriations and a longer timeline for the project .

under the new projection , the project would be completed in fy2026 at a cost of $4.5 billion .

the project was criticized by gao in september 2014 for not conforming to certain leading practices for capital decisionmaking processes .

dhs and gsa revised its plans as a result of similar observations by gao and other critics , announcing a new plan that would be completed in fy2021 , and cost $3.7 billion .

according to gsa , even with the cost increases from delaying funding , the project would still result in over $430 million in projected savings compared to leasing over the next 30 years .

this estimate does not take into account the costs gsa would have to incur to stabilize and maintain the st. elizabeths campus if the project were halted , or the efficiencies for dhs that a consolidated headquarters would generate .

with the coast guard now operating from st. elizabeths , any discussions on headquarters consolidation in the 115 th congress are likely to focus on how to best use the available facilities on the campus , whether the latest revisions to the plan are acceptable to congress , and how the headquarters consolidation will compete for resources within the dhs and gsa budgets .

[author name scrubbed] , analyst in american national government ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) an essential consideration underlying the mission and performance of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) is human resource management ( hrm ) .

responsibility for hrm is vested in the office of the chief human capital officer ( ochco ) , an entity organizationally and for appropriations purposes located within the under secretary for management .

the ochco plays a critical role in supporting and executing the department's "strategic plan for fiscal years 2014-2018. .

the chief human capital officer ( chco ) is the chief policy advisor on human resource management issues .

at dhs , the chco is a career senior executive service position .

the incumbent chco assumed the position on january 11 , 2016 .

during the 115 th congress , the house of representatives and the senate may conduct oversight of personnel issues at dhs .

among the matters that may be considered are those related to the statutory responsibilities for the chco position , the department's human capital strategy for recruitment , millennials and federal government employment , the organizational culture at dhs , and collaboration between the department and its components through the employee engagement steering committee .

each of these issues is briefly discussed below .

hearings conducted by the house of representatives and the senate related to dhs appropriations or management matters could include review of these issues .

each may , during public service recognition week , the value of public service is discussed and the work of public servants , including federal employees , is highlighted and honored .

this observance could provide an occasion for congress to annually review human resource management at the department , either through meetings with dhs officials and the chco or an oversight hearing .

such activities could supplement congressional review and oversight of the ochco and current and developing hrm policies at dhs , throughout the year .

[author name scrubbed] , analyst in american national government ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) .

title xiii , sec .

1302 ( the chief human capital officers act of 2002 ) of p.l .

107-296 , the homeland security act of 2002 , enacted on november 25 , 2002 , authorizes the position of chco in the cabinet departments and selected independent agencies .

the 114 th congress amended section 704 of the homeland security act to codify the responsibilities of the chco at dhs .

title xix , section 1904 of p.l .

114-328 , the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 2017 ( s. 2943 ) , enacted on december 23 , 2016 , specifies that the chief human capital officer reports directly to the under secretary for management .

the law provides that the department's chco has 10 responsibilities as follows: ( 1 ) develop and implement strategic workforce planning policies that are consistent with government - wide leading principles and in line with department strategic human capital goals and priorities , taking into account the special requirements of members of the armed forces serving in the coast guard ; ( 2 ) develop performance measures to provide a basis for monitoring and evaluating department - wide strategic workforce planning efforts ; ( 3 ) develop , improve , and implement policies , including compensation flexibilities available to federal agencies where appropriate , to recruit , hire , train , and retain the workforce of the department , in coordination with all components of the department ; ( 4 ) identify methods for managing and overseeing human capital programs and initiatives , in coordination with the head of each component of the department ; ( 5 ) develop a career path framework and create opportunities for leader development in coordination with all components of the department ; ( 6 ) lead the efforts of the department for managing employee resources , including training and development opportunities , in coordination with each component of the department ; ( 7 ) work to ensure the department is implementing human capital programs and initiatives and effectively educating each component of the department about these programs and initiatives ; ( 8 ) identify and eliminate unnecessary and duplicative human capital policies and guidance ; ( 9 ) provide input concerning the hiring and performance of the chief human capital officer or comparable official in each component of the department ; and ( 10 ) ensure that all employees of the department are informed of their rights and remedies under chapters 12 and 23 of title 5 , united states code .

under the law , each dhs component , in coordination with the department's chco , is directed to develop a five - year workforce strategy that will support dhs goals , objectives , and performance measures for determining the proper balance of federal employees and private labor resources .

in addition , the dhs secretary is directed to submit a report related to workforce strategies and staffing to the house committee on homeland security and the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs within 90 days after submitting the annual budget justification .

congress may be interested in examining the fulfillment of the chco's statutory responsibilities , including the policies and programs that are established , implemented , and evaluated to carry them out .

congress could also review the department's workforce strategies and staffing plans .

[author name scrubbed] , analyst in american national government ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) .

the responsibilities of the chco at dhs are centered around human capital planning .

according to the office of personnel management ( opm ) : human capital planning is the method by which an agency designs a coherent framework of human capital policies , programs , and practices to achieve a shared vision integrated with the agency's strategic plan .

implementation of the strategic human capital plan is a key step in an agency's progress to build a highly effective , performance - based organization by recruiting , acquiring , motivating , and rewarding a high - performing , top quality workforce .

the plan becomes the road map for continuous improvement and the framework for transforming the culture and operations of the agency .

an agency's recruitment strategy is part of its human capital strategic plan .

dhs's planning process for hiring new employees is reportedly underway .

recruitment will occur against the backdrop of a recently - expired government - wide hiring freeze and directives to hire a specified number of employees in u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) and u.s. customs and border patrol ( cpb ) .

a presidential memorandum issued by president donald trump on january 23 , 2017 , instituted a 90-day hiring freeze in executive agencies .

executive orders issued by president trump on january 25 , 2017 , directed cbp to hire 5,000 border patrol officers and ice to hire 10,000 immigration officers , subject to available appropriations , respectively .

in testimony provided to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs , subcommittee on regulatory affairs and federal management in september 2016 , the department's chco , angela bailey , stated that a "dhs strategic outreach and recruitment ( soar ) plan" had been prepared and is "focused on recruiting a highly qualified and diverse workforce. .

the testimony identified several of the department's mission critical occupations , including transportation security administration ( tsa ) officers ; cbp officers ; emergency management personnel at the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) ; budget , cost , internal control , and resource analysts ; and accountants .

congress may be interested in examining the implementation and impacts of the hiring freeze and follow - on hiring policies on dhs , including positions exempted from hiring restrictions ; the implementation of the executive order directives on hiring at ice and cbp ; and the department's recruitment strategy , especially as it relates to mission - critical occupations .

congress could also consider directing the department to include links to the relevant hrm policy documents on the ochco webpage to facilitate oversight .

[author name scrubbed] , analyst in american national government ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) .

millennials who are considering employment with the federal government may be especially interested in the dhs recruitment strategy .

congress conducted oversight on the issue of millennials and federal employment in 2016 .

the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs , subcommittee on regulatory affairs and federal management , for example , conducted a hearing titled understanding the millennial perspective in deciding to pursue and remain in federal employment on september 29 , 2016 .

the subcommittee chairman , senator james lankford , and the ranking member , senator heidi heitkamp , noted the retirement eligibility of a significant portion of the federal workforce over the next several years and the importance of recruiting and retaining "a new generation of federal employees. .

in his opening statement , senator lankford cited "the fact that many millennials believe government service is not a rewarding or fulfilling job" as an obstacle in hiring .

senator heitkamp's opening statement expressed her belief that "it is important for the federal government to connect with the millennial generation in a way that speaks to their needs and their desire to pursue mission - oriented careers , while also demonstrating all that a career in the federal government has to offer. .

stating that , "millennials are identified as a key demographic in our recruitment strategy," angela bailey , chco at dhs , provided testimony to the committee that millennials represent approximately 21% of the dhs workforce , compared to 18.68% across the federal government ; over 50% of millennials at dhs identify as a member of a diverse racial or ethnic group ; and some 36% of millennials at dhs are women .

she also stated that younger millennials under age 30 represent approximately 9% of the dhs workforce ( compared to 7% across the federal government ) ; 59% identify as a member of a diverse racial or ethnic group ; and 42% are women .

according to the chco , millennials are employed in mission - critical occupations across the department , and include more than 17,000 transportation security officers at tsa , almost 11,000 cbp officers and border patrol agents , and almost 300 emergency management personnel at fema .

during an interview with a federal news organization in early july 2016 , the chco said , with regard to recruitment: it is okay to have this in - and - out of government career .

we are really okay with the fact that in some ways , you become an ambassador for us .

if we at least create the best experience that we can , that you gain the most knowledge that can from this , and that you then take it to your private sector career.... we're not looking for 30-year - career employees .

we're actually looking for folks that want to come in , they want to get this excellent experience and then they take it to the private sector , and then they come back again .

dhs excellence in leadership ( del ) is an official , independent employee association at the department .

the organization's mission is "to foster 'unity of effort' through professional development and community engagement. .

the organization's webpage posts information on issues of interest to members , including federal employment of millennials .

congress may be interested in examining hrm policies and programs for millennials , including the recruitment strategy , recruitment and retention rates , and demographics for this workforce within the department and its components .

congress could also encourage the department to survey its millennial employees with regard to their experiences in working for dhs , perhaps in coordination with dhs excellence in leadership .

[author name scrubbed] , analyst in american national government ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) .

in june 2006 , then - dhs secretary michael chertoff "directed the homeland security advisory council ( hsac ) to establish a culture task force ( ctf ) to provide recommendations for creating , achieving and maintaining an empowering , energetic , dedicated , mission - focused culture within the department and within the spectrum of its state , tribal , local and private sector partners. .

the task force report , issued on january 23 , 2007 , included recommendations that it believed would assist the secretary and dhs leaders in creating and sustaining an organization "that leverages , focuses , strengthens and synergizes the multiple capabilities of its components and empowers them to continuously improve the department's operational capacities and the security of the nation. .

according to the report , "'culture' is about people relationships and inspirations , and how the people of the department view its leadership , the organization itself and its purposes , and the importance of one's individual role within the department. .

among the report's six recommendations were suggestions that the department ( 1 ) implement homeland security management and leadership models and ( 2 ) create leadership - empowered teamwork and a "blended culture. .

in making the first recommendation , the task force found that dhs should adopt two models: "a closed loop management model that sets the key relationships between strategic accountabilities , organizational units , performance expectations and management processes to achieve dhs goals" and "a leadership and training model , including 'joint duty and training' experience that will help all dhs leadership to focus collaboratively on key leadership expectations and objectives. .

with regard to the second recommendation , the task force found that "no single homeland security culture is possible or — for that matter — wise .

dhs must leverage its components' unique cultures to create organizational and operational capacities greater than is the sum of their parts. .

on september 19 , 2016 , then - dhs secretary jeh johnson and then deputy homeland security secretary alejandro mayorkas issued a fact sheet titled , "changing the culture at dhs. .

the document stated that the dhs officials "have made employee engagement and morale one of their highest priorities and have taken action to create an engagement - supportive culture across dhs. .

the document affirmed policies and listed action steps in five areas related to departmental management: ( 1 ) active involvement of a strong employee engagement steering committee ( eesc ) ; ( 2 ) recognizing and rewarding excellence in pursuit of mission ; ( 3 ) enhancing communication ; ( 4 ) increasing leadership accountability , awareness , and empowerment related to employee engagement ; and ( 5 ) increasing transparency and fairness in the hiring and promotion process .

congress may be interested in reviewing the department's initiatives related to organizational culture , employee engagement , and the implementation and results of the culture task force report recommendations and the fact sheet on changing the culture of dhs .

congress could also examine coordination between the department's strategies related to organizational culture and the "unity of effort" initiative and dhs implementation of any policies on joint duty assignments for employee development .

[author name scrubbed] , analyst in american national government ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) .

in december 2016 , the homeland security and defense business council and its member company , grant thornton , released the second survey of its five - year 20 / 20 project on the homeland security enterprise ( hse ) .

according to the document , "the overall project aims to capture perspectives from government and industry executives engaged in homeland security missions on critical challenges and future opportunities facing [dhs] and the broader interagency and public - private partnership that is the [hse]. .

the survey identified interagency collaboration as an example of an excellent management practice that "exist[s] across dhs that should be acknowledged , examined , and replicated. .

within the department , the eesc has a central role in coordinating interagency collaboration among dhs components that work together "on common dhs - wide programs" and implement "customized initiatives reflecting their particular needs and cultures. .

the under secretary for management chairs the committee , which is made up of leaders from the department's operational components .

the leaders are to "advise dhs leadership on their perspectives for department - wide approaches," share "best practices and brainstorming ideas" and report "on what is working and what needs to be improved. .

during an april 27 , 2016 , hearing conducted by the house committee on oversight and government reform , subcommittee on government operations , the dhs chco , angela bailey , provided testimony that the steering committee's input had informed a new employee action engagement plan applicable department - wide .

she said that the action plan focuses on "selecting and empowering high performing leaders , developing excellent leaders at all levels , and enhancing communication. .

with regard to the communication focus , a dhs report explained that this referred to "two - way communication and inclusion utilizing labor management forums , diversity and inclusion councils , and ideation platforms. .

congress may be interested in examining the department's existing policies and planned initiatives related to collaboration between dhs and its components and the operation and activities of the eesc .

congress could also direct the department to publish a link to the employee engagement action plan , and any other related hrm policy documents , on the ochco's webpage .

