the apt t - x acquisition strategy poses potential oversight issues for congress .

the addition of a new major defense acquisition program as the air force continues to purchase f - 35as and kc - 46s and develop the new long range strike bomber , b - 21 , will affect the usaf budget requests going forward , and the t - x contract award has already been delayed several times in light of budget issues .

specific to the apt t - x acquisition , congress may wish to consider the correct number of trainer aircraft and ground - based training systems along with timing of their procurement and fielding .

dod's apt t - x acquisition strategy poses a number of questions for congress , including the following: given the usaf's position on the looming pilot shortage , the anticipated purchase of 350 t - x aircraft , and the current fleet size of 430 , what are the minimum and optimum recapitalization levels needed ? .

should the number of new aircraft increase , would a corresponding increase in gbts be appropriate ? .

is there an opportunity to consolidate the usaf's five pilot training locations into fewer bases ? .

is a study warranted at this time to further consolidate pilot training ? .

given the ramp - up in f - 35a purchases , additional kc - 46 lots , and development of the b - 21 bomber , what is the impact of a fourth major defense acquisition program to the usaf budget ? .

should the training fleet be recapitalized sooner to accommodate the increase in the number of fifth - generation platforms ? .

what , if any , acquisition reform initiatives need to be in place to facilitate faster procurement of the t - x ? .

should the usaf consider the selected t - x platform , with modification , as a light - attack fighter to take advantage of the fifth - generation capabilities required in the t - x system ? .

considering that the winning bid was less than 50% of the air force's projected cost , can boeing execute the program on time and within budget ? .

appendix a .

air force pilot training how does the usaf produce pilots ? .

the usaf uses a deliberate , competitive process to select pilot candidates .

once chosen , candidates undergo a lengthy academic and flight training program .

pilot candidate selection the usaf pilot selection process begins with a battery of academic and psychomotor tests ; candidates must also meet flight physical requirements and anthropometric standards .

the usaf uses a pilot candidate selection method ( pcsm ) tool to predict the ability of a prospective candidate to complete pilot training .

the pcsm score is a combination of performance on the test of basic aviation skills ( tbas ) and air force officer qualifying test ( afoqt ) and the total number of flying hours the candidate has already accumulated from civilian flight training .

a pilot selection board , composed of senior usaf aviators , uses the pcsm score along with other whole - person concept factors to select candidate pilots .

according to some researchers , higher scores on the pcsm may predict greater probability of successfully completing training ; reduced flight hours needed to complete training ; a higher class rank ; and greater likelihood of being fighter aircraft qualified .

the tbas is a computerized psychomotor test to measure a candidate's motor skills , cognitive aptitude , and attitude toward risk .

the candidate manipulates a joystick , throttle , and rudder pedals to accomplish tasks to measure directional orientation , listening skills , horizontal tracking , aircraft tracking , and combining all actions at once .

the afoqt is a standardized test similar to the scholastic aptitude test .

it measures applicants' aptitudes for various officer commissioning programs and includes a specific portion dedicated to measuring aptitude for pilot and combat systems officer career fields .

regardless of the desired field , the afoqt is mandatory for application for a commission in the usaf .

the afoqt has been used for officer selection since 1957 and has been updated about every seven years .

the pilot composite , another test for pilot selection , measures a candidate's knowledge of aviation and mechanical systems , his or her ability to determine aircraft attitude from a flight instrument graphic , his or her spatial ability and knowledge of aeronautical concepts , and his or her ability to interpret and read tables and scales .

flight training pilot candidates enter flight training by attending the introductory flight training ( ift ) course .

ift is a civilian flight instructor - led program administered in pueblo , co .

the course provides a pilot candidate the opportunity to complete flight ground school and a 25-flight - hour screening program .

doss aviation administers the ift program for the usaf .

ift prepares usaf students to enter specialized undergraduate pilot training ( supt ) , undergraduate combat systems officer training , or undergraduate remotely piloted aircraft pilot training .

according to doss aviation , the two primary objects of ift are to provide the air force an opportunity to screen aviation candidates prior to undergraduate flight training attendance ; and begin the development of the student's aviation skills in order to enhance his / her ability to succeed in undergraduate flight training .

doss aviation operates diamond da20-c1 aircraft ( see figure a - 1 ) to execute the ift program .

following ift , student pilots attend either the euro - nato joint jet pilot training ( enjjpt ) program or the specialized undergraduate pilot training ( supt ) program .

enjjpt is located at sheppard afb , texas , and is a three - phase , 55-week training program taught by usaf and euro - nato country instructor pilots .

upon graduation , the new pilots will attend follow - on training on their assigned aircraft at various bases around the country .

there are eight enjjpt classes per year with six - week entry / graduation cycles .

each enjjpt class has 20-25 students .

pilots selected to fly fighter aircraft attend the introduction to fighter fundamentals ( iff ) course at sheppard afb , texas .

there are 15 enjjpt iff classes per year , and the course lasts approximately eight weeks .

following iff , the pilots transition to training on their assigned aircraft at bases throughout the united states , depending on aircraft assignment .

table a - 1 identifies the respective aircraft and training base .

supt is a joint usaf and usn pilot training program conducted at vance afb , oklahoma , and naval air station whiting field , florida .

the program lasts approximately 54 weeks .

upon graduation , the new pilots attend follow - on training in their assigned aircraft at bases throughout the united states , known as formal training units ( ftus ) .

there are 15 supt courses per year at each supt base .

a class enters and graduates supt every eight weeks .

supt classes are typically 8-10 student pilots .

usaf and usn students complete primary flight training on the t - 6 aircraft .

some usaf students complete their primary flight training at columbus afb , mississippi , or laughlin afb , texas , flying the t - 6 .

following primary flight training , students assigned to the fighter / bomber track will go on to train on the t - 38 , concentrating on low - level tactics , instrument procedures , formation flying , and navigation training .

pilots selected for airlift and tanker aircraft complete their advanced training on the t - 1a at columbus afb , mississippi ; laughlin afb , texas ; or vance afb , oklahoma .

airlift and tanker pilots are introduced to crew resource management techniques , air - to - air refueling , airdrop missions , and radar positioning and navigation .

students selected to fly multiengine turboprop aircraft train on the navy's t - 44 or air force's c - 12 turboprop trainers at naval air station corpus christi , texas , and are introduced to c - 130 training mission profiles .

very few students are selected to fly helicopters ; however , their advanced training is conducted at fort rucker , al , in the uh - 1 huey .

table a - 2 identifies the respective airlift , tanker , and helicopter training bases .

supt graduates assigned to a fighter / bomber aircraft attend iff at randolph afb , texas , or columbus afb , mississippi .

there are 12 iff courses per year with a four - week entry / graduation cycle .

in addition to academic classes and flight instruction , students are also required to train in aircraft simulators to apply learned techniques and to be prepared for the cockpit .

experts agree that simulators provide a cost - effective means of instruction to help reduce the burden and cost of aircraft operations and maintenance .

also , simulators allow instructors to introduce a variety of emergency conditions that pilots may confront during flight operations in a safe and controlled environment .

the emergency simulations are critical to enhance the student pilot's awareness and skills in preparation for encountering similar emergencies in flight .

advancements in pilot training a 1996 usaf research project demonstrated that advancements in aircrew training methods and technologies allow ground - based pilot training to move beyond training procedural skills to training wartime mission skills .

as training resources become scarce , analysts agree that more realistic and advanced synthetic training environments have evolved to support more complex training requirements .

one of the major advancements is the ability to link a variety of training simulators , constructive models , and live aircraft in a wide area network to accomplish mission training .

according to usaf researchers , modeling and simulation increase scope and realism of warfighter training at an affordable cost .

simulator networking allows construction of large confederations of disparate simulators which permit multiservice and allied country joint combined training in a variety of military mission sets .

in addition , simulated combat environments provide instructional advantages , such as avoiding range constraints like electronic warfare restrictions and enabling real - time kill removal during an air battle .

one major consideration in using simulators for aircrew training is spatial awareness development .

spatial awareness is the ability to comprehend the spatial parameters of an air - combat or flight - training mission .

the challenge lies in the difficulty the pilot has mentally visualizing a three - dimensional ( 3-d ) environment while using two - dimensional displays .

technology has advanced to supply more realistic 3-d views through virtual reality , allowing pilot trainees to experience spatial situations in a computer - generated virtual battlespace .

spatial cognition trainers augment academic instruction by allowing the trainee to practice visualization skills that mimic in - flight spatial problem - solving situations .

past aircrew training relied heavily on actual aircraft flight training to provide realistic mission training .

aircraft training devices were used to prepare the aircrews to use limited flying hours effectively .

the increase in training requirements due to fourth - and fifth - generation fighter aircraft , coupled with the high cost of flight hours , reduced both the quality and quantity of available aircrew training .

usaf analysts agree that the advent of distributed mission training ( dmt ) and advanced distributed simulation technology can significantly improve aircrew training .

dmt allows multiplayer , multisite training scenarios from individual and team participation to full - theater battles .

usaf analysts believe that expanding on - demand , realistic training opportunities will significantly improve aircrew training and help overcome limited training resources .

according to the usaf , the planned t - x program includes state - of - the - art ground - based training system ( gbts ) requirements to take full advantage of the advancements in pilot modeling and simulation training .

according to a defense media network article , the cost to train a usaf fighter pilot is $2.6 million and the cost to train an airlift pilot is $600,000 .

usaf analysts argue that the increased use of simulators is a cost - saving imperative .

simulator use reduces flight - hour costs , airframe flight hours , and maintenance .

aetc commented that current air force live flight / simulator training balance varies from pipeline to pipeline .

primary training that all usaf pilots go through in the t - 6 texan ii demonstrates the current emphasis on live flight .

the division between live flight and simulation events is 65 percent / 35 percent .

that equates to about 87 hours in the aircraft and 46 hours in the simulator .

for the airlift / mobility pipeline where students fly the t - 1 jayhawk , the current balance is similar , 71 percent of events occurring in the aircraft and 29 percent in the simulator .

this will shortly change , however .

the usaf is working its way through a "tech refresh" of its t - 1 simulation devices , which will grow significantly in capability .

with t - 1 flight training total time scheduled to drop to 130 hours , the pipeline will move toward a 60 / 40 percent live flight / simulator split by 2013 .

this represents 76.5 hours of aircraft time and 53.5 hours of simulator time .

as the air force's upgrade to the th - 1h iroquois helicopter with its new engine and glass cockpit progresses , the live flight / simulator balance for rotary - wing students will go from 77 percent / 23 percent to 74 percent / 26 percent .

the fighter - bomber track sees students in the venerable t - 38c talon 71 percent of the time , comprising 96 hours , and in the simulator 29 percent of the time or 39 hours .

according to aetc , all flying training programs have seen a drop in flight times of approximately 15% and a move to integrate more simulator time .

however , the usaf maintains that although simulation is complementary to live flight across all training programs , this is not true for new pilots .

undergraduate pilot training is biased to live flight training to ensure the student pilot experiences enough live flight that he or she can appreciate what occurs in simulation .

analysts agree that simulators can help reduce the costs of pilot training ; however , the extent of the reduction is unknown .

according to financial analysts , the global flight simulator market , both military and commercial , is expected to grow 4.5% by 2022 as a result of the need to cut costs associated with pilot training while ensuring aviation safety .

high - fidelity full - motion simulators are very expensive and require energy , maintenance , and personnel to operate and maintain .

the initial cost of the system along with continuous maintenance , upgrades , and operation costs must be considered in making comparisons to live flight operations .

analysts have yet to define all the variables that go into calculating costs associated with simulator versus live flight training costs .

the navy is also planning to progressively boost simulator fidelity to improve full - immersion mission experience for its pilots and sensor operators .

the navy's aviation simulation master plan for 2020 "is designed to cautiously and progressively increase the amount of cost - saving virtual training while maintaining enough in - aircraft practice to ensure safety. .

according to aviation week reporting , the government accountability office ( gao ) has reported that the navy as of 2012 was using simulators for 18-20% of boeing f / a - 18 hornet training , 39% of romeo training and 41% for sikorsky mh - 60 sierra training .

the navy uses the romeo primarily for anti - submarine warfare and anti - surface warfare missions , while the sierra is used primarily for search and rescue , medevac , utility and vertical replenishment missions .

with upgraded mh - 60 romeo and sierra , f / a - 18e and f , and ea - 18g tofts [tactical operational flight trainer] , however , the navy estimates it will be able to boost the virtual training ratio to approximately 50% for the mh - 60 fleet , and more than 30% for the f - 18s by 2020 .

capt .

craig dorrans , program manager of pma - 205 at the naval air systems command says crews for the boeing p - 8a poseidon , the replacement for the p - 3 , will probably be able to perform as much as 70% of their training in a toft .

the p - 8a is based on the boeing 737-800 , allowing the military to leverage commercial simulation capabilities already developed .

training for fire scout pilots is already moving to 100% synthetic training .

"we're looking at 100% simulation to train aircrew for the fire scout and mq - 4 triton," dorrans says .

"the cockpit is already separated from the aircraft .

everything that you see on the ground in the cockpit , you can simulate. .

appendix b .

prior legislative activity fy2018 funding request the fy2018 administration budget request included $105.999 million for the advanced pilot training program .

congress authorized the full amount in the fy2018 national defense authorization act ( h.r .

2810 ) .

in division c of the fy2018 consolidated omnibus appropriations act ( h.r .

1625 ) , congress appropriated the advanced pilot training program $86.199 million , a reduction of $19.8 million , citing "contract award delay. .

fy2017 funding request the administration's proposed fy2017 defense budget requested $12.377 million in air force research and development funding to continue apt t - x development and acquisition .

table 2 represents the usaf's portion of the future years defense program ( fydp ) submission dedicated to the t - x and the $12.377 million requested budget for fy2017 .

fy2017 defense authorization act ( h.r .

4909 / s. 2943 ) the administration's fy2017 budget request included $12.377 million for the advanced pilot training program .

house the house armed services committee , in its report accompanying h.r .

4909 , recommended funding the advanced pilot training program at $12.377 million , the requested level .

senate the senate armed services committee , in its report accompanying s. 2943 , recommended funding the advanced pilot training program at $4.477 million , $7.9 million below the requested level , finding that the funds were early to need given the current contract award schedule .

final action the conference report accompanying h.r .

4909 , as passed , recommended $7.377 million , a reduction of $5 million from the administration's request , finding the funds were early to need .

fy2017 appropriations division c of the fy2017 consolidated appropriations act ( h.r .

244 ) appropriated $7.377 million for the advanced pilot training program , reducing the requested amount by $5.0 million as "early to need. .

fy2016 funding request the administration's fy2016 defense budget request included $11.395 million in air force research and development funding to continue apt t - x development and acquisition .

fy2016 defense authorization act ( h.r .

1735 / s. 1376 ) the house armed services committee and senate armed services committee both recommended funding the advanced pilot training program at $11.395 million , the requested level .

fy2016 defense appropriations act ( h.r .

2685 / s. 1558 ) the house appropriations committee recommended funding the advanced pilot training program at $10.395 million , a reduction of $1 million from the administration's request , with no accompanying language .

the senate appropriations committee recommended funding the advanced pilot training program at the administration's request , $11.395 million .

h.rept .

114-139 accompanying h.r .

2685 funded the advance pilot training program at $10.395 million , a reduction of $1 million from the administration's request .

fy2015 defense authorization and appropriations ( h.r .

4870 ) h.rept .

113-473 and s.rept .

113-211 accompanying h.r .

4870 funded the advance pilot training program at $8.201 million , the administration's requested level .

fy2015 was the first year of funding to execute the program .

appendix c. apt capability gap summary appendix d. system specification for the advanced pilot training program aircraft syste .

