the size and scope of the federal workforce , along with the rights and responsibilities of federal agencies and their employees , has been the subject of various legislative proposals from congress in recent years , and has also been an issue of focus for the trump administration .

a major topic of interest concerns statutory limits on when federal employees can be removed or demoted for cause or performance - related issues .

the current legal framework governing removal or demotion of federal employees originates from efforts to reform the nation's earlier "patronage" system for filling positions in the federal government .

under the "spoils system" that existed in the first century of the republic , many federal government jobs were filled based upon "political contributions rather than capabilities or competence. .

eventually , "strong discontent with the corruption and inefficiency of the patronage system of public employment" resulted in the passage of the pendleton act in 1883 , which served as the "foundation of [the] modern civil service" and required that federal employees within the civil service be hired based on merit .

a number of subsequent laws have further reformed the civil service system , although the modern framework governing the rights of most federal workers is the civil service reform act of 1978 ( csra or act ) , as amended .

the csra "was designed to replace an 'outdated patchwork of statutes and rules' that afforded employees the right to challenge employing agency actions in district courts across the country. .

this patchwork had resulted in "wide variations" within different federal courts regarding the rights of federal employees .

against this backdrop , the csra created "a comprehensive system for reviewing personnel action taken against federal employees. .

it established "an integrated scheme of administrative and judicial review , designed to balance the legitimate interests of the various categories of federal employees with the needs of sound and efficient administration. .

the act provides a variety of legal protections for federal employees , authorizes challenges to agency decisions , and funnels review of those challenges to the merit systems protection board ( mspb or board ) , whose decisions are exclusively subject to review by the united states court of appeals for the federal circuit ( federal circuit ) .

among other things , the csra establishes a statutory framework , codified in title 5 of the u.s. code , regulating specific actions taken by agencies against certain federal employees , including removal , demotion , and suspension .

this report focuses on certain legal issues arising under a prominent type of action taken against federal employees — major adverse actions based on employee misconduct under chapter 75 of title 5's provisions .

however , another important type of action taken by agencies against employees — performance - based actions under chapters 75 and 43 — is beyond the scope of this report .

moreover , this report primarily focuses on the crsa's applicability to the competitive service .

the requirements pertaining to senior executive service ( ses ) members are thus only discussed briefly .

likewise , certain categories of employees at particular agencies that are exempt from the csra's requirements are largely excluded from discussion in the report .

the report begins with a brief examination of an important principle that informs and supplements protections for federal workers — the constitutional protections afforded civil service employees by the due process clause .

these constitutional considerations not only inform the interpretation and application of the existing statutory rules governing adverse actions against federal employees , but may also establish baseline parameters for policymakers' consideration of proposals to modify the removal and demotion processes authorized under current law .

the due process clause of the fifth amendment requires the federal government to observe certain procedures when depriving individuals of life , liberty , or property .

in addition to protecting against the deprivation of an individual's physical property , the constitution also guards against the deprivation of certain "property interests" without due process .

the property interests protected by the due process clause are not themselves created by the constitution ; instead , those interests arise from an independent source , such as state or federal law .

the csra contains an initial categorization of who counts as a federal employee and which particular employees are covered under its various procedural protections .

these classifications are important because , among other things , the csra functions as the "comprehensive" legal framework governing certain type of actions taken by agencies against employees .

as such , potential claims of certain federal workers not covered by particular provisions of the csra may be precluded because of the comprehensive scope of the csra .

the statute defines the civil service generally as "all appointive positions in the executive , judicial , and legislative branches of the government of the united states" except for the armed forces and the uniformed forces .

it further categorizes civil service federal government employees into three groups: ses employees , competitive service employees , and excepted service employees .

ses employees are high - level positions in the federal government above the grade of general schedule 15 .

career ses members are selected according to a merit - based system , and they operate functionally as a link , through successive presidential administrations , between career staff and the political appointees who head federal executive agencies .

the csra's requirements for ses employees , including hiring and performance reviews , are distinct from those of competitive service and excepted service employees and are beyond the scope of this report .

in general , federal civil service employees are in the competitive service .

the competitive service generally covers all civil service positions within the executive branch except those that are ( 1 ) ses positions ; ( 2 ) filled via appointment by the president following senate confirmation ; or ( 3 ) excepted from the competitive service via statute .

by statute , certain positions not in the executive branch and positions in the government of the district of columbia may be specifically included in the competitive service .

finally , excepted service employees are civil service employees who are not in the ses or the competitive service categories .

the primary procedural protections under the csra for agency actions taken against employees for misconduct are contained in chapter 75 of title 5 .

subchapter ii of chapter 75 provides various procedural protections for certain government employees subjected to "major adverse actions. .

those adverse actions include removals , suspensions for more than 14 days , reductions in grade or pay , and furloughs of 30 days or less .

agencies may only take a major adverse action against an employee "for such cause as will promote the efficiency of the service. .

the federal circuit has interpreted "efficiency of the service" to involve consideration of "the work of the agency," "the agency's performance of its functions," and "the employee's job responsibilities. .

the circumstances in which federal employees may be removed from service are thus determined by a variety of legal considerations .

the rights of federal employees are protected by both statutory and constitutional requirements .

through the csra , congress has provided certain procedural protections to a number of civil servants , delineating the conditions under which agencies may take adverse actions against federal employees .

in the context of adverse actions for misconduct , for example , agencies may only take actions "for such cause as will promote the efficiency of the service" and must abide by various procedural provisions that ensure employees have a sufficient opportunity to defend themselves .

because congress has bestowed these statutory protections on the federal workforce , certain employees have a property interest in continued employment that cannot be taken away without due process .

those constitutional protections thus inform the interpretation of statutory rules regarding adverse actions against federal employees , as well as establish a baseline of protections that may inform consideration of proposals to modify the process of removing federal employees .

attention to all of these issues may occur if and when lawmakers consider amending the civil service laws .

