on may 8 , 2017 , sinclair broadcast group inc. announced that it agreed to acquire the tribune media company for $6.6 billion .

the transaction , if approved by shareholders and the u.s. government , would make sinclair the nation's largest television broadcast company , giving it access to a far larger share of u.s. households than any other television broadcaster .

the extent of the combined company's reach is a matter of dispute because , in addition to owning television stations , sinclair is a party to numerous agreements to share services with other station owners in markets where sinclair owns stations , as well as in two markets where it does not own stations .

in evaluating the proposed transaction , federal authorities are likely to consider whether these shared services agreements might give sinclair undue power over the rates charged television advertisers , the flow of information to television viewers , and the fees paid by cable and direct broadcast satellite companies to retransmit programming to their subscribers .

this report provides background on the market structure and economic situation of the u.s. television industry .

it then discusses the specific matters the federal communications commission ( fcc ) and the antitrust division of the u.s. department of justice ( doj ) must examine in reviewing sinclair's proposal to purchase tribune .

this report includes maps showing the television markets affected by the proposed transaction , detailed information about joint agreements to which sinclair and tribune are parties , and a chronology of key fcc actions related to broadcast station ownership that set the stage for sinclair's acquisition offer .

sinclair broadcast group is currently one of the largest broadcast television groups in the united states .

sinclair reported more than $2.7 billion in total revenues in 2016 .

as of june 2017 , sinclair owned and / or operated 173 television stations in 81 local television markets .

in addition , sinclair owns four radio stations , two broadcast networks ( tbd and comet ) , and the tennis channel cable network .

sinclair is also the largest producer of local news in the country .

for example , sinclair's connect to congress initiative provides sinclair's local television news anchors the ability to interview members of congress remotely via sinclair's news bureau in washington , dc .

on june 30 , 2017 , the fcc's media bureau , acting under delegated authority from chairman ajit pai , approved sinclair's acquisition of 14 stations in eight television markets from bonten media group .

as part of the transaction , sinclair agreed to take over five agreements under which bonten shares services with four stations it does not own .

as of the publication date of this report , the bonten transaction was awaiting approval of federal antitrust authorities .

if it is completed without divestitures , sinclair would own 187 television broadcast stations in 89 local markets , and would be a party to 60 shared services agreements with stations it does not own .

tribune media owns or operates 42 broadcast television stations , the cable network wgn america , the radio station wgn ( am ) in chicago , and los angeles - based tribune studios , which produces original programming for tribune's stations and cable network .

in august 2014 , tribune media spun off its publishing business , including several daily newspapers , into a separate company .

broadcast television stations such as those owned by sinclair and tribune have two primary sources of revenue .

they sell advertising , charging rates based on the number and type of viewers who watch their programs .

they also may charge cable and satellite operators — together referred to in statute as multichannel video program distributors ( mvpds ) — for the right to retransmit the stations' signals to the operators' subscribers .

the research firm kagan estimates that in 2016 , u.s. broadcast stations collectively earned about $30.6 billion in revenues , with 67% coming from advertising and 26% from retransmission consent .

television broadcasters are part of a complex television industry ecosystem ( see figure 1 ) in which the various participants may simultaneously be competitors , suppliers , customers , and business partners .

many television broadcasters have sought greater scale through mergers , acquisitions , and joint agreements , as greater scale may provide leverage in dealing with other industry participants .

for example stations sell air time to both local and national advertisers .

in the local market , control of multiple stations may enable a broadcaster to command higher advertising rates than competitors .

in the national market , a firm owning stations in many local markets may be better positioned to bargain with large advertisers such as automobile manufacturers and retail chains .

stations may purchase rights to programming from television and movie studios and sports leagues .

a firm owning many stations may have greater bargaining power with respect to program owners than a firm with few stations .

consolidation among mvpds has left a relatively small number of cable and satellite operators serving customers nationwide .

this has encouraged consolidation among broadcasters , who fear that the mvpds' greater size will allow them to bargain for lower retransmission consent fees .

for example , during retransmission consent negotiations with dish , a satellite operator , in august 2015 sinclair briefly withheld permission for dish to retransmit its broadcast signals in 79 different markets in 36 states and washington , dc .

for dish , losing access to sinclair's stations risked putting it at a disadvantage against competing cable and satellite operators that were able to retransmit sinclair's programming during the blackout .

at the same time , television broadcasters are facing an erosion of their markets as increasing numbers of viewers watch video programming through online video subscription services such as netflix , hulu , or amazon prime , rather than subscribing to mvpds or receiving stations' broadcasts over the air .

this potential loss of viewership affects broadcast television stations' advertising revenue , which is based on the number of and demographics of people viewing the stations' programming , and retransmission consent revenue , which is partly based on the number of each mvpd's subscribers .

both an antitrust agency ( either doj or the federal trade commission ) and the fcc must approve sinclair's purchase of tribune media before it can close .

although neither antitrust agency has publicly announced its role , reports indicate that doj is reviewing the transaction .

in reviewing the proposed sinclair - tribune media transaction , the fcc is to examine whether it is consistent with the commission's local media ownership rules .

the fcc has distinct sets of rules governing ownership of multiple media outlets in a single market .

these include , but are not limited to , ( 1 ) local radio ownership rules ; ( 2 ) radio / television cross - ownership rules ; and ( 3 ) local television ownership rules ( known as the television duopoly rules ) .

the purpose of the local media ownership rules is to promote diversity , localism , and competition by restricting the number of media outlets that a single entity may own or control within a geographic market .

the u.s. supreme court has supported diversity as a public interest goal , affirming that "the widest possible dissemination of information from diverse and antagonistic sources is essential to the welfare of the public" and "assuring that the public has access to a multiplicity of information sources is a governmental purpose of the highest order , for it promotes values central to the first amendment. .

localism addresses whether broadcast stations are responsive to the needs and interests of their communities .

in evaluating the extent of competition , the fcc considers whether stations have adequate commercial incentives to invest in diverse news and public affairs programming tailored to serve viewers within their communities .

this differs from the competition analysis conducted by antitrust authorities , which primarily considers the prices stations charge advertisers to air commercials during programming , and , in the case of television stations , the prices they charge cable and satellite operators for the retransmission of broadcast programming .

section 202 ( h ) of the telecommunications act of 1996 directs the fcc to review its media ownership rules every four years to determine whether they are "necessary in the public interest as a result of competition," and to "repeal or modify any regulation it determines to be no longer in the public interest. .

section 257 ( b ) of the act directs the fcc to promote policies favoring the diversity of media voices and vigorous economic competition .

many owners of commercial broadcast stations have relationships that fall short of the fcc's definition of common ownership , yet allow the owner of one station to exert substantial influence over the operation and finances of another station .

to minimize such behavior , the fcc has developed attribution rules "to identify those interests in or relationships to licensees that confer a degree of influence or control such that the holders have a realistic potential to affect the programming decisions of licensees or other core operating functions. .

in addition to the local media ownership rules that limit the ability of one company to own multiple media outlets within a dma , the fcc has national media ownership rules that limit the ability of one company to own multiple broadcast stations throughout the united states .

as discussed in " communications law concerns ," when reviewing mergers , the fcc counts as benefits several broad aims of the communications laws , including ensuring a diversity of information sources and services to the public .

in addition , among the fcc's general policy goals is the promotion of localism — that is , the responsiveness of broadcast stations to the needs and interests of their communities .

among the merger - specific benefits sinclair presents to the fcc in its application , sinclair states that the transaction would enable it to invest in and increase the amount of local news programming aired on the stations it would acquire .

in reviewing the merger , the fcc might consider whether the number of stations sinclair would own and / or operate both within local markets and nationwide would promote the fcc's goals of localism and diversity .

critics of broadcast licensees that own and / or operate multiple broadcast television stations within a market state that the newscasts on these stations are composed of the same news stories airing on different stations .

therefore , they maintain , such arrangements do not promote the fcc's public policy goals of promoting diverse sources of news information .

broadcasters , however , claim that such arrangements enable stations to air news programming that they could not afford to produce on their own , thereby increasing the total amount of local news available in communities .

reports indicate that sinclair has an internal corporate policy of requiring its stations throughout the country to air centrally produced video segments known as "must runs. .

critics claim that this practice inhibits stations' ability to air news programming that is responsive to the needs and interests of their local communities .

others counter that sinclair's practice is routine , and that its national presence offers a countervailing point of view to other national media outlets .

the ability of broadcast television stations to produce and distribute local news sets them apart from other electronic media , such as online video distributors , national television networks , and mvpds .

thus , in addition to the traditional competition analysis that both the doj and fcc are to undertake when reviewing the sinclair - tribune merger , the potential scale and scope of sinclair's news operations post - merger will require a public interest review by the fcc .

moreover , the timing of the fcc's review of its media ownership and attribution rules will have a large impact on what conditions , if any , the agency might impose on sinclair in order to complete the transaction .

