the federal government spends more than $80 billion each year on information technology ( it ) investments ; in fy2017 that investment is expected to increase to more than $89 billion .

the government accountability office ( gao ) has found that , historically , the projects supported by these investments have often incurred "multi - million dollar cost overruns and years - long schedule delays. .

in addition , they may contribute little to mission - related outcomes and , in some cases , may fail altogether .

these undesirable results , according to gao , "can be traced to a lack of disciplined and effective management and inadequate executive - level oversight. .

the federal information technology acquisition reform act ( fitara ) was enacted on december 19 , 2014 , to address these issues and codify existing initiatives managed by the federal chief information officer ( cio ) .

fitara outlines seven areas of reform that affect how federal agencies purchase and manage their information technology ( it ) assets , including the following: enhancing the authority of agency cios ; improving transparency and risk management of it investments ; setting forth a process for agency it portfolio review ; refocusing the federal data center consolidation initiative ( fdcci ) from only consolidation to optimization ; expanding the training and use of "it cadres," as initially outlined in the "25 point implementation plan to reform federal information management technology" ; maximizing the benefits of the federal strategic sourcing initiative ( fssi ) ; and creating a govemment - wide software purchasing program , in conjunction with the general services administration .

among other provisions , fitara codified elements of existing federal cio initiatives .

in addition , fitara requires the federal cio , in conjunction with federal agencies , to refocus the federal data center consolidation initiative ( fdcci ) from consolidation to optimization , to include adoption of cloud services ; set forth a process for agency it portfolio review and oversight ; improve transparency and risk management of it investments ; identify and publish cost savings and optimization improvements ; provide public updates on cumulative cost savings and optimization improvements ; and review agencies' data center inventories and management strategies .

fitara requires federal agencies to submit annual reports that include comprehensive data center inventories , multiyear strategies to consolidate and optimize data centers , performance metrics and a time line for agency action , and yearly calculations of investment and cost savings related to fitara implementation .

on june 10 , 2015 , omb published guidance to implement the requirements of fitara and harmonize existing policy and guidance with the new law .

among other goals , the requirements are intended to assist agencies in establishing management practices that align it resources with agency missions , goals , programmatic priorities , and statutory requirements ; establish government - wide it management controls that will meet fitara requirements while providing agencies with the flexibility to adapt to agency processes and unique mission requirements ; establish universal roles , responsibilities , and authorities of the agency cio and other senior agency officials ; strengthen the agency cio's accountability for the agency's it costs , schedules , performance , and security ; strengthen the relationship between agency and bureau cios ; establish consistent government - wide interpretation of fitara terms and requirements ; and provide appropriate visibility and involvement of the agency cio in the management and oversight of it resources to support the implementation of effective cybersecurity policies .

in addition to implementing fitara , the guidance also harmonizes the requirements of fitara with existing law , primarily the clinger - cohen act of 1996 and the e - government act of 2002 .

those laws require omb to issue management guidance for information technology and electronic government activities across the government , respectively .

fitara also contains provisions that required omb interpretation before implementation .

fitara provided the framework to refine existing cio initiatives , mainly the data center optimization initiative , the cloud first policy , the it dashboard , and portfolio review .

through hearings and gao investigations , congress has been active in monitoring the activities of the federal cio and the initiatives carried out by the office .

congress has been especially attentive to the topics of data center use and cloud adoption as they relate to achieving the goals of fitara .

on may 23 , 2018 , the "fitara scorecard 6.0" was issued at a house hearing ( figure 4 ) .

the sixth scorecard continues to grade agencies implementation of fitara and the making electronic government accountable by yielding tangible efficiencies act of 2016 ( megabyte ) .

this scorecard includes new areas required by the modernizing government technology ( mgt ) act and the federal information security modernization act of 2014 ( fisma ) .

since the prior scorecard in november 2017 , 5 agencies increased their letter grade , 8 remained the same , and 11 decreased .

most of the decreases are due to a change in the grading methodology .

in particular , the overall grade of nine agencies was lowered because the associated cio does not report to the head of the agency .

the addition of the mgt requirements also had a negative impact on several agencies and three agencies' grades were lower because of both .

the scorecard noted , for example , that in the absence of the methodology changes , hhs would have raised its grade from a d to an a ; however , their grade only increased to a c due to the downward impact of the mgt and cio reporting changes .

overall , in the absence of changes to the methodology , there would have been three as and five bs .

at the may 23 , 2018 , hearing by the house committee on oversight and government reform , "the federal information technology reform act scorecard 6.0," david powner , director of information technology management issues at gao , cited five areas where significant actions remain to be completed: consolidating data centers , cio responsibilities , it contract approval , managing software licenses , and improving the security of federal it systems .

omb launched an initiative in 2010 to reduce the number of federal data centers , which was codified and expanded in fitara .

according to agencies , data center consolidation and optimization efforts have resulted in approximately $3.9 billion of cost savings through 2018 .

even so , additional work remains .

gao has made 160 recommendations to omb and agencies to improve the reporting of related cost savings and to achieve optimization targets ; however , as of may 2018 , 80 of the recommendations have not been fully addressed .

laws such as fitara and related guidance assigned 35 key it management responsibilities to cios to help address challenges .

however , in a draft report on cio responsibilities , gao's preliminary results suggested that none of the 24 selected agencies have implemented policies that fully address the role of their cio .

gao intends to recommend that omb and each of the selected 24 agencies take actions to improve the effectiveness of cio's implementation of their responsibilities .

according to fitara , covered agencies' cios are required to review and approve it contracts .

nevertheless , in january 2018 , gao reported that most of the cios at 22 selected agencies were not adequately involved in reviewing billions of dollars of it acquisitions .

consequently , gao made 39 recommendations to improve cio oversight over it acquisition .

effective management of software licenses can help avoid purchasing too many licenses that result in unused software .

in may 2014 , gao reported that better management of licenses was needed to achieve savings and made 135 recommendations for improvement .

most agencies generally agreed with the recommendations or had no comments .

as of may 2018 , 78 of the recommendations remained open .

gao found that agencies continue to need to improve their security programs , cyber capabilities , and the protection of personally identifiable information .

gao has made about 2,700 recommendations in the past few years to agencies aimed at improving the security of federal systems and information .

as of may 2018 , about 800 of the information security - related recommendations had not been implemented .

appendix a .

congressional oversight , 114 th congress congress held seven hearings related to federal cio initiatives during the 114 congress .

no legislation was introduced related to fitara or other federal cio initiatives .

the federal information t echnology reform act scorecard 3 .0 joint hearing: house committee on oversight and government reform ( subcommittees on information technology and government operations ) december 6 , 2016 federal agencies' reliance on outdated and unsupported information technology house committee on oversight and government reform may 25 , 2016 the federal information technology reform act scorecard 2.0 joint hearing: house committee on oversight and government reform ( subcommittees on information technology and government operations ) may 18 , 2016 the role of fitara in reducing it acquisition risk , part ii — measuring agencies' fitara implementation joint hearing: house committee on oversight and government reform ( subcommittees on information technology and government operations ) november 4 , 2015 the role of fitara in reducing it acquisition risk joint hearing: house committee on oversight and government reform ( subcommittees on information technology and government operations ) june 10 , 2015 reducing unnecessary duplication in federal programs: billions more could be saved senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs april 14 , 2015 risky business: examining gao 's 2015 list of high risk government programs senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs february 11 , 2015 appendix b .

government accountability office reports , 2012-2015 the gao has conducted numerous investigations into the initiatives being carried out under the auspices of the u.s. cio .

the agency has also testified at congressional hearings and held one forum .

information technology reform: billions of dollars in savings have been realized , but agencies need to complete reinvestment plans gao - 15-617 september 15 , 2015 information technology: additional omb and agency actions needed to ensure portfolio savings are realized and effectively tracked gao - 15-296 april 16 , 2015 reporting to omb can be improved by further streamlining and better focusing on priorities gao - 15-106 april 2 , 2015 data center consolidation: reporting can be improved to reflect substantial planned savings gao - 14-713 september 25 , 2014 information technology: omb and agencies need to more effectively implement major initiatives to save billions of dollars gao - 13-79 july 25 , 2013 information technology: omb and agencies need to focus continued attention on eliminating duplicative investments gao - 13-685t july 25 , 2013 data center consolidation: strengthened oversight needed to achieve cost savings goal gao - 13-378 may 14 , 2013 information technology reform: progress made but future cloud computing efforts should b e better planned gao - 12-756 july 11 , 201 .

