when there is concern with deficit or debt levels , congress will sometimes implement budget enforcement mechanisms to mandate specific budgetary policies or fiscal outcomes .

the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) was the legislative result of extended budget policy negotiations between congressional leaders and president barack obama .

these negotiations occurred in conjunction with the government's borrowing authority approaching the statutory debt limit .

budget deficits in fy2009 through fy2011 averaged 9.0% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) and were higher than any other year since world war ii .

those deficits were due to a number of factors , including reduced revenues and increased spending demands attributable to the great recession and costs associated with the economic stimulus package passed through the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) .

the bca includes several interconnected components related to the federal budget , some of which are no longer in effect .

there are five primary components: 1 .

an authorization to the executive branch to increase the debt limit in three installments , subject to a disapproval process by congress .

 ( those provisions were temporary and are no longer in effect. ) .

2 .

a one - time requirement for congress to vote on an amendment to the constitution to require a balanced budget .

3 .

the establishment of limits on defense discretionary spending and nondefense discretionary spending , enforced by sequestration ( automatic , across - the - board reductions ) in effect through fy2021 .

under this mechanism , sequestration is intended to deter enactment of legislation violating the spending limits or , in the event that legislation is enacted violating these limits , to automatically reduce discretionary spending to the limits specified in law .

4 .

the establishment of the joint select committee on deficit reduction ( often referred to as "the joint committee" or "the super committee" ) , which was directed to develop a proposal that would reduce the deficit by at least $1.5 trillion over fy2012 to fy2021 .

5 .

the establishment of an automatic process to reduce spending , beginning in 2013 , in the event that congress and the president did not enact a bill reported by the joint committee reducing the deficit by at least $1.2 trillion .

 ( such a bill was not enacted. ) .

this automatic process requires annual downward adjustments of the discretionary spending limits , as well as a sequester ( automatic , across - the - board reduction ) of nonexempt mandatory spending programs .

in this case , sequestration was included to encourage the joint committee to agree on deficit reduction legislation or , in the event that such agreement was not reached , to automatically reduce spending so that an equivalent budgetary goal would be achieved .

the bca as amended has three main components that currently affect the annual budget .

one component imposes annual statutory discretionary spending limits for defense and nondefense spending .

a second component requires annual reductions to the initial discretionary spending limits , triggered by the absence of a deficit reduction agreement from the joint committee .

third are annual automatic mandatory spending reductions triggered by the same absence of a deficit reduction agreement .

each of those components is described in further detail below .

a sequester provides for the enforcement of budgetary limits established in law through the automatic cancellation of previously enacted spending .

this cancellation of spending makes largely across - the - board reductions to nonexempt programs , activities , and accounts .

a sequester is implemented through a sequestration order issued by the president as required by law .

the purpose of a sequester is to enforce certain statutory budget requirements—either to discourage congress from enacting legislation violating a specific budgetary goal or to encourage congress to enact legislation that would fulfill a specific budgetary goal .

one of the authors of the law that first employed the sequester recently stated , "it was never the objective ... to trigger the sequester ; the objective ... was to have the threat of the sequester force compromise and action. .

as mentioned above , sequestration is currently used as the enforcement mechanism for policies established in the bca: for the discretionary spending limits , a sequester will occur only if appropriations are enacted that exceed either the defense or nondefense discretionary limits .

in such a case , sequestration is generally enforced when omb issues a final sequestration report within 15 calendar days after the end of a session of congress .

in addition , a separate sequester may be triggered if the enactment of appropriations causes a breach in the discretionary limits during the second and third quarter of the fiscal year .

in such an event , sequestration would take place 15 days after the enactment of the appropriation .

if the enactment of appropriations causes the discretionary spending limits to be breached in the last quarter of the fiscal year , the spending limit for the following fiscal year for that category must be reduced by the amount of the breach .

as mentioned above , the bca requires reductions to these discretionary spending limits annually .

these reductions are to be calculated by omb and included annually in the omb sequestration preview report to the president and congress , which is to be issued with the president's annual budget submission .

the reductions would then apply to the discretionary spending limits for the budget year corresponding to the president's submission .

while these reductions are often referred to as a sequester , they are not a sequester per se because they do not make automatic , across - the - board cuts to programs .

instead , they lower the spending limits , allowing congress the discretion to develop legislation within the reduced limits .

a sequester of nonexempt mandatory spending programs will take place each year through fy2029 .

these levels are also calculated by omb and are included in the annual omb report to congress on the joint committee reductions , which is also to be issued with the president's budget submission .

the sequester does not occur , however , until the beginning of the upcoming fiscal year .

legislation has been enacted making changes to the spending limits or enforcement procedures included in the bca for each year from fy2013 through fy2021 .

some of the most significant of these changes are the following: the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( atra ; p.l .

112-240 ) postponed the start of fy2013 sequester from january 2 to march 3 and reduced the amount of the spending reductions by $24 billion , among other things .

the bipartisan budget act of 2013 ( bba 2013 ; p.l .

113-67 , referred to as the murray - ryan agreement ) increased discretionary spending limits for both defense and nondefense for fy2014 , each by about $22 billion .

in addition , it increased discretionary spending limits for both defense and nondefense for fy2015 , each by about $9 billion .

it also extended the mandatory spending sequester by two years through fy2023 .

soon after the enactment of the bipartisan budget act of 2013 , a bill was enacted to "ensure that the reduced annual cost - of - living adjustment to the retired pay of members and former members of the armed forces under the age of 62 required by the bipartisan budget act of 2013 will not apply to members or former members who first became members prior to january 1 , 2014 , and for other purposes ( p.l .

113-82 ) . .

this legislation extended the direct spending sequester by one year through fy2024 .

the bipartisan budget act of 2015 ( bba 2015 ; p.l .

114-74 ) increased discretionary spending limits for both defense and nondefense for fy2016 , each by $25 billion .

in addition , it increased discretionary spending limits for both defense and nondefense for fy2017 , each by $15 billion .

it also extended the direct spending sequester by one year through fy2025 .

in addition , it established nonbinding spending targets for overseas contingency operations / global war on terrorism ( oco / gwot ) levels for fy2016 and fy2017 and amended the limits of adjustments allowed under the discretionary spending limits for program integrity initiatives .

the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( bba 2018 ; p.l .

115-123 ) increased nondefense and defense discretionary limits in fy2018 and fy2019 .

in fy2018 bba 2018 increased the defense limit by $80 billion ( to $629 billion ) and increased the nondefense limit by $63 billion ( to $579 billion ) ; in fy2019 it increased the defense limit by $85 billion ( to $647 billion ) and increased the nondefense limit by $68 billion ( to $597 billion ) .

bba 2018 also extended the mandatory spending sequester by two years through fy2027 .

the bipartisan budget act of 2019 ( bba 2019 ; p.l .

116-37 ) increased discretionary spending limits for fy2020 and fy2021 .

in fy2020 , it increased the discretionary defense cap by $90 billion , to $667 billion , and increased the nondefense cap by $78 billion , to $622 billion .

in fy2021 , it increased the discretionary defense cap by $81 billion , to $672 billion , and increased the nondefense cap by $72 billion , to $627 billion .

bba 2019 also extended the mandatory spending sequester by two years , through fy2029 .

congress may modify or repeal any aspect of the bca procedures at its discretion , but such changes require the enactment of legislation .

since enactment of the bca , subsequent legislation has modified both the discretionary spending limits and the mandatory spending sequester ( as described above ) .

in considering the potential for congress to reach agreement on future modifications to the bca , particularly the discretionary spending limits , it may be worth noting the following: legislation that would modify the discretionary spending limit would be subject to the regular legislative process .

such legislation would therefore require house and senate passage , as well as signature by the president or congressional override of a presidential veto .

in the house , such legislation would require the support of a simple majority of members voting , but in the senate , consideration of such legislation would likely require cloture to be invoked , which requires a vote of three - fifths of all senators ( normally 60 votes ) to bring debate to a close .

previous legislative increases to the discretionary spending limits have been coupled with future spending reductions , such as extensions of the mandatory spending sequester .

for example , bba 2013 extended the mandatory spending sequester by two years ( from fy2021 to fy2023 ) .

previous legislative increases to the discretionary spending limits have adhered to what has been referred to as the "parity principle. .

in essence , this means that some members of congress have insisted that any legislation changing the limits must increase each of the two limits ( defense and nondefense ) by equal amounts .

for example , bba 2015 increased discretionary spending limits for both defense and nondefense for fy2016 , each by $25 billion .

in addition , it increased discretionary spending limits for both defense and nondefense for fy2017 , each by $15 billion .

some spending is regarded as "exempt" from the bca .

a distinction should be noted between categories of spending that are "excluded" from the discretionary spending limits and spending programs that are "exempt" from sequestration .

some categories of spending are considered "exempt" or "excluded" from the discretionary spending limits , meaning that when an assessment is made as to whether the discretionary spending limits have been breached , they are not counted .

 ( in precise terms , the bca does not "exempt" such spending but allows for an upward adjustment of the discretionary limits to accommodate such spending. ) .

for example , spending designated as emergency requirements or for oco / gwot is effectively excluded from the discretionary spending limits up to any amount ( meaning that the designation of such spending allows for an upward adjustment of the discretionary limits to accommodate that spending ) .

the bca does not define what constitutes this type of funding , nor does it limit the level or amount of spending that may be designated as being for such purposes .

similarly , "disaster funding" and spending for "continuing disability reviews and redeterminations" and "healthcare fraud and abuse control" are effectively exempt up to a certain amount ( again meaning that such spending allows for an upward adjustment of the discretionary limits to accommodate that spending ) , as are other programs .

some programs are exempt from a sequester , such as social security , medicaid , chip , tanf , and snap .

in addition , special rules govern the sequestration of certain programs , such as medicare , which is limited to a 2% reduction .

these exemptions and special rules are found in sections 255 and 256 of the bbedca , as amended , respectively .

it may also be helpful to review omb sequester reports detailing programs that have been subject to sequester .

to see a list of both discretionary and direct spending programs subject to the fy2013 sequester , see the omb report to congress on the joint committee sequestration for fy2013 .

to see a list of direct spending programs included in the most recent sequester report , see the annual omb report to congress on the joint committee sequester for fy2020 .

the "parity principle" refers to the equality between changes made to defense and nondefense budget authority through some deficit reduction measures established by the bca .

while there has never been a statutory requirement to uphold the parity principle , budget parity has followed from deficit reduction measures imposed by the bca and some of the subsequent amendments to its deficit reduction measures .

the specific type of parity in each law evolved over time .

the bca and atra reflected parity in the budgetary impact of changes to defense and nondefense budget authority across both discretionary and mandatory spending categories .

subsequent bca amendments in bba 2013 and bba 2015 reflected parity between defense and nondefense budget authority for discretionary spending only , as those laws also extended automatic mandatory deficit reduction measures that had larger budget reductions for nondefense activities than for defense programs .

bba 2018 reflected yet another type of parity , as the amended discretionary cap levels in fy2018 and fy2019 were increased by an equivalent amount relative to the initial bca levels as established in august 2011 .

as compared with the caps after the automatic reductions took effect , bba 2018 included larger increases to the defense caps than to the nondefense caps .

as with bba 2013 and bba 2015 , bba 2018 also included an extension to the automatic mandatory spending reductions with a larger set of reductions for nondefense programs than for defense programs .

bba 2019 did not include increases that reflected any definition of the parity principle: as with bba 2018 it imposed larger increases to defense programs than nondefense programs for fy2020 and fy2021 , but the difference between the nondefense and defense caps in each year was smaller than the gap initially established by the bca .

the bca provides for upward adjustments to the discretionary caps , sometimes called spending "outside the caps," for budget authority devoted to oco , emergency requirements , and other purposes .

budget authority for bca upward adjustments has not reflected parity between defense and nondefense activities in any effective year of the bca to date , as upward adjustments have allowed for more defense spending than nondefense spending in each year from fy2012 through fy2017 and fy2019 , while upward adjustments were larger for defense spending than nondefense spending in fy2018 .

the bca includes annual statutory caps that limit how much discretionary budget authority can be provided for defense and nondefense activities .

these limits are in effect through fy2021 and are enforced by sequestration , meaning that a breach of the discretionary spending limit for either category would trigger a sequester of resources within that category only to make up for the amount of the breach .

a second component of the bca makes automatic decreases to these caps annually .

in the absence of the enactment of a joint committee bill to reduce the deficit by at least $1.2 trillion , the bca required downward adjustments ( or reductions ) to the statutory limit on both defense and nondefense spending each year through fy2021 .

while these reductions are often referred to as sequesters , they are not technically sequesters because they do not make automatic , across - the - board cuts to programs .

the reductions instead lower the spending limits , allowing congress the discretion to develop legislation within the reduced limits .

these reductions are to be calculated annually by o mb and are included in the omb sequestration preview report to the president and congress , which is issued with the president's annual budget submission .

the bca stipulates that certain discretionary funding , such as appropriations designated as oco or for emergency requirements , allows for an upward adjustment of the discretionary limits .

oco funding is therefore sometimes described as being "exempt" from the discretionary spending limits .

the bca does not define what constitutes this type of funding , nor does it limit the level of spending that may be designated as being for such purposes .

the absence of an agreement by the joint committee triggered automatic spending reductions ( as provided for in the bca ) for all mandatory programs that were not explicitly exempted from fy2013 through fy2021 .

notably , social security payments were exempted from the automatic reductions , and the effect on medicare spending was limited to 2% of annual payments made to certain medicare programs .

extensions of the mandatory spending reductions were included in bba 2013 , bba 2015 , bba 2018 , and bba 2019 and are currently scheduled to remain in place through fy2029 .

a recent omb sequestration report estimated that such measures will reduce mandatory outlays by $20.7 billion in fy2020 , with $19.86 billion of that total applied to nondefense programs and $0.84 billion applied to defense programs .

the limits on discretionary spending established by the bca apply to budget authority , which is the amount that federal agencies are legally permitted to obligate .

outlays , meanwhile , are disbursed federal funds: in other words , they represent amounts that are actually spent by the government .

there is generally a lag between when congress grants budget authority and when outlays occur , and that lag can vary depending on the agency and specific purpose of the obligation .

furthermore , the budget may classify certain types of spending in a certain way when measuring budget authority and another way when measuring outlays .

for example , much of the spending attached to the highway trust fund is classified as mandatory spending when measuring budget authority and as discretionary spending when measuring outlays .

budget deficits declined for much of the 1990s due to decreased spending , rising revenues , and an improved economy .

the federal budget recorded surpluses from fy1998 through fy2001 .

prior to that , the last budget surplus occurred in fy1969 .

budget deficits returned starting in fy2002 and slowly increased over the next several years due to reduced revenues and increased spending .

net deficits peaked during the great recession from fy2009 to fy2011 , as negative and low economic growth coupled with increased spending commitments provided for by the american recovery and reinvestment act ( p.l .

111-5 ) contributed to real deficits averaging 9.0% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) in those years .

real deficits have declined since fy2011 , due to the modifications made by the bca , increased revenues , and the winding down of stimulus programs .

however , the fy2019 deficit ( 4.3% of gdp , or $665 billion ) remains higher than the average deficit since fy1969 ( 2.9% of gdp ) .the cbo baseline projects that real budget deficits will increase in future years .

modifications to the limits on discretionary spending , established by the bca , change authorizations levels , which in turn affect outlays .

cbo provides estimates of both discretionary spending effects and mandatory spending effects in its legislative cost estimates .

whether proposed legislation affects discretionary or mandatory spending may have ramifications for congressional budgetary enforcement procedures , however .

cbo's baseline projections assume that the discretionary limits imposed by the bca as amended will proceed as scheduled through fy2021 and that discretionary spending levels will grow with the economy in subsequent years .

such methodology uses the discretionary spending levels in fy2021 as the basis for discretionary spending projections for the remainder of the budget window .

