congress has been interested in disaster relief since the earliest days of the republic .

on february 19 , 1803 , the 7 th congress passed the first known federal disaster assistance legislation , providing debt relief to the residents of portsmouth , nh , following a december 26 , 1802 , fire that burned down most of the town ( "a bill for the relief of the sufferers by fire , in the town of portsmouth," commonly known as the congressional act of 1803 ) .

over the years , congress has authorized the expansion of federal disaster assistance to individuals , businesses , and places ( both for humanitarian reasons and as a means to enhance interstate commerce ) .

for example during the 1930s , congress passed legislation authorizing the reconstruction finance corporation to make disaster loans for the repair and reconstruction of certain public facilities following an earthquake , and later , other types of disasters ; and the bureau of public roads to provide funding for highways and bridges damaged by natural disasters .

during the 1950s , congress passed legislation authorizing the president to respond to major disasters .

during the 1960s , congress passed legislation expanding the u.s. army corps of engineers' authority to implement flood control projects .

during the 1970s , congress passed legislation authorizing federal loans and tax assistance to individuals affected by disasters , as well as federal funding for the repair and replacement of public facilities ; and the establishment of the presidential disaster declaration process .

during the 1980s , congress passed legislation authorizing numerous changes to federal disaster assistance programs administered by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , which had been created by executive order 12127 on march 31 , 1979 , to , among other activities , coordinate federal disaster relief efforts .

since the 1980s , congress has focused on the oversight of fema's implementation of federal disaster relief efforts and assessing the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( of 1988 ) , hereinafter the stafford act , as amended ( 42 u.s.c .

5721 et seq. ) .

to determine if its provisions meet current needs .

one such potential need is providing disaster assistance following a terrorist attack .

the stafford act requires that all major disaster declaration requests be made by state governors or tribal leaders .

such requests must be made on the basis that the incident is of such severity and magnitude that effective response is beyond the capability of the affected state and local government .

the request for a declaration begins with a letter to the president from the governor or tribal leader .

included with the letter are supplemental material and any relevant information about the incident .

the letter also describes what types of federal assistance is being requested .

in the case of a request for a major disaster declaration , a particularly important piece of information accompanying the letter is the preliminary damage assessment ( pda ) .

pdas provide public infrastructure damage estimates ( as well as estimated damage to households ) .

by regulation , fema compares this damage estimate against the state's population .

in general , fema will make a recommendation to the president that a major disaster be declared if public infrastructure damages exceed $1.42 per capita .

this formula is known as the "per capita threshold. .

a request for an emergency declaration follows the same basic regulatory procedures highlighted above for major disasters with some nuances .

similar to a request for a major disaster declaration , the basis for an emergency declaration is that the incident is of such severity and magnitude that effective response is beyond the capability of the affected state and local government .

fema , however , does not apply any formulas — including the per capita threshold — in regulations to make emergency declaration recommendations to the president .

while there are differences between the two types of declarations , the ultimate decision to declare and grant federal assistance for emergencies and major disasters rests solely with the president .

in general , an incident must meet three criteria to be eligible for a major disaster declaration: ( 1 ) definition , ( 2 ) unmet need , and ( 3 ) state action .

the three criteria for an incident to be eligible for an emergency disaster declaration include ( 1 ) definition , ( 2 ) unmet need , and ( 3 ) state action .

the following section provides information on past terror attacks that have received federal assistance under the stafford act , including a general description of what types of assistance was provided for the incident .

it also provides information on the orlando pulse nightclub shooting .

it is included in this discussion because the governor requested stafford act assistance .

the san bernardino and ohio state attacks are not included because stafford act declarations were not requested .

table 1 provides a comparison of each incident .

it is notable that in all but one case , the declaration was issued on the same day as the attack .

it is generally agreed that the government should help victims of terrorism in times of need , but the proper scope of that assistance with respect to the stafford act is subject to debate .

some might question whether the fiscal responsibility resides primarily with the federal or the state government .

the debate may be further complicated if the incident does not clearly meet the definition of a major disaster or does not meet certain thresholds , or both .

the selected approach will likely be influenced by how policymakers view the role of the federal government in response to terrorism .

some may argue that stafford act assistance is warranted for all or most acts of terrorism .

others might argue that stafford act assistance should only be provided in cases where the incident meets the existing framework of definitions and unmet need .

this report has outlined several different approaches , both definitional and administrative , that could fill in perceived gaps that have been forecast based on possible events juxtaposed against current policy parameters .

one view argues that the stafford act should be amended to assure that terrorist attacks are eligible for major disaster assistance .

another view is that the stafford act is a flexible instrument that has assisted states and families and individuals through a myriad of unanticipated situations .

according to this view , the stafford act's existing structure is sufficient to meet the potential terrorism challenges that may lie ahead .

the selected approach will likely be influenced by two factors: ( 1 ) impact on federal costs , and ( 2 ) personal views concerning the appropriate nature of the federal government's role in addressing terrorism .

some might be concerned that amending the stafford act to assure that soft target and nonconventional terror attacks are eligible for major disaster assistance might , in their view , inappropriately shift the primary financial burden for addressing terrorism costs from the states to the federal government .

others might see these costs as minimal , particularly compared to the costs of natural disasters , such as those from major hurricanes .

with respect to the appropriate role for the federal government in addressing terrorism costs , some might argue that the federal government should provide assistance for all instances of terrorism , even if those costs could be adequately handled by the state .

others might argue that federal assistance should be provided only in those cases where state and local government financial capacity is lacking .

