the minority small business and capital ownership development program — commonly known as the "8 ( a ) program" — provides participating small businesses with training and technical assistance designed to enhance their ability to compete effectively in the private marketplace .

one of the program's major benefits is that 8 ( a ) firms can receive federal contracting preferences in the form of set - aside and sole - source awards .

a set - aside award is a contract in which only certain contractors may compete , whereas a sole - source award is a contract awarded , or proposed for award , without competition .

as a business development program , its overall goal is for 8 ( a ) firms to graduate from the program and continue to do well in a competitive business environment .

8 ( a ) program eligibility is generally limited to small businesses which are "unconditionally owned and controlled by one or more socially and economically disadvantaged individuals who are of good character and citizens of and residing in the united states" and demonstrate "potential for success. .

however , small businesses owned by alaska native corporations ( ancs ) , community development corporations ( cdcs ) , indian tribes , and native hawaiian organizations ( nhos ) are also eligible to participate in the 8 ( a ) program under somewhat different terms .

in fy2017 , 3,421 8 ( a ) firms were awarded more than $27.1 billion in federal contracts , including $8.0 billion in 8 ( a ) set - aside awards and $8.4 billion in 8 ( a ) sole - source awards .

other programs provide similar assistance to other types of small businesses ( eg , women - owned , hubzone , and service - disabled veteran - owned ) .

congress has a perennial interest in small business programs , including the 8 ( a ) program .

as stated in the small business act it is the declared policy of the congress that the government should aid , counsel , assist , and protect , insofar as is possible , the interests of small - business concerns in order to preserve free competitive enterprise , to insure that a fair proportion of the total purchases and contracts or subcontracts for property and services for the government ( including but not limited to contracts or subcontracts for maintenance , repair , and construction ) be placed with small - business enterprises , to insure that a fair proportion of the total sales of government property be made to such enterprises , and to maintain and strengthen the overall economy of the nation .

the small business act also indicates "that the opportunity for full participation in our free enterprise system by socially and economically disadvantaged persons is essential if we are to obtain social and economic equality for such persons and improve the functioning of our national economy. .

to help achieve these goals , the 8 ( a ) program's stated statutory purposes are to ( a ) promote the business development of small business concerns owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals so that such concerns can compete on an equal basis in the american economy ; ( b ) promote the competitive viability of such concerns in the marketplace by providing such available contract , financial , technical , and management assistance as may be necessary ; and ( c ) clarify and expand the program for the procurement by the united states of articles , supplies , services , materials , and construction work from small business concerns owned by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals .

recent congresses have had particular interest in the 8 ( a ) program largely because of its effects on minority - owned small businesses and small businesses' overall role in job creation .

8 ( a ) business development assistance has many forms , including business counseling and mentoring , both in online and traditional face - to - face settings ; access to capital and surety bond guarantees ; contract marketing guidance ; and assistance with acquiring federal government surplus property .

in addition , the small business administration ( sba ) reviews and certifies eligible clients ; assigns sba personnel ( business opportunity specialists , boss ) to monitor and measure each firm's progress through annual reviews , business planning collaboration , and systematic evaluations ; helps to identify potential contract opportunities ; and markets each firm's technical capabilities to federal agency procurement officials .

this report examines the 8 ( a ) program's historical development , key requirements , administrative structures and operations , and the sba's oversight of 8 ( a ) firms .

it also discusses two sba programs designed to support 8 ( a ) firms , the 7 ( j ) management and technical assistance program and the 8 ( a ) mentor - protégé program , and provides various program statistics .

it concludes with an analysis of the following current 8 ( a ) program issues: the sba's decision to address recent declines in the number of program participants by revising and streamlining the program's application process , an action which the sba's office of inspector general ( sba oig ) reports "may erode core safeguards that prevented questionable firms from entering the 8 ( a ) program. .

reported variation in 8 ( a ) program service delivery .

reported deficiencies in the oversight of 8 ( a ) program participant's continuing eligibility .

disagreements concerning the financial thresholds used to determine economic disadvantage , including the sba's decision to exclude equity in a primary residence from the calculation of an individual's net worth .

the adequacy of the performance measures used to evaluate the program's effectiveness in meeting its statutory goals .

detailed statutory and regulatory requirements govern 8 ( a ) program eligibility , set - aside and sole - source awards , and related issues .

these requirements are generally the same for all 8 ( a ) firms , although there are instances where there are "special rules" for group - owned 8 ( a ) firms .

an appendix to this report compares the requirements applicable to individual owners of 8 ( a ) firms to those applicable to groups owning 8 ( a ) firms ( i.e. , ancs , cdcs , nhos , and indian tribes ) .

the sba's office of business development ( bd ) , housed within the office of government contracts and business development , oversees the 8 ( a ) program .

bd has three offices: the office of certification and eligibility ( oce ) , the office of management and technical assistance ( omta ) ; and the office of program review ( opr ) .

their functions are provided in the footnote below .

applications for the 8 ( a ) program are processed at one of two central office duty stations ( cods ) , one located in san francisco , ca , and the other in philadelphia , pa .

applicants apply to the cods that serve the territory where the applicant's principal place of business is located .

business opportunity specialists ( boss ) work directly with 8 ( a ) firms in district offices under the general supervision of the sba's office of field operations ( ofo ) .

although boss report to the sba's ofo , they interact extensively with bd , which is located in the sba's headquarters building in washington , dc .

as will be discussed , gao and others have argued that this overlapping organizational structure may "create programmatic challenges. .

prior to applying for certification , firms must complete all requirements for contracting with the federal government ( eg , get a free d - u - n - s number — a unique nine - digit identification number of each physical business location from dun and bradstreet ; obtain a free tax identification number or employer identification number from the internal revenue service ; create a profile in the federal system for award management , and get a free sba general login system user id ) .

the sba's district office staff generally encourage potential 8 ( a ) program applicants "to attend an information session to obtain information regarding the program and its eligibility criteria prior to filing an application … [and] also refer the applicant to sba's website for forms , specific eligibility criteria , pertinent regulatory sections in the code of federal regulations , and overall information on the program. .

in an attempt to encourage more applicants , the sba revised and streamlined the 8 ( a ) program's application process in 2016 by accepting online applications only ( hard copy applications are no longer accepted ) and eliminating the requirement for a wet signature application ; a completed irs form 4506t , request for copy or transcript of tax form , in every case ; and narrative statements in support of the applicants' claims of economic disadvantage .

that determination is now based solely on an analysis of objective financial data relating to the individual's net worth , income and total assets .

in addition , to prevent what it viewed as unnecessary delays for minor infractions that may have "occurred many years ago" and may have "nothing to do with the individual's business integrity," the sba made optional the automatic suspension of consideration and referral to the sba oig of all applications with adverse information regarding the applicant's or any of its principals' possible criminal conduct .

despite these changes , applicants still have a relatively long list of supporting documents ( and required sba forms ) that they must submit , including the following: signed and dated federal income tax returns for the firm and all individuals that either own more than 10% of the firm or have a key position in the firm for the past three years preceding the date of application ( including all forms , statements , schedules and attachments ) .

the firm's financial statements , balance sheet , and profit and loss statements for the past three years ( including the most recent balance sheet , current within 90 days of application ) .

a completed personal financial statement form ( from all principals and their spouses ) , including a list of all assets , liabilities , real estate and other personal property , including transferred assets , information on delinquent federal obligations , past due taxes or liens , bankruptcy filings and pending civil lawsuits , and a list of any sba loans for the firm and other businesses owned by the principal ( s ) .

a list or chart of the firm's current and past federal and nonfederal contracts within the most recently completed fiscal year .

a list of any lease agreements .

proof of signature authority on the firm's bank account ( s ) ( i.e. , signature card ( s ) for firm bank account ( s ) or letter from the bank ) .

documented proof of contributions: ( 1 ) used to acquire ownership ( for each owner ) , ( 2 ) of any transfer of assets to or from the firm , and ( 3 ) of any transfer of assets to or from any of the firm's owners over the past two years .

state filings ( signed , dated and stamped by the state where the firm does business ) and certificate of good standing .

list of any foreign corporation filings .

articles of incorporation , articles of organization , any dba ( "doing business as" ) filings , governing documents signed by the principals , bylaws , operating agreements , partnership agreements , and meeting minutes .

any stock certificates and ledgers .

proof of social disadvantage from majority owners and firm managers .

background information and personal information from all principals , including a resume , a completed statement of personal history form , proof of u.s. citizenship or naturalization , duties within the firm and time devotion , a list of other business interests and time devotion , and the nature of outside employment and time devotion .

documentation addressing how the firm meets specified objectives , if it is applying for a two - year waiver .

as mentioned previously , applications are processed at the san francisco or philadelphia cods .

in general , the sba processes an application and issues a decision letter within 90 days of the receipt of an application package .

the processing time will be suspended only if an applicant is referred to the sba oig , for a formal size determination , or both .

applicants are notified within 15 days of receipt whether the application package is complete or incomplete .

the sba will not process an incomplete application .

complete means that the application is ready to be processed .

a bos , at one of the cods , initially reviews the application .

if , during the eligibility review process , it is determined that an application is incomplete , the bos may request additional information or clarification "via a delivery method that tracks delivery and provides return receipt capability. .

the applicant must provide the requested information within five calendar days of receipt of the request .

failure to meet the deadline may result in the applicant's ineligibility to participate in the program .

however , a request for additional information does not stop the 90-day processing clock .

"once the requested information is provided , the case may require priority handling in order for the cods to complete the eligibility review within the required timeframe. .

after the initial review , the bos submits the case file , the bos analysis , and a decision letter to the cods' chief for review .

the chief examines the bos analysis and decision letter to verify that all required steps and regulations have been properly applied .

upon completing the examination , the chief returns the case file and attachments to the bos along with any applicable comments and recommendations .

the bos then makes any changes or corrections to the analysis or decision letter as requested by the chief .

the chief then signs and returns the case file to the processing bos .

the chief makes his or her recommendation in the electronic application system ( which is equivalent to transmitting it to the oce's director , who approves or declines the application largely based on the cods' review ) .

after the oce review , the associate administrator for business development ( aa / bd ) ultimately approves or declines the application in writing .

the electronic application system notifies the firm by issuing an approval or declination letter .

all declination letters must clearly explain the reason ( s ) why the firm was found to be ineligible , including a direct reference to regulatory provisions that the applicant failed to satisfy .

the letter must also include the applicant's right to request reconsideration and , if applicable , to appeal the decision to the sba's office of hearings and appeals .

as discussed below in the "current issues" section , the sba and others have identified the application process , and its relatively high rate of rejection , as an impediment to the 8 ( a ) program's growth .

boss assist both prospective and existing 8 ( a ) firms with questions related to the application process , required forms , and the program's various eligibility , reporting , and performance requirements .

boss also provide general business development assistance , assist with the firm's planning and establishment of goals , work with the firm as it develops and submits its required business plan , and ensure that the firm is on track regarding anticipated business growth .

boss "on - going responsibility is to assist the participant in developing its business to the fullest extent possible so that it attains competitive viability during its program participation term , and maintains viability thereafter. .

as directed , boss accomplish this by ( 1 ) helping the firm identify its strengths and weaknesses ; ( 2 ) providing advice , counsel , and guidance in the areas of marketing to the federal government , prime contracting , and contract administration ; ( 3 ) referring the firm to appropriate internal and external resources for assistance in technical , management , and financial matters ; and ( 4 ) monitoring the firm's progress in the program and its compliance with program requirements .

8 ( a ) firms must demonstrate program compliance by reporting specific information to the sba on an as needed , periodic , or requested basis .

much of the reporting is accomplished through the required annual review , which focuses on the firm and its business development , and the continuing eligibility review .

the annual review requires numerous forms and documentation , including the following: form 1450 — 8 ( a ) annual update review ( information about the firm , including its tenure in the program , current financial data , business development targets , loans and other sources of capital , and applicable bonding information ) ; form 1623 — certification regarding debarment , suspension , and other responsibility matters primary covered transactions ( detailed information regarding any debarments , suspensions , or other potentially adverse matters ) ; form 1790 — representatives used and compensation paid for services in connection with obtaining federal contracts ( required semiannually , includes a list of any agents , representatives , accountants , consultants , etc .

that receive fees , commissions , or compensation of any kind to assist the firm in obtaining or seeking federal contracts ) ; form 912 — statement of personal history ( information related to claiming disadvantaged status for all officers , directors , general partners , managing members , and holders of more than 10% ownership in the firm ) ; and form 413 — personal financial statement ( information concerning the owner's and their spouse's personal net worth ) .

8 ( a ) firms are also required to provide any updates or modifications to their business plan .

if the firm participates in the 8 ( a ) mentor - protégé program ( see below ) it must provide "a narrative report detailing the contracts it has had with its mentor and benefits it has received from the mentor / protégé relationship. .

in addition , the firm must provide a report for each 8 ( a ) contract performed during the year "explaining how the performance of work requirements are being met for the contract , including any 8 ( a ) contracts performed as a joint venture. .

in 2010 , gao reported that the district staff's "dual role of advocacy for and monitoring of the firms may have contributed in part to the retention of ineligible firms. .

in response , in 2012 , the sba shifted responsibility for processing the continued eligibility portion of the required annual review from boss located in the sba district offices to its washington , dc , office .

while boss continue to perform other components of the annual review , "shifting the responsibility for processing continued eligibility to headquarters was designed to eliminate conflict of interest for district offices associated with performing both assistance and oversight roles. .

8 ( a ) firms may leave the program by any of the following means: voluntary withdrawal ; voluntary early graduation ( where the firm voluntarily decides to leave the program after the sba has determined that the firm has substantially achieved its business plan's targets , objectives , and goals and has demonstrated the ability to compete in the marketplace without program assistance ) ; involuntary early graduation ( where the sba requires a firm to leave the program because it has determined that the firm has substantially achieved its business plan's targets , objectives , and goals and has demonstrated the ability to compete in the marketplace without program assistance ; or one or more of the disadvantaged owners upon whom the firm's eligibility is based are no longer economically disadvantaged ) ; termination for good cause ; expiration of the program term ( maximum of nine years ) without meeting the sba's graduation requirements ; or graduation at the expiration of the program term .

the sba's 7 ( j ) management and technical assistance program assists 8 ( a ) firms by providing management and technical assistance training .

the program's origin dates back to 1970 when the sba issued regulations creating the 8 ( a ) contracting program to "assist small concerns owned by disadvantaged persons to become self - sufficient , viable businesses capable of competing effectively in the market place. .

using its statutory authority under section 7 ( j ) of the small business act to provide management and technical assistance through contracts , grants , and cooperative agreements to qualified service providers , the regulations specified that "the sba may provide technical and management assistance to assist in the performance of the subcontracts. .

on october 24 , 1978 , p.l .

95-507 , to amend the small business act and the small business investment act of 1958 , provided the sba explicit statutory authority to extend financial , management , technical , and other services to socially and economically disadvantaged small businesses .

the sba's current regulations indicate that the 7 ( j ) management and technical assistance program will , "through its private sector service providers [deliver] a wide variety of management and technical assistance to eligible individuals or concerns to meet their specific needs , including: ( a ) counseling and training in the areas of financing , management , accounting , bookkeeping , marketing , and operation of small business concerns ; and ( b ) the identification and development of new business opportunities. .

eligible individuals and businesses include "8 ( a ) certified firms , small disadvantaged businesses , businesses operating in areas of high unemployment or low income , or small businesses owned by low income individuals. .

as shown in table 2 , 6,483 small businesses received 7 ( j ) program assistance in fy2018 .

the sba has been marketing the 7 ( j ) program to 8 ( a ) firms in an effort increase awareness of the program , to help those small businesses "better prepare themselves for federal contracting opportunities," and to retain 8 ( a ) firms in the 8 ( a ) program .

table 2 also shows the amount of total administrative resources the sba provides the 7 ( j ) program each year .

the sba established the 8 ( a ) mentor - protégé program on july 30 , 1998 .

the program is designed to "enhance the capabilities" of 8 ( a ) firms and "improve [their] ability to successfully compete for contracts" by providing various forms of assistance , including technical or management training , financial assistance in the form of equity investments or loans , subcontracts , trade education , and assistance in performing prime contracts with the federal government through joint venture agreements .

although the sba established the 8 ( a ) mentor - protégé program and sba rules govern participation in the program , the 8 ( a ) mentor - protégé program is government - wide in the sense that firms may enjoy the benefits of participation in the program while performing the contracts of any federal agency .

in fact , when agencies that do not have their own mentor - protégé programs are involved , the 8 ( a ) mentor - protégé program may be referred to as if it were that agency's program .

the sba's office of business development ( bd ) administers the 8 ( a ) mentor - protégé program .

this makes it somewhat different from agency - specific mentor - protégé programs , which are generally administered by the agency's office of small and disadvantaged business utilization ( osdbu ) and may involve coordination with agency contracting offices .

sba regulations govern various aspects of the 8 ( a ) mentor - protégé program , including who may qualify as a mentor or protégé , the content of written agreements between mentors and protégés , and the sba's evaluation of the mentor - protégé relationship .

for example , mentors must be for - profit concerns that demonstrate a commitment and the ability to assist developing 8 ( a ) firms , including large firms , other small businesses , firms that have graduated from the program , and other 8 ( a ) firms that are in the transitional stage , or final five years of the program .

only sba approved firms may serve as mentors , and each mentor must ( 1 ) demonstrate that it "is capable of carrying out its responsibilities to assist the protégé firm under the proposed mentor - protégé agreement" ; ( 2 ) possess good character ; ( 3 ) not be debarred or suspended from government contracting ; and ( 4 ) be able to "impart value to a protégé firm due to lessons learned and practical experienced gained because of the [8 ( a ) program] , or through its knowledge of general business operations and government contracting. .

protégés , in turn , are required to be small businesses owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals that are in good standing in the 8 ( a ) program .

protégés must also qualify as small for the size standard corresponding to their primary ( or , under specified circumstances , their secondary ) north american industry ( naics ) code and demonstrate how the business development assistance to be received through the mentor - protégé relationship would advance the goals and objectives set forth in their business plans .

mentors are generally expected to have only one protégé at a time .

however , mentors may have up to three protégés at one time provided they can demonstrate that "the additional mentor / protégé relationship[s] will not adversely affect the development of either protégé firm. .

similarly , protégés are expected to have one mentor at a time .

however , protégés may , under specified circumstances , have two mentors .

mentors and protégés are required to enter a written agreement , approved by the sba's aa / bd which sets forth the protégé's needs and describes the mentor's assistance .

this agreement generally obligates the mentor to furnish assistance to the protégé for at least one year , although it does allow either mentor or protégé to terminate the agreement with 30 days' advance notice to the other party and the sba .

unless rescinded in writing , the mentor - protégé agreement automatically renews for another year .

the term of a mentor - protégé agreement is limited to three years but may be extended for a second three - year period .

the 8 ( a ) mentor - protégé program is intended to benefit both mentors and protégés .

serving as a mentor to an 8 ( a ) firm counts toward any subcontracting requirements to which the mentor firm may be subject under section 8 ( d ) of the small business act .

section 8 ( d ) requires that all federal contractors awarded a contract valued in excess of $700,000 ( $1.5 million for construction contracts ) that offers subcontracting possibilities agree to a "subcontracting plan" that ensures small businesses have "the maximum practicable opportunity to participate in [contract] performance. .

in addition , in certain circumstances , mentors may form joint ventures with their protégés that are eligible to be awarded an 8 ( a ) contract or another contract set aside for small businesses .

mentor firms and joint ventures involving mentor firms would otherwise generally be ineligible for such contracts because they would not qualify as small under sba regulations .

mentor firms may also acquire an equity interest of up to 40% in the protégé firm in order to help the protégé firm raise capital .

because mentor firms are not 8 ( a ) participants , they would generally be prohibited from owning more than 10% - 20% of an 8 ( a ) firm .

however , their participation in the 8 ( a ) mentor - protégé program permits them to acquire a larger ownership share .

protégés not only receive various forms of assistance from their mentors , but also may generally retain their status as "small businesses" while doing so .

if they received similar assistance from entities other than their mentors , they could risk being found to be other than "small" because of how the sba determines size .

the sba combines the gross income of the firm , or the number of its employees , with those of its "affiliates" when determining whether the firm is small , and the sba could potentially find that firms are affiliates because of assistance such as that which mentors provide to protégés .

however , sba regulations provide that "[n]o determination of affiliation or control may be found between a protégé firm and its mentor based on the mentor - protégé agreement or any assistance provided pursuant to the agreement. .

as of september 30 , 2017 , there were 314 active 8 ( a ) mentor - protégé agreements .

as shown in table 3 , the number of 8 ( a ) firms assisted by sba business opportunity specialists ( bos ) has declined somewhat since fy2010 , the number of federal contracts awarded to 8 ( a ) firms increased from 3,421 in fy2017 to 3,709 in fy2018 , and the 8 ( a ) program's administrative costs have increased .

as shown in table 4 , in fy2017 , 8 ( a ) firms were awarded $27.167 billion in federal contracts ( 5.14% of all federal contracts awarded ) .

of that amount , these firms received $7.971 billion through an 8 ( a ) set - aside award , $8.445 billion through an 8 ( a ) sole - source award , and $6.110 billion through either open competition or with another small business preference applied ( eg , small business set - aside and hubzone set - aside or sole - source award ) .

from fy2010 through fy2017 , 8 ( a ) firms were awarded , on average , approximately 5.45% of the total amount of federal contracts awarded , ranging from a low of 4.97% of all federal contracts in fy2011 to a high of 6.11% in fy2014 .

during this period , 8 ( a ) firms received about $214.902 billion in federal contracts: $58.609 billion through an 8 ( a ) set - aside ( 27.2% of all 8 ( a ) contracts ) , $73.544 billion through an 8 ( a ) sole - source award ( 34.3% of all 8 ( a ) contracts ) , and $82.749 billion through either open competition or with another small business preference applied ( 38.5% of all 8 ( a ) contracts ) .

the sba faces several challenges concerning the 8 ( a ) program , including a recent decline in participation , reported variation in program service delivery , disagreements related to the program's financial thresholds used to determine economic disadvantage , and concerns related to the performance measures used to evaluate the program's success .

noting that the number of certified 8 ( a ) firms had declined from 2010 to 2015 , the sba announced in 2015 that it was establishing a goal to "increase the number of approved firms" in the program by 5% in fy2016 and fy2017 .

in an effort to achieve this goal and increase 8 ( a ) program retention , the sba initiated a pilot program to streamline the program's application process ; increased its marketing of the 7 ( j ) management and training assistance program to 8 ( a ) firms ; increased its efforts to expand the 8 ( a ) mentor - protégé program by streamlining that program's application process , shortening its application response time from 45 days to 10 days , and initiating an annual mentor - protégé conference to help 8 ( a ) firms become more knowledgeable about the potential benefits of joint ventures and the various rules and compliance requirements for mentor - protégé agreements .

the sba presented four reasons to streamline the program's application process: 1 .

although regulatory guidance provides the sba approximately 90 days to process a complete application , several firms endured delays that extended anywhere from six months to several years .

2 .

nearly three - quarters of 8 ( a ) applications are initially rejected due to incomplete or missing documentation .

3 .

less than half of complete applications are approved .

4 .

the sba's low rate of approval has led to an industry of third party firms that charge 8 ( a ) applicants from $5,000 to $75,000 to prepare the application and respond to the sba's processors .

the sba argued that some of these firms are taking advantage of applicants , and regardless of the amount paid , there is no guaranteed approval because the approval rate is consistently less than 50% .

the sba reported that it certified 568 applicants to the 8 ( a ) program in fy2015 ( before the streamlined process ) , 911 in fy2016 ( after the streamlined process was instituted on a pilot basis ) , and 557 in fy2017 .

the agency declared the pilot streamlined application process a success .

however , the sba's oig has argued that shortening the review process by eliminating required documents may erode core safeguards that prevented questionable firms from entering the program: federal prosecutors have told oig that it would be difficult for them to describe sba , the procuring agency , or honest 8 ( a ) competitors as fraud victims when sba is perceived not to have exercised proper due diligence in admitting firms' into the 8 ( a ) program .

although sba's efforts to increase the participation in the 8 ( a ) program is commendable , sba still needs to ensure that only eligible firms are admitted into the program , and the documentation supporting 8 ( a ) program application approvals is maintained in a method ensuring clear eligibility of the applicant .

in a related development , a recent sba oig audit of the 8 ( a ) program's application determination process found that the sba did not always document why the aa / bd approved applications even though lower - level "reviewers [had] identified one or more eligibility issues" with the applications .

the oig concluded that this lack of documentation resulted in "potentially ineligible firms" being accepted into the program .

to address this situation , the sba agreed with the oig's recommendation to clearly document , in its business development management information system ( bdmis ) which tracks 8 ( a ) program applications , justifications for approval when they differ from that of lower - level reviewers .

the sba asserted that this lack of documentation was not an indication that ineligible firms were being certified into the program without adequate review .

witnesses at congressional hearings have reported that common business opportunity specialists ( bos ) practices , including the interpretation and implementation of standardized policies and procedures , vary from sba district office to sba district office and across state lines .

some members of congress have argued that "many of the problems with … bos advocates are compounded by the fact that" the position's responsibilities are not laid out in statute .

instead , they argue , the position's responsibilities "have been left to develop with sops [standard operating procedures] and common practices. .

they have also asserted that boss are "often pulled by their district offices to help with other small business programs rather than overseeing the 8 ( a ) participants as intended. .

during the 115 th congress , p.l .

115-91 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2018 , among other provisions , amended the small business act to clarify the responsibilities of business opportunity specialists by providing them a statutory list of duties .

those concerned about variation in 8 ( a ) program service delivery also note that a 2010 gao report found a "breakdown in communication between sba district offices and headquarters … that resulted in inconsistencies in the way district offices delivered the program. .

in addition , in 2015 , gao indicated that the sba's overlapping organizational structure may contribute to variation in 8 ( a ) program service delivery: sba's organizational structure often results in working relationships between headquarters and field offices that differ from reporting relationships , potentially posing programmatic challenges .

district officials work with program offices at sba's headquarters to implement the agency's programs , but these officials report to regional administrators , who themselves report to the office of field operations .

for example , … business opportunity specialists in the district offices work with the office of government contracting and business development at sba headquarters to assist small businesses with securing government contracts but report to district office management .

during the 114 th congress , legislation ( h.r .

4341 ) was introduced to require gao to review the sba's office of government contracting and business development ( gcbd ) and make recommendations to address several administrative concerns , including issues related to the sba's organizational overlap .

in a related development , gao reported that a "skill gap" among boss may also contribute to the possibility of variation in the program's service delivery .

gao noted that the sba's office of field operations ( ofo ) revised its field office operations in 2012 following a 2010 review of all position descriptions to ensure that the descriptions aligned with the sba's strategic plan and district office strategic plans .

the sba informed gao that it undertook this review because district office staff were given new responsibilities after the sba moved loan processing from district offices to loan processing centers in 2004 .

before the review , district office staff had two principal program delivery positions , lender relations specialist and business development specialist .

as a result of the review , descriptions for both of these positions were rewritten and the business development position was split into two separate positions , economic development specialist and business opportunity specialist .

the skills and competencies for the new position descriptions focused on the change in the district office's function from loan processing to program compliance and community outreach .

staff were retrained for the rewritten positions .

the sba reported that the change in the position descriptions created a "skill gap" because employees who were originally required to have a financial background for loan processing were now required to have different skills , such as a marketing background and interpersonal skills needed for assisting and overseeing 8 ( a ) firms and conducting outreach to small businesses .

the sba informed gao that the skill gap was particularly pronounced among 885 employees in two job series , gs - 1101 and gs - 1102 , including boss , economic development specialists , and procurement staff , and that despite its efforts to address this skill gap through training and offering early retirement and separation incentives in fy2012 and fy2014 in an effort to restructure its personnel , "the competency gap remains. .

the sba also noted that its skill gap had been compounded by recent changes in job requirements and new initiatives that require new skill sets for its employees .

for example , p.l .

114-92 , the national defense authorization act of fy2016 , requires boss to obtain federal acquisition certification in contracting as a prerequisite for employment .

arguably , the sba's relatively recent issuance of a new 300-page sop ( effective september 2016 ) for the office of business development , which oversees the 8 ( a ) program , may help to address the reported skill gap .

the new sop provides all sba staff , including boss , specific guidance concerning their roles and responsibilities in 8 ( a ) program service delivery .

as mentioned previously , two sba offices , the gcbd and the ofo , share responsibility for overseeing the 8 ( a ) program .

within gcbd , boss assigned to the office of certification and eligibility ( oce ) evaluate all 8 ( a ) program applications and conduct continuing eligibility reviews of "high - risk" or "complex" 8 ( a ) firms , including those firms with total 8 ( a ) revenue exceeding $10 million , are part of a joint venture , are party to a mentor - protégé agreement , or are an entity - owned firm such as an alaska native corporation , and those that are requested from district office field staff .

however , an sba oig audit found that the oce reviewed the continuing eligibility of less than half of the firms identified as high risk in fy2016 ( 352 of 859 firms , or 41% ) and in fy2017 ( 350 of 798 firms , or 44% ) .

within ofo , boss in each of the sba's 68 district offices work directly with their assigned 8 ( a ) firms and , among other duties , conduct annual reviews of those firms' progress toward achieving the targets , objectives , and goals set forth in their business development plan .

according to the 8 ( a ) program's standard operating procedures ( sop ) manual , boss in each of the sba's 68 district offices conduct continuing eligibility reviews for all 8 ( a ) firms not reviewed by the gcbd to ensure their compliance with all continuing eligibility requirements during the annual review process .

however , in practice , the sba oig's audit found that district office boss assess continuing eligibility as part of the annual review process for all 8 ( a ) firms , including those deemed to be high risk or complex .

the sba is also required to review the participant's continuing eligibility "upon receipt of specific and credible information alleging that a participant no longer meets the eligibility requirements. .

generally , the sba receives this information from the sba oig's hotline .

however , the sba oig's audit found that the oce did not conduct continuing eligibility reviews for any of the 44 oig hotline complaints that were referred to the gcbd from october 1 , 2015 , through may 4 , 2017 .

in addition , gcbd did not inform district office boss of complaints filed against firms within their purview .

as a result , district office boss took no action regarding the complaints .

the sba oig's audit reviewed the continuing eligibility of two samples of 8 ( a ) firms to determine whether the sba's continuing eligibility review process "consistently identify ineligible firms enrolled in the program": the 15 individually owned 8 ( a ) firms with the highest set - aside dollars in fy2016 that were scheduled to have continuing eligibility reviews within the first half of fy2017 and 10 individually owned 8 ( a ) firms that were identified as being ineligible in hotline complaints received between october 1 , 2015 , and may 4 , 2017 .

the sba oig found that "despite oce and district offices having shared responsibility for assessing 8 ( a ) firms' continuing eligibility , they did not detect that 4 of the 15 individually - owned 8 ( a ) firms we reviewed were ineligible for the 8 ( a ) program," and "our review of the 10 firms referred by the oig hotline revealed that they were all ineligible for the 8 ( a ) program , based on issues such as excessive income and lack of good character. .

in addition , the sba oig found that the sba had identified eligibility concerns through its annual reviews and continuing eligibility reviews for 6 of the 15 individually owned 8 ( a ) firms the oig had reviewed , but "did not take timely action to remove these firms from the 8 ( a ) program or document resolution of eligibility issues. .

the sba oig concluded that 20 of the 25 firms it reviewed should have been removed from the 8 ( a ) program and made 11 recommendations "to improve the overall management and effectiveness" of the 8 ( a ) program's continuing eligibility review process .

sba management agreed with seven of the recommendations , partially agreed to the other four recommendations , and indicated that it would conduct continuing eligibility reviews for the firms identified in the sba oig's audit as ineligible and take appropriate action .

section 8 ( a ) ( 6 ) ( a ) of the small business act defines economically disadvantaged individuals as "socially disadvantaged individuals whose ability to compete in the free enterprise system has been impaired due to diminished capital and credit opportunities as compared to others in the same business area who are not socially disadvantaged. .

in determining the degree of diminished credit and capital opportunities , section 8 ( a ) ( 6 ) ( a ) authorizes the sba to "consider , but not be limited to , the assets and net worth of such socially disadvantaged individual. .

as mentioned previously , in 1989 , the sba established by regulation that personal net worth of less than $250,000 at the time of entry into the program ( and $750,000 for continuing eligibility ) constitutes economic disadvantage .

some members of congress have argued that these financial thresholds should be increased or periodically adjusted for inflation .

during the 112 th congress , h.r .

3754 , the not too small to succeed in business act of 2011 , would have increased these thresholds to $750,000 for 8 ( a ) program admission and $2.25 million for continued participation after admission .

h.r .

2424 , the expanding opportunities for main street act of 2011 , would have amended section 8 ( a ) ( 6 ) ( a ) by inserting after "disadvantaged individual" the following: "for purposes of this section , an individual having a net worth of more than $1,500,000 is not economically disadvantaged. .

legislation with provisions similar to those in h.r .

2424 was also introduced during the 113 th congress ( h.r .

2550 , the minority small business enhancement act of 2013 , and h.r .

2551 , the expanding opportunities for main street act of 2013 ) .

advocates for increasing the program's personal net worth threshold noted that the department of transportation ( dot ) increased the personal net worth threshold for determining eligibility for the disadvantaged business enterprise ( dbe ) program in 2011 to account for inflation .

the dbe threshold was increased from $750,000 ( which was set by dot in 1999 , and was based on the 8 ( a ) program's $750,000 threshold ) to $1.32 million .

dbe firms , which are provided special consideration in the awarding of federal transportation contracts , argued that the limit penalized success and imposed "a glass ceiling on the growth and competitiveness of dbe firms. .

opponents argued that the $1.32 million limit was too high and would include business owners who were not truly disadvantaged and that raising the limit would favor larger , established , and richer dbes at the expense of smaller , start - up firms because the larger companies would be able to stay in the program longer .

more recently , the sba's oig has argued that the sba's 1989 decision to exclude equity in a primary residence from an individual's net worth calculation "serves as a loophole allowing affluent business owners to shelter wealth in personal real estate , while taking advantage of a program designed to help the socially and economically disadvantaged. .

pursuant to p.l .

100-656 , the business opportunity development reform act of 1988 , the sba is required to "develop and implement a process for the systematic collection of data on the operations of the [8 ( a ) ] program" and to report this data , not later than april 30 of each year , to congress .

the act requires the report to include the following: the average personal net worth of individuals who own and control concerns that were initially certified for program participation during the immediately preceding fiscal year and the dollar distribution of each of these individual's net worth , at $50,000 increments .

a description and estimate of the benefits and costs that have accrued to the economy and the federal government in the immediately preceding fiscal year due to the operations of those business concerns that were performing 8 ( a ) contracts .

a compilation and evaluation of those business concerns that have exited the program during the immediately preceding three fiscal years , including the number of concerns actively engaged in business operations , those that have ceased or substantially curtailed operations , including the reasons for such actions , and those concerns that have been acquired by other firms or organizations owned and controlled by other than socially and economically disadvantaged individuals .

for those businesses that have continued operations after they exited from the program , the sba administrator is required to separately detail the benefits and costs that have accrued to the economy during the immediately preceding fiscal year due to their operations .

a listing of all program participants during the preceding fiscal year identifying , by state and region , for each firm: the concern's name , the race or ethnicity , and gender of the disadvantaged owners , the dollar value of all contracts received in the preceding year , the dollar amount of advance payments received by each concern pursuant to contracts awarded under section 8 ( a ) , and a description including ( if appropriate ) an estimate of the dollar value of all benefits and loans received during such year .

the total dollar value of 8 ( a ) contracts and options awarded during the preceding fiscal year and such amount expressed as a percentage of total sales of all firms participating in the program during such year ; and of firms in each of the nine years of program participation .

a description of additional resources or program authorities required to provide the types of services needed over the next two - year period to service the expected portfolio of 8 ( a ) certified firms .

the total dollar value of 8 ( a ) contracts and options , at such dollar increments as the sba administrator deems appropriate , for each four digit standard industrial classification code under which such contracts and options were classified .

the sba's fy2014 report ( the latest one available ) indicated that 8 ( a ) firms "contributed an estimated 158,018 jobs to the nation's economy," and that 2,209 of the 2,288 firms that had exited and completed the program during the three preceding fiscal years ( october 1 , 2010 through september 30 , 2013 ) were still active , 45 had ceased operations , and 34 did not have data available for determining their status as reported by dun and bradstreet .

of the active firms , "two were acquired by another firm or organization owned and controlled by other than socially and economically disadvantages individuals and 144 firms were substantially curtailed within the past three years. .

in addition , the 2,209 still active firms reported fy2014 revenue of approximately $5.49 billion and provided jobs for approximately 70,330 persons .

in 2000 , gao recommended that the sba augment its data collection activities by periodically surveying a nationwide sample of 8 ( a ) firms .

gao argued that a survey would improve the sba's ability to determine how well the program is working , further arguing that "at a minimum , the survey should assess whether sba assistance is meeting the firms' expectations and needs. .

the sba currently contracts with a third - party to conduct an annual client satisfaction survey of small businesses that have received management training and technical assistance from small business development centers , score , and women business centers .

the survey's objective is to measure these programs' impact "on the creation , financial development and survival of client firms. .

the wording of many of that survey's questions , which focus on client satisfaction and the programs' impact on client behavior and economic success , could prove useful should the sba decide to conduct a nationwide survey of 8 ( a ) firms .

