the federal government supports a number of benefits for qualified former members of the armed forces ( veterans ) .

some of these benefits are targeted to veterans who , in the course of service , incurred or aggravated an injury or contracted a disease ( service - disabled veterans ) .

this report discusses major benefits that are provided to individual service - disabled veterans by the department of veterans affairs ( va ) .

in some cases , it may omit smaller va programs .

this report divides benefits into four categories: 1 .

disability compensation is monthly payments for veterans who have been determined to have a service - connected disability .

2 .

vocational rehabilitation and employment benefits typically support service - disabled veterans in obtaining and maintaining suitable employment .

3 .

housing grants and benefits can assist veterans in modifying their homes to accommodate a service - connected disability .

4 .

other grants and benefits are available to qualified subsets of service - disabled veterans , including grants for automobiles or clothing .

table 1 summarizes the programs discussed in this report .

as the table shows , the programs vary in both funding levels and the number of beneficiaries served .

veterans disability compensation ( vdc ) is a monthly cash payment to a veteran with a service - connected disability .

the payment is determined by the veteran's disability rating and number of dependents , including a spouse .

the vocational rehabilitation and employment ( vr&e ) program provides employment - related services to veterans with a service - connected disability and an employment handicap .

the program also provides independent living services for qualified veterans who may not be able to seek employment .

several va grants are available to assist veterans who have service - connected disabilities with their housing - related needs .

the veterans benefits administration operates the specially adapted housing program , consisting of two subgrants .

the program provides grants to veterans and servicemembers with certain service - connected disabilities to assist them in constructing , purchasing , or remodeling homes to fit their needs .

the veterans health administration administers the home improvements and structural alterations grant to assist veterans who have both service - and non - service - connected disabilities in making their homes accessible .

veterans with certain service - connected disabilities are eligible for one - time grants toward the purchase of an automobile or for financial assistance to purchase adaptive equipment for an existing automobile to make it safe or legal for the veteran's use .

to be eligible for the automobile grant , a veteran must have one of the following service - connected conditions: loss or permanent loss of use of one or both feet ; loss or permanent loss or use of one or both hands ; permanent impairment of vision in both eyes ; severe burns ; or als ( or lou gehrig's disease ) .

to be eligible for adaptive equipment , a veteran must have one of the service - connected conditions listed above or ankylosis ( i.e. , immobility of the joint ) of one or more of the knees or hips .

a veteran is eligible for only one automobile grant in his or her lifetime .

the current maximum grant is $20,235.20 and is adjusted annually on october 1 based on changes in the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( cpi - u ) .

payment is made to the seller of the automobile .

a veteran may be eligible for adaptive equipment for up to two automobiles during a four - year period .

payments for adaptive equipment may be made to either the seller or the veteran up to maximum amounts set periodically by the veterans health administration .

for example , the current maximum amount payable for an automatic transmission is $1,363.00 .

a veteran with a service - connected disability is eligible for an annual clothing allowance if because of the disability he or she wears or uses a prosthetic or orthopedic appliance , including a wheelchair , which the va determines is likely to damage the veteran's clothing ; or uses a prescription skin medication that the va determines causes irreparable damage to the veteran's outergarments .

a veteran is eligible for one annual clothing allowance if he or she uses one type of device or medication .

a veteran may be eligible for more than one annual clothing allowance if he or she uses multiple devices or medications and multiple outergarments are subject to damage , or one type of outergarment is subject to an increased rate of damage due to the use of multiple devices or medications .

the current clothing allowance is $779.62 and is payable on august 1 of each year .

the clothing allowance is not automatically adjusted for annual increases in the cost - of - living .

however , generally , legislation is enacted annually to increase the clothing allowance using the social security cola .

a veteran with a service - connected disability , even if rated at 0% , who is in good health may apply for service - disabled veterans insurance ( s - dvi ) life insurance within two years of receiving a disability rating from the va. good health is defined by regulation as being free from any medical condition that would likely weaken the person's normal physical or mental functions or shorten his or her life .

s - dvi provides a variety of term and permanent life insurance plans to eligible veterans .

s - dvi policies have maximum face value of $10,000 and do not pay dividends .

insurance premiums vary by age and type of plan .

totally disabled veterans are eligible to have their premiums waived .

a veteran under the age of 65 and eligible for an s - dvi premium waiver may also purchase $30,000 in supplemental coverage if he or she applies within one - year of receiving the premium waiver .

s - dvi may be paid in the case of a veteran who did not apply for insurance during the two - year eligibility period due to mental incompetence and who dies before a guardian is appointed or within two - years of such appointment ( referred to as gratuitous s - dvi ) .

an eligible beneficiary must generally apply for gratuitous s - dvi within two years of the veteran's death .

gratuitous s - dvi is paid as a $10,000 lump sum payment .

