e ach year , congress and the administration provide funding for a variety of grant programs through the department of justice ( doj ) .

these programs provide support to state , local , and tribal governments and nonprofit organizations for a variety of criminal justice - related purposes , such as combatting violence against women , reducing backlogs of dna evidence , supporting community policing , assisting crime victims , promoting prisoner reentry , and improving the functioning of the juvenile justice system .

these programs are funded through five accounts in the annual commerce , justice , science , and related agencies ( cjs ) appropriations act: violence against women programs ; research , evaluation , and statistics ; state and local law enforcement assistance ; juvenile justice programs ; and community oriented policing services .

this report provides an overview of congressional actions to fund doj's grant programs through these accounts for fy2018 .

the report also provides information on fy2017 appropriations for doj's grant programs .

the amounts in this report reflect only new funding made available at the start of the fiscal year .

therefore , the amounts do not include any rescissions of unobligated or deobligated balances that may be counted as offsets to newly enacted appropriations .

the office on violence against women ( ovw ) was established to administer programs created under the violence against women act ( vawa ) of 1994 ( p.l .

103-322 ) .

these programs provide financial and technical assistance to communities around the country to facilitate the creation of programs , policies , and practices designed to improve criminal justice responses to domestic violence , dating violence , sexual assault , and stalking .

the trump administration's fy2018 budget request for ovw was largely in - line with what was provided for fy2017 .

the administration's budget request would have cut , relative to fy2017 funding , $2.0 million from the grant program that is designed to improve the criminal justice response to sexual assault , domestic violence , dating violence , and stalking ; $1.0 million from grants that are designed to prevent domestic violence in rural jurisdictions ; and $1.5 million from grants that assist indian tribes in planning , implementing , and exercising criminal jurisdiction over non - indians who commit crimes of domestic violence or dating violence or violate certain protection orders in indian country .

the administration's budget request would have increased funding by $1.0 million , relative to fy2017 funding , for a program to increase states' allocations under the stop formula grant program if the state has a law that allows women to terminate the parental rights of rapists .

the administration proposed supplementing $35.0 million in appropriations from the general fund of the treasury for the ovw account with a $445.0 million transfer from the crime victims fund .

for fy2017 , congress and the administration supplemented appropriations from the general fund of the treasury for ovw with a $326.0 million transfer from the crime victims fund .

the house - passed bill ( h.r .

3354 ) would have funded nearly every program under the ovw account at the fy2017 level .

the house - passed bill included a $0.5 million increase for research on violence against women relative to fy2017 funding .

the proposed $45.5 million increase in the ovw account relative to fy2017 funding was due to the house proposing to fund grants for victims of trafficking through the ovw account rather than the state and local law enforcement assistance account , where the appropriation for this program is traditionally provided .

the house - passed bill did not recommend transferring any funding from the crime victims fund to the ovw account .

the senate committee - reported bill ( s. 1662 ) would have also largely funded programs under the ovw account at the fy2017 level .

the two exceptions were $1.0 million increases , relative to fy2017 funding , for both transitional housing assistance and grants for rural domestic violence and child abuse enforcement assistance .

the committee - reported bill included a $379.0 million transfer from the crime victims fund to the ovw account .

congress and the administration provided $492.0 million for ovw for fy2018 , all of which comes via a transfer from the crime victims fund .

fy2018 funding was $10.5 million greater than fy2017 funding and $12.0 million more than the administration's request .

in general , for fy2018 ovw programs were funded at the fy2017 level , but there were a few programs that received an increase .

congress and the administration provided , relative to fy2017 funding , an additional $5.0 million for transitional housing assistance grants , an additional $5.0 million for grants to assist victims of domestic violence in rural areas , and an additional $0.5 million for research related to violence against women .

the office of justice programs ( ojp ) manages and coordinates the national institute of justice ; bureau of justice statistics ; office of juvenile justice and delinquency prevention ; office of victims of crimes ; bureau of justice assistance ; office of sex offender sentencing , monitoring , apprehending , registering , and tracking ; and related grant programs .

the community oriented policing services ( cops ) office awards grants to state , local , and tribal law enforcement agencies throughout the united states so they can hire new officers , train them in community policing , purchase and deploy new crime - fighting technologies , and develop and test new and innovative policing strategies .

the administration requested $218.0 million for cops for fy2018 , which was $3.5 million less than fy2017 funding .

the budget request would have increased funding for the cops hiring program , and within this amount reestablished a set - aside for assistance to tribal law enforcement .

however , the budget request would have eliminated funding for antimethamphetamine and antiheroin task forces .

the house - passed bill included $240.5 million for the cops account , but it would have eliminated funding for many programs that are traditionally administered by the cops office .

most of the programs in the house bill that would have been funded under the cops account have traditionally received funding under the s&llea account .

the senate committee - reported bill included $226.5 million for the cops account .

the committee - reported bill included a $13.0 million increase for the cops hiring program and a $2.0 million increase for antiheroin task forces relative to fy2017 funding .

congress and the administration funded the cops account at $275.5 million for fy2018 .

this amount is $54.0 million greater than fy2017 funding and $57.5 million greater than the administration's request .

congress and the administration increased funding for the cops hiring program by $31.0 million relative to fy2017 funding , and within that amount , reestablished a set - aside for tribal law enforcement assistance ( $30.0 million ) .

there is also a $22.0 million increase for antiheroin task forces relative to fy2017 funding .

in the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 , funding for the police act — which allows cops funds to be used to provide active shooter training — is its own line item in the cops account rather than being funded as a set - aside from the hiring program , and funding for program increased by $2.5 million for fy2018 .

