financial regulatory relief has been identified as a policy priority by president donald trump — who has reportedly called for the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( p.l .

111-203 ) to be "dismantled" — and by some members of the 115 th congress .

this report does not discuss the content of current financial regulatory policy or proposals to provide relief from those policies .

instead , it provides a framework for understanding how relief might be pursued , which could be useful to proponents and opponents of such relief .

it discusses the sources of policy changes following the 2007-2009 financial crisis that have been the focus of recent relief efforts and outlines the different legislative strategies available to congress .

in addition , the report addresses what regulators and the administration could do to provide relief without statutory change , to clarify where legislative action would or would not be necessary .

many financial reforms were adopted in response to the 2007-2009 financial crisis .

reforms aimed to address problems that emerged during the crisis , such as financial instability and inadequate protection for consumers and investors .

critics argue that these reforms went too far and that the burden of financial regulation now exceeds the benefits .

the financial reforms at the center of the current debate primarily stem from legislation enacted since 2008 , international agreements , and preexisting authority of the financial regulators .

regulatory relief in financial services refers to policy changes to reduce or eliminate regulatory requirements or the costs of complying with those requirements .

this report does not discuss the content of current financial regulatory policy or proposals to provide relief from those policies .

instead , it discusses different approaches to implementing regulatory relief .

nevertheless , the following framework for evaluating relief proposals may be useful to consider before choosing between different approaches .

in determining whether to provide regulatory relief , a central question is whether an appropriate trade - off has been struck between the benefits and costs of regulation .

benefits .

financial regulation has different objectives and potential benefits , including enhancing the safety and soundness of certain institutions ; protecting consumers and investors from fraud , manipulation , and discrimination ; and promoting financial stability while reducing systemic risk .

a financial regulatory system that delivers a baseline level of stability and trust between financial agents is a precondition to a healthy financial system that can generate robust economic growth .

regulators employ different tools to achieve these goals .

regulators issue rules ; supervise and examine institutions to verify that the rules are followed ; and take enforcement actions , such as imposing fines , when the regulations are not followed .

in other cases , regulators require companies or individuals to meet certain standards and receive a license before engaging in a particular business practice .

the specific goals regulators attempt to achieve and the tools they use vary by market .

for example , risk management is emphasized for banking regulation and disclosure is a priority in securities regulation .

costs .

the costs associated with government regulation — rulemaking , supervision , and enforcement — are frequently referred to as regulatory burden .

regulatory requirements often are imposed on providers of financial services , so financial institutions frequently are the focus of discussions about regulatory burden .

but costs associated with regulation can flow through the providers and ultimately be borne , in part , by different entities , including consumers , the government , and the economy at large .

for example , a provider may respond to increased regulatory burden by raising the prices it charges to customers .

if regulatory burden reduces the long - term availability of credit , it would have a negative effect on business investment and economic growth .

regulatory burden may manifest itself in different forms .

operating costs are the costs the company must bear to adhere to the regulation , such as employee training .

some regulations create one - time operating costs borne up front , whereas other regulations create recurring costs that exist as long as the requirement is in effect .

opportunity costs are the costs associated with foregone business opportunities because of additional regulation .

for example , a lender may make fewer mortgages because new regulations make mortgage lending more expensive , and that lender may instead perform a different type of lending that is now more profitable .

trade - o ffs .

regulatory relief may face trade - offs between reducing regulatory burden and potentially reducing the benefits of regulation .

the trade - offs are not limited to the effects on the direct recipients of relief — usually the providers of financial services — but may extend to the effects on consumers , investors , particular markets , and market stability more broadly .

the presence of regulatory burden does not necessarily mean that a regulation is undesirable or should be repealed .

a regulation can have benefits that could outweigh its costs , but the presence of costs means , tautologically , that the regulation causes regulatory burden .

the concept of regulatory burden can be contrasted with the phrase unduly burdensome .

whereas regulatory burden is about the costs associated with a regulation , unduly burdensome refers to the balance between benefits and costs .

for example , some would consider a regulation to be unduly burdensome if costs are in excess of benefits or the same benefits could be achieved at a lower cost .

however , the presence of regulatory burden does not mean that all regulations are unduly burdensome .

policymakers consider these trade - offs and evaluate the broader effects of regulation that could be either positive or negative , such as how a requirement would impact innovation , the price of credit , and the availability of credit .

for example , efforts to protect consumers against potential actions taken by banks may drive up the cost for a bank to provide certain services and may result in that activity migrating to a less regulated part of the financial system or to foreign jurisdictions with lower regulatory standards .

however , trade - offs are not always present .

if regulation makes an unstable system more stable , it could reduce costs and increase the availability of credit .

through legislation , congress provides financial regulators with the authority that underpins the regulations they issue .

thus , congress can amend or repeal that authority through new legislation .

congress can pass legislation that amends or repeals specific rules or parts of the statute that those rules are based on .

congress can also instruct regulators to revisit rules , sometimes by requiring studies , in light of policy goals that congress specifies .

alternatively , congress may provide regulators with broad authority to provide relief at their discretion .

congress may provide relief to all financial services providers or target it to specific groups , such as small financial institutions .

regulatory relief could be enacted through the normal legislative process .

for example , h.r .

10 , a wide - ranging regulatory relief package , was passed by the house on june 8 , 2017 .

regulatory relief could also occur through the annual appropriations process .

in addition , two special legislative procedures are available that congress may use in limited circumstances — the congressional review act ( cra ) and the reconciliation process .

these tools have advantages and disadvantages compared to the normal legislative process .

the main advantage is that both require only a simple majority for approval in the senate .

the disadvantage is that many of the regulatory relief proposals under consideration would not qualify for either process , for reasons discussed below .

financial policy is implemented mainly through regulations issued by the federal financial regulators , shown in table 1 , not by agencies that are more directly influenced or controlled by the administration .

although the authority for these regulations derives from statute , regulators often have considerable latitude to determine the practical details of how a regulation is structured and hence the regulatory burden it imposes .

the financial regulators have been statutorily structured to be independent from the administration , in the sense that they have greater autonomy from the president's leadership and insulation from partisan politics than is typical of executive - branch agencies .

a number of organizational features found in some of these agencies , including self - funding and "for cause" ( as opposed to "at will" ) removal , support this independence .

in theory , a regulator could issue new regulations modifying or repealing any previously issued regulation , assuming in the case of repeal that the rule is not statutorily or judicially required to be in place .

the repeal process can be time - consuming and must comply with certain mandated procedures , however .

the vast majority of agency rulemakings must comply with the administrative procedure act's ( apa's ; 5 u.s.c .

§551 et seq. ) .

notice and comment process , which requires an agency to provide the public with notice of a proposed rulemaking and a meaningful opportunity to comment on the rule .

the apa explicitly defines rulemaking as "the agency process for formulating , amending , or repealing a rule . .

under the apa , the agency must provide a reasoned justification for repealing a rule .

proposed rules can be modified more quickly and easily than final rules .

each financial regulator currently has several proposed rules that have not yet been finalized .

if a rule is in the proposed stage , a regulator can more easily modify it by withdrawing the proposed rule or by republishing a modified proposed rule for public comment .

sometimes , agencies decide not to finalize proposed rules , although a key factor in such a decision would be whether the statute requires or gives regulators the discretion to act .

this discussion of an agency's ability to modify regulations says nothing about the financial regulators' desire to modify regulations .

until new leadership is appointed , regulators may have little desire to revisit regulations that they have issued recently under current or previous leadership .

after a rule has been finalized , ensuring that firms comply with the regulation involves judgment by regulators .

regulators can alter how a regulation is interpreted and enforced using their supervisory and enforcement powers .

regulators can issue nonbinding guidance and supervisory letters to regulated entities providing further explanation of how to adhere to a regulation .

although changes in supervision and enforcement cannot substitute for the rulemaking process , they can subtly influence regulatory burden by changing how rules are complied with or enforced .

high - profile examples of how supervision has influenced financial policy in recent years include a joint agency guidance on leveraged lending , a cfpb bulletin on indirect auto lending , and a joint agency statement on commercial real estate .

regulators also have latitude to change firms' behavior through enforcement powers .

for example , numerous legal settlements surrounding mortgage lending following the financial crisis included codes of conduct and changes in business practices , which created new industry norms .

the president's role in financial regulation is limited relative to other policy areas .

the president may issue executive orders instructing agencies to undertake rulemaking , reports , or reviews .

however , the president's ability to compel agency action likely differs depending on whether the agency is a traditional executive - branch agency or an independent regulatory agency .

financial regulators are independent regulatory agencies that are not required to coordinate their policy priorities with the president's .

although the president's scope of authority over independent regulatory agencies is not completely clear , the president generally is viewed as lacking the direct authority to order an independent regulatory agency to repeal a rule or revoke a discretionary agency directive or guidance document .

the following sections highlight major areas where the president can directly influence financial regulation .

the president may nominate individuals with similar priorities to fill an agency's leadership positions when those positions become vacant .

in addition , the treasury secretary plays a role in financial regulation as the chair of the financial stability oversight council ( fsoc ) .

on february 3 , 2017 , president trump signed an executive order entitled "core principles for regulating the united states financial system. .

this order directed the treasury secretary , in consultation with fsoc , to report to the president within 120 days to "identify any laws , treaties , regulations , guidance , reporting and recordkeeping requirements , and other government policies that inhibit federal regulation of the united states financial system in a manner consistent with the core principles. .

the core principles are ( a ) empower americans to make independent financial decisions and informed choices in the marketplace , save for retirement , and build individual wealth ; ( b ) prevent taxpayer - funded bailouts ; ( c ) foster economic growth and vibrant financial markets through more rigorous regulatory impact analysis that addresses systemic risk and market failures , such as moral hazard and information asymmetry ; ( d ) enable american companies to be competitive with foreign firms in domestic and foreign markets ; ( e ) advance american interests in international financial regulatory negotiations and meetings ; ( f ) make regulation efficient , effective , and appropriately tailored ; and ( g ) restore public accountability within federal financial regulatory agencies and rationalize the federal financial regulatory framework .

the order does not revise or repeal any specific regulation , which can be done only through the standard rulemaking process .

on january 30 , 2017 , president trump issued executive order 13371 , stating that for fy2017 , ( a ) unless prohibited by law , whenever an executive department or agency ( agency ) publicly proposes for notice and comment or otherwise promulgates a new regulation , it shall identify at least two existing regulations to be repealed .

 ( b ) for fiscal year 2017 , which is in progress , the heads of all agencies are directed that the total incremental cost of all new regulations , including repealed regulations , to be finalized this year shall be no greater than zero , unless otherwise required by law or consistent with advice provided in writing by the director of the office of management and budget ( director ) .

 ( c ) in furtherance of the requirement of subsection ( a ) of this section , any new incremental costs associated with new regulations shall , to the extent permitted by law , be offset by the elimination of existing costs associated with at least two prior regulations .

any agency eliminating existing costs associated with prior regulations under this subsection shall do so in accordance with the administrative procedure act and other applicable law .

although the president's ability to use executive orders as a means of implementing presidential power has been established as a matter of law and practice , it is equally well established that the substance of an executive order , including any requirements or prohibitions , may have the force and effect of law only if the presidential action is based on power vested in the president by the u.s. constitution or delegated to the president by congress .

because financial regulators are independent regulatory agencies , they cannot be compelled to comply with executive orders such as executive order 13371 that direct agencies to provide regulatory relief .

nevertheless , some agencies have indicated that they intend to voluntarily comply with certain executive orders .

one notable postcrisis regulation issued by the previous administration — as opposed to an independent regulatory agency — was the department of labor's ( dol's ) 2016 fiduciary rule , which requires a uniform fiduciary standard for registered broker - dealers and investment advisers when giving financial advice on retirement accounts .

previously , broker - dealers were held to a lower "suitability" standard .

on february 3 , 2017 , president trump issued a presidential memorandum directing the dol "to examine the fiduciary duty rule to determine whether it may adversely affect the ability of americans to gain access to retirement information and financial advice. .

if the dol finds the fiduciary rule to be inconsistent with the priorities of the presidential memorandum , the memorandum directs the dol to initiate rulemaking to rescind or revise the rule .

the treasury secretary plays a key role in some of the new authorities that the dodd - frank act created to promote financial stability .

the treasury secretary has the opportunity to influence regulatory priorities through his position as chair of fsoc .

fsoc is a council created by the dodd - frank act and made up predominantly of the federal financial regulators that is tasked with identifying risks to financial stability , promoting market discipline , and responding to emerging threats to financial stability .

as fsoc chair , the treasury secretary sets the council's agenda .

fsoc has limited rulemaking authority , however .

it can make recommendations to member agencies , but it cannot compel agencies to follow those recommendations .

potentially , these powers could be used to "name and shame" a member agency that is conducting activities with which the fsoc chair or other members disagree — but the agency could choose to ignore that pressure .

with the exception of limited authority regarding the cfpb , fsoc cannot override or reverse member agency rulemaking .

fsoc's most notable rulemaking authority is its ability to designate nonbank financial institutions as systemically important financial institutions ( sifis ) .

sifis are subject to enhanced prudential regulation by the federal reserve .

on april 21 , 2017 , president trump issued a presidential memorandum calling for the secretary of the treasury to conduct a review of the sifi designation process within 180 days .

the memorandum recommended a temporary pause on designations until the review was complete .

currently , two insurers ( aig and prudential ) are designated as sifis .

fsoc is required to review sifis' designations at least once a year .

fsoc last designated a sifi in december 2014 .

if a sifi were de - designated , it would automatically cease to be subject to enhanced regulation .

in a vote to designate a company as a sifi , the fsoc chair has veto power .

however , de - designating an existing sifi requires a vote of two - thirds of fsoc , including the chair .

in other words , the chair can unilaterally prevent a sifi from being designated or de - designated but cannot unilaterally de - designate an existing sifi .

title ii of the dodd - frank act created the orderly liquidation authority ( ola ) to resolve certain failing financial firms .

ola can only be triggered if the treasury secretary makes a determination , subject to a recommendation by the fed and fdic and subject to judicial review , that the firm's failure would "have serious adverse effects on financial stability," and no viable private alternative is available to ola .

ola has never been used since its enactment in 2010 .

on april 21 , 2017 , president trump issued a presidential memorandum calling for the treasury secretary to review ola and refrain from using ola until the review is complete .

all the leadership positions at the financial regulators have fixed terms and are appointed by the president following senate confirmation .

many recent reforms were approved by current agency leadership , who might therefore be reluctant to revisit them .

although not always specified in statute , it appears that the heads of financial regulators , in contrast with cabinet secretaries , typically do not serve at the pleasure of the president ( "at will" ) .

instead , most financial regulators may be removed only if a higher "for cause" threshold is met .

 ( an ongoing court case will determine whether the cfpb director's for cause removal status is constitutional given the unique structure of the cfpb. ) .

thus , opportunities to nominate individuals for these positions generally must wait until the positions become vacant as terms end or individuals step down prematurely .

over time , these positions will become vacant , allowing president trump to nominate candidates to fill most , if not all , of them .

on may 2 , 2017 , the senate confirmed president trump's nominee , jay clayton , to be chair of the sec .

at present , several positions are vacant , including the chairs of the occ and the cftc .

president trump's nominees for chairs of the occ and the cftc await senate confirmation .

some financial regulators are led by a single director , and some are led by a multimember board or commission .

most , but not all , multimember boards or commissions have statutory political affiliation requirements that give the president's party a majority of seats but limit the number of board members from one party .

these requirements might limit the number of like - minded nominees that the president could select .

