in a june 23 , 2016 , national referendum , a majority of british voters supported the united kingdom ( uk ) exiting the european union ( eu ) , a process known as "brexit. .

since then , various members of congress have voiced support for launching u.s. - uk free trade agreement ( fta ) negotiations , while other members have moderated their support with calls to ensure that such negotiations do not undercut the promotion of broader u.s. - eu trade relations .

president donald trump , since taking office , has continued to express support for brexit , and stated his intention to nego tiate a u.s. - uk fta "quickly" that is "[g]ood for both sides. .

during a meeting on january 27 , 2017 , president trump and uk prime minister theresa may discussed how the two sides could launch high - level talks and "lay the groundwork" for a future u.s. - uk fta .

in july , the two sides launched a u.s. - uk trade and investment working group to explore a possible post - brexit fta .

u.s. - uk fta negotiations would represent a change in u.s. transatlantic trade policy , which , under the obama administration , focused on negotiating a u.s. - eu transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) fta .

bilateral fta negotiations also would represent a change from the obama administration's focus on multiparty regional negotiations , such as on t - tip and notably the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) .

at the same time , the united states and the uk have had long - standing trade ties .

the united states has viewed the uk as a liberalizing force within the eu , and often has found itself more aligned with the uk on trade policy approaches than with the eu overall .

at the same time , the notion of a u.s. - uk fta is not new .

for example , some policymakers expressed interest previously in exploring the possibility of the uk joining the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) .

more broadly , the notion of a "special relationship" between the united states and uk is long - standing .

formal u.s. - uk fta negotiations cannot start immediately .

the uk is legally precluded from engaging in its own trade negotiations under its eu membership terms .

on march 29 , 2017 , prime minister may sent a letter to the european council notifying the body of the uk's intention to leave the eu .

this action triggered the two - year article 50 exit process under the treaty on european union .

until the uk completes what could be prolonged negotiations with the eu on its terms of withdrawal and formally exits , the uk remains a member of the eu , which retains competence over trade negotiations .

so long as the uk is a member of the eu and in the absence of any preferential trade agreement between the united states and the eu , world trade organization ( wto ) parameters continue to govern u.s. - uk trade — as they do for u.s. trade with all other eu member states .

meanwhile , the united states and the uk could pursue informal discussions on a potential bilateral fta .

congress has important legislative , oversight , and advisory responsibilities regarding a potential u.s. - uk fta .

the role of congress in u.s. trade policy is rooted in article 1 , section 8 , of the u.s. constitution , which grants congress the power to regulate commerce with foreign nations .

congress establishes overall u.s. trade negotiating objectives , which it updated in the 2015 trade promotion authority ( tpa ) legislation ( p.l .

114-26 ) .

this grant of tpa is valid through 2021 ( unless congress enacts a possible extension disapproval resolution in 2018 ) .

congress also would face a decision on future implementing legislation for a u.s. - uk fta to enter into force .

an fta could receive expedited legislative consideration if congress determines that it advances trade negotiating objectives in tpa and meets tpa's other requirements , including for the president to notify and consult with congress on the status and content of the negotiations .

the united states and the uk have a deep , extensive economic relationship .

u.s. firms , large and small , are involved in u.s. - uk trade , directly and as a part of integrated supply chains .

in 2016 , u.s. goods and services exports to the uk totaled about $121 billion , and u.s. goods and services imports from the uk reached $107 billion , yielding a $15 billion u.s. trade surplus ( figure 1 ) .

in terms of the eu , the uk accounted for about one - fifth of u.s. total trade with the eu - 28 , making it the united states' second - largest trading partner within the eu after germany .

globally , in goods trade , the uk ranked as the united states' fifth - largest export destination and seventh - largest source of imports .

top u.s. goods exports to the uk include civilian aircraft and parts , nonmonetary gold bullion ( bulk gold before coining ) , pharmaceutical products , and art .

top u.s. imports from the uk include machines and machinery , motor vehicles , and pharmaceutical products .

the uk is the united states' largest services trading partner , accounting for close to one - tenth of u.s. total trade in services and spanning sectors such as financial services , tourism , education , and business services .

the united states is the uk's largest food and agricultural trading partner outside the eu for both exports and imports .

while the u.s. - uk trade is significant and stands out in particular sectors , it is outweighed by u.s. trade with the rest of the eu ( figure 2 ) .

bilateral foreign direct investment ( fdi ) is also prominent in the relationship ( see figure 3 ) .

in recent years , u.s. and uk majority - owned multinational enterprises ( mnes ) have employed over 2 million employees combined at their subsidiaries in each other's markets .

in 2015 , u.s. - uk fdi totaled $1.2 trillion , composed of $682 billion of u.s. outbound fdi and $556 billion of inbound fdi to the united states .

the uk ranked as the second - largest destination for u.s. fdi abroad ( the netherlands being the largest ) , and the largest source of fdi in the united states ( ahead of japan ) .

a number of industries stand out in the u.s. - uk investment relationship , notably finance and insurance , "professional , scientific , and technical" services , and manufacturing ( particularly chemicals , transportation , equipment , and primary and fabricated metals ) .

u.s. companies are attracted to the uk for its open business environment , workforce skills , and ( current ) access to the eu single market , among other things ( see text box ) .

u.s. financial companies in the uk presently can take advantage of "passporting rights," through which they can set up a "hub" in the uk and then carry out their activities across the eu without having to establish a separate entity and / or obtain authorization in each individual member country .

uk majority - owned mnes with u.s. operations also play a role in u.s. trade .

they represented $43.1 billion of u.s. exports of goods and $48.7 billion of u.s. imports of goods with affiliates in 2015 .

the united states and uk have had minimal trade frictions .

however , the uk notably has been a part of the long - running u.s. - eu dispute in the wto over subsidies to boeing and airbus .

brexit is expected to return authority to the uk to set its own external tariffs and its trade policy more broadly , a competence that currently resides with the eu for all eu member states .

formal u.s. - uk fta negotiations , nevertheless , cannot start immediately .

article 50 of the treaty on european union ( teu ) sets a two - year period for exit negotiations , although some analysts raise the possibility of the process taking longer .

until the uk completes what could be prolonged negotiations for its withdrawal from the eu and formally exits , the uk remains a member of the eu , and the eu continues to have exclusive competence over the uk's trade policy as it does for other eu member states — meaning that the eu negotiates a common trade policy with non - eu countries on behalf of ( and with input from ) its member states .

in the meantime , the united states and the uk could pursue preliminary "informal" discussions .

the line between "formal" and "informal" negotiations may be blurry , but moves such as exchanging tariff offers presumably would cross the line .

a european commission spokesperson described informal discussions as , "you can read the menu , but you can't order the food. .

while u.s. and uk interest in negotiating a bilateral fta is high , including on the part of the trump administration and many members of congress , the brexit process means that formal negotiations are at least two years off .

in the meantime , the united states and uk can discuss an fta informally , though such discussions may be constrained by uncertainty surrounding the status of the future uk - eu trade relationship , among other factors .

congress has an important role in examining a potential u.s. - uk trade agreement , u.s. trade negotiating priorities , and other issues through oversight of , and consultations with , the trump administration .

