malawi is a small , poor southeastern african country of just over 18 million people that in the early 1990s underwent a democratic transition from one - party rule .

the country has long relied on foreign assistance , and u.s. aid is the main focus of u.s. - malawian relations .

congressional interest centers mostly on such assistance , in particular health aid , as well as on concerns over governance trends , notably under the presidency of the late president bingu wa mutharika , the brother of incumbent president peter mutharika .

in recent years , state department and u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) bilateral assistance to malawi has ranged between $196 million ( fy2014 ) and $261 million ( fy2016 ) , supplemented in fy2016 with an additional $102.6 million in disaster response funding , primarily made up of food aid ( see table 1 ) .

the obama administration requested $195.6 million for fy2017 .

under the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l .

115-31 ) congressional appropriators mandated that at least $56 million in development assistance account funds be allocated to malawi , and that up to $10 million of this funding be made available for higher education programs .

the trump administration requested $161.3 million for malawi in fy2018 .

this reduction is part of a roughly one - third reduction in overall global aid levels proposed by the trump administration .

congress has yet to enact fy2018 foreign operations appropriations , but some members have suggested that they are unlikely to enact many of the cuts proposed by the president .

malawi last held national elections in may 2014 .

peter mutharika garnered 36.4% of votes , a plurality that under malawi's electoral system resulted in his victory over his reputed main political rival , then - incumbent president joyce banda .

banda had come to power after the death of president wa mutharika , who died in april 2012 .

banda was serving as president wa mutharika's vice president at the time of his death , and constitutionally succeeded him .

reported efforts by then - foreign minister peter mutharika to prevent her succession led to treason charges against mutharika during the banda administration .

banda's tenure was initially well received by the international donor community , which had developed deep policy differences with wa mutharika ( as discussed below ) , but the emergence of a corruption scandal during her administration tempered this view and led to european and multilateral donors to restrict aid ; some of these restrictions remain in place .

drought .

like the rest of southern africa , malawi was affected by the 2015-2016 el niño weather system .

drought conditions , exacerbated by delays in the distribution of state - subsidized seeds and fertilizer , resulted in poor harvests nationwide .

usaid expects conditions to improve after the 2017 april - may harvest season .

nonetheless , further delays in fertilizer distributions , a worsening regional infestation of south american armyworms , and the inability of many farmers to hire agricultural laborers — a consequence of poor farm earnings in 2015-2016 — are expected to result in continued low output and undercut incomes for poor rural dwellers .

roughly 6.7 million malawians were experiencing acute food insecurity in early 2017 .

territorial dispute .

malawi and tanzania have been engaged in a long - running dispute over competing sovereign claims to lake malawi ( also known as lake nyasa ) , in part fueled by the prospect that it may contain deep - water fossil fuel reserves .

the dispute reemerged in early 2016 , when malawi lodged a diplomatic protest with tanzania's government after the latter published an official map showing the international border equally splitting the lake zone between the two countries .

this depiction was at odds with malawi's claim to the entire lake , based in part on mappings and the administrative history of the lake during the colonial period .

regional mediation efforts , which had stalled in recent years , are being facilitated by mozambique's former president , joaquim chissano .

in february 2017 , president mutharika announced that mediation efforts would resume .

meanwhile , malawi's government has allowed exploration for oil and gas in the lake to continue , drawing criticism from environmentalists and unesco .

some analysts contend that economic plans for the lake , which also include a shipbuilding plant , may remain stymied by uncertainty linked to the ongoing border dispute .

in may 2017 , the malawian government announced that it would lodge a legal case over the dispute with the international court of justice in the hague .

refugee influx .

between late 2015 and april 2016 , roughly 10,000 mozambicans crossed into southern malawi as refugees fleeing renewed fighting between the mozambican government and an armed opposition party known as renamo .

most refugees have returned to mozambique ; roughly 3,000 remained in malawi as of late march 2017 .

these refugees comprise a portion of a total population of about 27,300 refugees — most from rwanda and burundi — hosted by malawi .

some have been living in malawi for several years .

malawi , a former british colony , was ruled by its founding leader , hastings kamuzu banda ( no relation to joyce banda ) , from 1964 until he lost an election in 1994 to opposition leader bakili muluzi .

that presidential election and the accompanying legislative races were the first multi - party elections held after a democratic transition spurred by social unrest and broad opposition to kamuzu banda's arguably authoritarian , patriarchal , and personalistic one - party rule .

during muluzi's two terms , political pluralism grew and market - based economic reforms took hold , as did allegations of corruption .

muluzi faced term limits and was succeeded in 2004 by bingu wa mutharika , whose first term was economically successful , but marred by increasing signs of a semi - authoritarian leadership style , which became more pronounced in his second term .

he tried to expel joyce banda from her position as vice president , but she resisted and left wa mutharika's democratic progressive party ( dpp ) to form her own people's party ( pp ) .

the government harshly repressed mass protests in 2011 , resulting in 20 deaths and about 500 arrests .

these developments prompted various international donors to withhold aid .

in january 2011 , the u.s. millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) paused implementation of its five - year , $350 million compact in malawi .

in 2012 , wa mutharika accused western donors of falsely labeling him undemocratic and of aiding nongovernmental groups intent on ousting him , and said the donors should "go to hell. .

the mcc then suspended the compact , which was reinstated after wa mutharika's death .

mutharika took office in june 2014 .

his cabinet includes finance and economics minister goodall gondwe , a long - time politician , government minister , and former international monetary fund ( imf ) executive .

it also includes a number of locally well - known politicians , including minister of lands , housing , and urban development , atupele muluzi , the son of former president muluzi .

mutharika has retained the defense portfolio .

mutharika , born in 1940 , is a former long - time u.s. resident and professor of law who held multiple teaching posts in the united states and africa .

he returned to malawi for a period in 1993 to help design a new constitution underpinning the country's nascent multi - party political system .

he left again , but returned in 2004 , upon his brother's election as president .

in 2009 , mutharika won a national assembly seat as a candidate of his brother's dpp .

he also held several cabinet ministerial posts in his brother's administration ( justice ; education , science , and technology ; and later foreign affairs ) and was a close presidential adviser .

malawi's gdp fell from $6.4 billion in 2015 to $5.5 billion in 2016 , owing to decreased agricultural production linked to the severe drought .

gdp per capita — which is among the world's lowest — fell substantially , from $354 in 2015 to $294 last year .

analysts expect growth to pick up in 2017 with the end of the drought and recuperation of the agricultural sector: the imf projects gdp growth to accelerate from 2.7% in 2016 to 4.5% in 2017 and 5.0% in 2018 .

malawi is landlocked , and its agriculturally - centered and undiversified economy is import - dependent for many products , such as fuel and manufactured goods .

these factors , along with poor physical and communications infrastructure ( despite expanding cell phone access ) , contribute to high transport and import costs and inhibit economic growth and trade .

such structural challenges are the focus of state economic development and reform efforts .

key government policy objectives include private sector growth , trade liberalization and pricing control reductions , reduction of administrative overhead costs , civil service reforms , and the streamlining of investment licensing procedures .

several state firms have been or are being privatized .

the government is also seeking to develop the mining sector .

malawi's first uranium mine , completed in 2009 , has helped to diversify export earnings moderately .

agriculture employs a large percentage of the labor force and is a key source of export earnings , but is subject to world market price shocks and weather - related risks , especially in the often arid far south .

most malawians are smallholder farmers who produce food for direct subsistence needs and cash crops , notably tobacco , which is by far the top export .

many are also laborers on tea and sugar plantations .

malawi has a small manufacturing base focused on agricultural processing and limited consumer goods production , but malawi's formal sector and skilled workforce are small .

malawi reached the highly indebted poor countries ( hipc ) completion point in 2006 and subsequently qualified for debt relief under the imf and world bank - administered multilateral debt relief initiative ( mdri ) .

malawi is also a member of the southern african development community ( sadc ) , a regional intergovernmental body .

sadc supports efforts to link malawi's transport and electricity networks with those of other countries in southern africa , and to advance the regionally integrated development of its members' mineral , agricultural , forestry , gas , and tourism sectors .

like many african countries , malawi has a mixed human rights record .

key issues in malawi include institutional weaknesses , a lack of education and training , and resource limitations , which have inhibited access to justice .

there have also been reports of misconduct and / or the extralegal use of force or other coercive actions by security and law enforcement agencies .

a number of institutions , however , are involved in efforts to foster human and legal rights advocacy , monitoring , and capacity - building efforts , including the government's malawi human rights commission and multiple nongovernmental organizations .

according to the state department , the "most significant human rights problems" in malawi in 2016 included unlawful police killings ; excessive use of force , including torture by security officers ; and sexual exploitation of children , including early and forced marriage .

other human rights problems included arbitrary arrest and detention ; harsh prison and detention center conditions ; lengthy pretrial detention ; mob violence ; societal discrimination and violence against women ; harmful traditional practices , including sexual initiation rituals ; trafficking in persons ; discrimination against lesbian , gay , bisexual , transgender , and intersex ( lgbti ) persons ; discrimination against persons with disabilities ; violence against persons with albinism ; and child labor .

a notable group of victims who face increasingly serious human rights threats are malawi's estimated 7,000 to 10,000 persons with albinism .

in a recent report , amnesty international ( ai ) summarized the threat that albinos have increasingly faced in recent years .

it reported that in malawi in 2016 an unprecedented wave of violent attacks against people with albinism exposed a systemic failure of policing .

individuals and criminal gangs perpetrated abductions , killings and grave robberies as they sought body parts that they believed contain magical powers .

women and children were particularly vulnerable to killings , sometimes targeted by their own relatives .

the government is attempting to address these and other human rights challenges , such as elder abuse .

in his 2016 state of the nation address , president mutharika reported that his government had investigated the root causes of attacks and killings of albinos , and prosecuted and convicted suspects accused of such acts .

he also reported on a government public awareness campaign centered on promoting and protecting the human rights of the elderly and countering witchcraft - related violence .

he announced plans to review the 1911 witchcraft act , undertake efforts focused on the rights and welfare of the disabled , and develop a national elderly bill .

he also gave an update on malawi's compliance with various international human rights treaty reporting requirements .

homosexuals also face widespread social discrimination in malawi .

state bias against homosexuals was a point of u.s. - malawian bilateral contention during the wa mutharika administration , but president banda suspended anti - homosexuality laws in 2012 and committed to repealing them , though this did not occur .

in late 2015 , a neighborhood watch group detained two men whom they suspected of being homosexual and turned them over to police , and a criminal case against the men was initiated .

the mutharika administration later ended the prosecution and stated that no further arrests or prosecutions would occur pending the outcome of a parliamentary review of sexual conduct laws .

the government has announced plans to hold public consultations on whether to reform laws banning homosexuality , but such efforts are controversial ; in late 2016 , there was a large protest by religious groups opposed to homosexuality .

also in late 2016 , notwithstanding the reported suspension of anti - gay laws , a magistrate's court convicted two men of participating in homosexual sexual acts .

u.s. - malawi relations warmed following malawi's democratic transition in 1994 , but became strained during president wa mutharika's second term ( see " political background ," above ) , before improving under banda .

general acceptance by malawians of the legitimacy of the 2014 electoral process , despite some reported flaws in its administration , was a key consideration for continued close bilateral cooperation .

u.s. relations with malawi under president mutharika have thus far remained close and positive ; he attended the obama administration's 2014 u.s. - africa leaders summit and reportedly meets regularly with the u.s. ambassador .

according to the state department , the united states and malawi have "worked together to advance health , education , agriculture , energy , and environmental stewardship in malawi" and the two countries' "views on the necessity of economic and political stability in southern africa generally coincide. .

malawi is a participant in the young african leaders initiative , a learning exchange program .

malawi is eligible for trade benefits , including apparel benefits , under the u.s. african growth and opportunity act ( agoa , title i , p.l .

106-200 , as amended ) .

there are currently no indications of any changes to bilateral ties under the administration of president donald trump , although the trump administration has proposed general cuts to aid for malawi that could affect the extent and focus of bilateral cooperation and engagement .

malawi is likely to remain among the world's most impoverished countries for years to come , but socioeconomic conditions may improve as a result of ongoing investment in public goods and services , efforts to alleviate poverty , and initiatives aimed at promoting private sector growth .

u.s. - malawian relations will likely continue to center on u.s. assistance and development cooperation .

the nature and extent of such engagement may , nevertheless , depend on the outcome of emerging debate over u.s. assistance levels and foreign policy priorities under the trump administration .

while there are some indications that congress may not enact cuts as sharp as those proposed by the administration , u.s. development cooperation will be strongly affected by whether — and to what extent — the trump administration continues key development initiatives pioneered by past administrations , such as pepfar and ftf .

these initiatives are key delivery channels for aid to malawi , and any major reordering of the scale , scope , or goals of such efforts may significantly change the nature and focus of bilateral relations .

