this report tracks and provides an overview of actions taken by the administration and congress to provide fy2018 appropriations for the international trade administration ( ita ) , the u.s. international trade commission ( usitc ) , and the office of the united states trade representative ( ustr ) .

the three trade - related agencies are funded through the annual commerce , justice , science , and related agencies ( cjs ) appropriations act .

this report also provides an overview of the enacted fy2017 appropriations for the three trade - related agencies .

historical funding for the trade - related agencies is provided in the appendix .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l .

115-31 ) provided a total of $636.5 million for the trade - related agencies .

the ita received $483.0 million in direct appropriations , while the usitc received $91.5 million , and ustr received a total of $62.0 million , $15 million of which was derived from the trade enforcement trust fund .

see the appendix for aggregated budget authority tables for fy2007-fy2017 .

over the past decade , congress has provided funding for specific trade - related programs , including china trade enforcement and compliance activities ; trade promotion and attracting foreign direct investment to the united states through ita's selectusa program ; and the interagency trade enforcement center ( itec ) , established in 2012 and superseded by the interagency center on trade implementation , monitoring , and enforcement ( ictime ) in 2016 .

since 2004 , congress has dedicated some of ita's funding to ad / cvd enforcement and compliance activities with respect to china and other nonmarket economies .

ita's office of china compliance was established by the consolidated appropriations act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-199 ) .

its primary role has been to enforce u.s. ad / cvd laws and to develop and implement other policies and programs aimed at countering unfair foreign trade practices in china .

ita's china countervailing duty group was established in fy2009 to accommodate the workload that resulted from the application of countervailing duty law to imports from nonmarket economy countries .

the administration did not request specific funding for china trade enforcement efforts for fy2018 .

both the house - passed h.r .

3354 and the senate bill s. 1662 proposed $16.4 million for china ad / cvd enforcement and compliance activities , which is equal to the fy2017 enacted amount .

the fy2018 consolidated appropriations act provides $16.4 million for china ad / cvd enforcement and compliance activities , which is equal to the fy2017 enacted amount and the administration's request .

created in 2011 , selectusa is part of ita's global markets and usfcs unit .

it coordinates investment - related resources across more than 20 federal agencies to promote the united states as an investment market and to address investor climate concerns that may impede investment in the united states .

it serves as an information resource for international investors and advocates for u.s. cities , states , and regions .

the administration requested $8.1 million for ita for fy2018 to continue the selectusa program , a decrease of $1.9 million ( - 19.0% ) from the fy2017 funding amount of $10.0 million .

the house appropriations committee proposed defunding selectusa in fy2018 .

the senate appropriations committee proposed "up to $10 million" in funding for selectusa , and recommends that the agency update its protocol to ensure that selectusa activities do not benefit state - owned enterprises from investing in the united states .

while the enacted consolidated appropriations act of 2018 does not provide a line - item entry for selectusa , the explanatory statement accompanying the act states that "the agreement adopts the senate report language regarding selectusa. .

the senate appropriations committee proposed "up to $10 million" in funding for selectusa , and recommended that the agency update its protocol to ensure that selectusa activities do not benefit state - owned enterprises from investing in the united states .

the purpose of the interagency trade enforcement center ( itec ) is to advance u.s. foreign trade policy through strengthened and coordinated enforcement of u.s. trade rights under international trade agreements and enforcement of u.s. trade laws .

in 2016 , the itec was succeeded by the interagency center on trade implementation , monitoring , and enforcement ( ictime ) , which congress established through the trade facilitation and trade enforcement act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-125 ) .

the goal of the ictime is to take a "whole - of - government" approach to monitoring and enforcing u.s. trade rights around the world by using expertise from across the federal government .

lead by a director designated by ustr , ictime investigates potential disputes under the auspices of the world trade organization , inspects potential disputes pursuant to bilateral and regional trade agreements to which the united states is a party , and carries out the functions of ustr with respect to the monitoring and enforcement of trade agreements to which the united states is a party .

ustr and ita work closely within the ictime to identify issues and develop information in areas of economic importance to u.s. industries .

the itec received its funding through ita ; funding for the ictime is now appropriated through ustr .

the fy2018 budget request for the ictime was $13.6 million , an increase of $1.5 million over the fy2017 funding amount .

the report to accompany the house bill was silent as to funding for ictime .

the senate proposal , s. 1662 , would have provided $57.6 million in funding for ustr .

in addition , the senate appropriations committee recommends that ustr fully support the ictime in fy2018 .

the fy2018 consolidated appropriations act does not provide an exact funding level for ictime .

