in 1956 , the year congress authorized the interstate highway system , there were 37,965 fatalities on u.s. roads — 6.05 fatalities for every 100 million vehicle miles traveled ( vmt ) .

the construction of limited - access highways spurred travel by automobile , leading to an increase in the number of fatal accidents .

congress responded with a series of laws that have helped reduce the fatality rate by 80% over the past six decades .

by 2014 , the united states recorded only 1.08 fatalities for every 100 million vmt , although the rate ticked up to 1.13 per 100 million vmt in 2015 ( table 1 ) , and again in the first 9 months of 2016 , when fatalities rose to 1.15 per 100 million vmt .

development of new motor vehicle technologies , investments in building safer highways and educating motorists , and improving emergency medical services all have contributed to reduced fatality rates .

congress has played a significant role in improving highway safety by directing the federal government to impose and enforce safety standards for motor vehicles .

this effort has been at times controversial , and several large recalls have raised questions about the effectiveness of federal motor vehicle regulation .

in the early decades of the automobile , u.s. vehicles were lightly regulated by a combination of state and private - sector standards .

national regulation was generally not seen as appropriate ; in the early 1900s , according to two historians of auto safety , it was widely believed that "the only useful and politically acceptable action congress might take was to help the states and localities construct more and better roads. .

the society of automotive engineers ( sae ) , a professional association founded in 1905 , became the primary source of vehicle safety rules for many decades .

state governments often used sae recommendations to set their own standards for vehicle brakes , headlamps , and windshield wipers .

at the same time , the rising number of highway deaths prompted a new interest in vehicle safety: between 1962 and 1964 , congress passed three safety bills into law , including a seat belt regulation .

the new laws were only a precursor to broader federal regulation .

two publications also spurred interest in a greater federal role .

ralph nader's 1965 book , unsafe a t any speed: the designed - in dangers of the american automobile , argued that cars were unnecessarily unsafe and that the auto industry should be regulated by a federal agency .

also influential was accidental death and disability: the neglected disease of modern society , a national academy of sciences report that documented the impact of accidental injuries , including those by motor vehicles .

comprehensive vehicle safety legislation was passed in the form of the national traffic and motor vehicle safety act of 1966 .

as approved unanimously by both houses of congress and signed by president lyndon b. johnson , the legislation had two parts: 1 .

the highway safety act of 1966 mandated that each state put in place a highway safety program in accordance with federal standards to improve driver performance , accident records systems , and traffic control .

2 .

the national traffic and motor vehicle safety act of 1966 directed the secretary of commerce ( later changed to the secretary of transportation when that agency was established in 1967 ) to issue safety standards for all motor vehicles beginning in january 1967 .

a national traffic safety agency was established to carry out the provisions of the new law ; it was renamed the national highway traffic safety administration ( nhtsa ) in 1970 .

since its establishment , nhtsa has issued dozens of safety standards , including regulations affecting windshield wipers , hood latches , tires , brakes , seat belts , and airbags .

proposing and finalizing a nhtsa safety regulation can take many years: all nhtsa regulations follow the administrative procedure act of 1946 ( apa ) , which ensures that proposed rulemaking is publicized in the federal register , comments are taken and considered , and agency decisions are clearly explained .

court review of standards is allowed , and revisions to federal regulations must also follow the apa .

nhtsa does not verify in advance that motor vehicles and parts comply with its standards .

instead , the law provides that "[a] manufacturer or distributor of a motor vehicle or motor vehicle equipment shall certify to the distributor or dealer at delivery that the vehicle or equipment complies with applicable motor vehicle safety standards prescribed under this chapter.... certification of a vehicle must be shown by a label or tag permanently fixed to the vehicle...." manufacturers are responsible for testing their vehicles and are liable for recalls and penalties if they are later found not to meet nhtsa's federal motor vehicle safety standards ( fmvss ) .

after a new model goes on sale , nhtsa buys a sampling from dealers and tests the vehicles at its own facilities to determine whether they comply .

if nhtsa determines there is noncompliance , it can encourage the manufacturer to recall the model to correct the problem , or it can order a recall .

in addition to promulgating motor vehicle standards and addressing vehicle defects , nhtsa's mission also includes providing assistance to states on traffic safety issues , such as drunk driving and distracted driving , and maintaining a comprehensive database about motor vehicle crashes .

in addition to promulgating and enforcing vehicle safety standards , nhtsa investigates vehicle defects that affect safety .

nhtsa's office of defects investigation ( odi ) r eviews and investigates comp laints of alleged defects from vehicle owners , a utomakers , and other sources .

there are several routes a potential recall complaint can take: denial .

when nhtsa 's analysis of petitions calling for defect investigations leads the agency to decide not to proceed , it publicizes the reasons for the denial in the federal register .

further r eview .

if nhtsa determines there is reason to open an investigation of alleged safety - related defects , it looks further into the facts and ends with either a recommendation that the manufacturer recall the vehicle or a determination that there is no safety - related defect .

if a safety defect is confirmed by nhtsa , most manufacturer s will initiate a recall ; if they fail to do so , nhtsa can initiate a recall itself .

in addition to the nhtsa investigative process , manufacturers also conduct their own in ternal in vestigation s ; if a manufacturer find s that a vehicle or component does not comply with a federal safety standard , it may issue its own recall to c orrect a safety defect before accidents are reported .

the law establishing the motor vehicle safety program requires that a manufacturer of a defective vehicle or component notify the vehicle owner and fix the defect without charge .

in practice , most recalls are issued by manufacturers , sometimes influenced by a nhtsa defect finding and sometimes solely by a manufacturer upon its own finding of a defect .

of the 1,039 recalls issued in 2016 , 92 were issued by manufacturers influenced by a nhtsa finding , and 947 were issued based on a manufacturer's finding alone .

the annual number of recall action s has generally risen in the past decade ( except for the recession year of 2009 ) , and the number of vehicles and items of equipment recalled has risen steeply since 2013 ( figure 1 ) .

there are several reasons for the rising number of recalls , including stricter laws , larger fines , delayed detection by nhtsa of vehicle problems , and several recent high - visibility cases affecting millions of vehicles .

in 2014 and 2015 , two large recalls were issued: general motors ( gm ) recalled 2.2 million vehicles because of faulty ignition switches , which could slip out of the "run" position and prevent air bags from deploying in crashes .

gm acknowledged that the defective switches caused 15 deaths and a number of injuries .

nhtsa assessed a maximum $35 million civil penalty against gm .

i n a separate settlement , the department of justice fined gm $900 million in criminal penalties.nineteen manufacturers recalled a total of about 42 million vehicles due to a defect in airbags provided by takata , a parts supplier .

the defect may cause the airbags' inflators to explode .

the faulty airbags are linked to 16 deaths globally .

in the united states , there have been 220 cases of takata - supplied airbag inflators exploding , with 11 deaths and 184 injuries .

nhtsa fined takata $200 million , with $70 million due in cash ; an additional $130 million payment would be demanded if takata fails to meet its commitments or if additional violations of the law are determined .

separately , the department of justice fined takata $1 billion , including a $25 million criminal fine , $125 million for victim compensation , and $850 million for compensating automakers for a portion of the cost of recalling the vehicles .

in response to the gm ignition switch recall , nhtsa evaluated its procedures , interactions , and communications with general motors .

its publication nhtsa's path forward in 2015 outlined how the lessons learned from that recall could improve its defect investigation system .

the then - nhtsa administrator , mark rosekind , wrote in that publication that it is no overstatement to say [the ignition switch recall] was one of the most significant cases in nhtsa's history , not only because of the tragic toll of deaths and injuries , or the technical challenges it presented , but because of the unprecedented steps the manufacturer took to conceal a deadly defect .

path forward identified five shortcomings in the recall and nhtsa procedures that affected its handling of the gm ignition switch problem: 1 .

gm withheld critical information about engineering changes that would have allowed nhtsa to more quickly identify the defect .

2 .

nhtsa did not hold gm accountable for providing inadequate information .

3 .

neither gm nor nhtsa completely understood the application of advanced airbag technology in gm vehicles .

4 .

nhtsa did not consider alternate theories proposed by internal and external sources .

5 .

nhtsa did not identify and follow up on trends in its own data sources and investigations .

the report proposed various process improvements , including increasing auto industry accountability , increasing nhtsa's knowledge of emerging technologies , and improving defects investigations .

many new technologies , whether mandated by congress or nhtsa or developed by automakers , have translated incrementally into safer motor vehicles .

as the introduction of new vehicle technologies has accelerated in the past decade , moving toward much more vehicle automation and a long - term goal of a fully autonomous vehicle , congress and federal regulators are grappling with how to encourage such advancements , while recognizing that the traditional regulatory process is long and could "stymie innovation and stall the introduction of these technologies. .

a range of new technologies are being introduced to motor vehicles , many of them bringing automation to vehicular functions once performed only by the driver .

mary barra , chairman and ceo of general motors , has observed that "the auto industry will change more in the next five to 10 years than it has in the last 50. .

there are three forces driving motor vehicle innovation: technological advances enabled by new materials and electronics ; consumer demand for telecommunications connectivity and new types of vehicle ownership and ridesharing ; and regulatory mandates pertaining to emissions , fuel efficiency , and safety .

the development of a new federal motor vehicle safety standard can be lengthy , often lasting many years .

former dot secretary anthony foxx and former nhtsa administrator mark rosekind broadened the agency's approach beyond the traditional rulemaking to include new means of interacting with manufacturers and other vehicle safety stakeholders .

in congressional testimony in november 2016 , then - nhtsa administrator rosekind said the agency's regulatory process was too slow , given the pace of technological development .

he explained that a traditional approach to regulating these new technologies would be to engage solely in rulemaking process , writing new regulations that prescribe specific standards .

our view is that approach would stymie innovation and stall the introduction of these technologies.... any rule we might offer today would likely be woefully out - of - date by the time it took effect , given the pace of technological development... .

among the steps dot and nhtsa took in 2016 to address these issues and establish new forms of enhancing vehicle safety are the following: secretary foxx announced a voluntary agreement in january 2016 with 18 automakers to collectively analyze and share safety data , increase the number of car owners who respond to recall notices , and develop a joint approach to automotive cybersecurity .

while automakers supported the agreement , former nhtsa administrator joan claybrook reportedly criticized it as ineffective .

in march 2016 , nhtsa and the iihs announced a commitment of 20 vehicle manufacturers to make automatic emergency braking ( aeb ) a standard feature on virtually all new passenger vehicles by 2022 .

this voluntary agreement makes aeb standard on vehicles three years earlier than had nhtsa pursued a traditional rulemaking .

in those three years , iihs estimates that 28,000 crashes and 12,000 injuries will be prevented .

nhtsa's september 2016 federal automated vehicle s policy officially adopted sae international's levels of automation , and provides guidance to automakers and other vehicle developers with a 15-point "safety assessment" that discusses safety areas that manufacturers should evaluate in developing highly automated vehicles .

in addition , the policy statement delineates federal and state roles in the absence of an fmvss regulatory process for automated vehicles , and also discusses how nhtsa might use current regulatory tools — such as exemption and interpretation authorities — to expedite the development of safe highly automated vehicles .

congress dealt extensively with vehicle safety issues in the fast act , the five - year surface transportation law enacted in december 2015 .

its provisions on vehicle safety are described below .

although many of the changes in federal vehicle safety policy made by the fast act have yet to take full effect , members of congress have advanced several other proposals that would extend nhtsa's authority to regulate motor vehicles .

among them are .

current law does not require auto dealers to fix used cars on their lots , or taxi and ride - sharing services to repair vehicles being used to transport customers .

some members of congress have called for including used cars in the recall process .

when a house floor amendment was debated during consideration of the surface transportation bill in 2015 , it was argued that auto dealers do not in practice sell cars with defects and that some recalls are "overly broad because the majority of vehicle recalls do not require the drastic step of grounding the vehicle. .

nhtsa presently has no authority to order repairs of recalled vehicles used by taxi and ride - sharing services .

currently , nhtsa cannot require manufacturers to immediately stop sales of vehicles or equipment without following the substantial procedural steps needed to complete a recall investigation .

the obama administration asked congress to grant nhtsa "imminent hazard authority," which would allow the agency to take immediate action when it believed there was the likelihood of death or serious injury .

congress did not include such authority in the fast act .

some members of congress have called for amending the early warning reporting provisions to require nhtsa to make information it receives from manufacturers more publicly available in a searchable , website format , contending that consumers and safety analysts could better evaluate potential defects .

nhtsa may allow auto manufacturers to limit a recall to a certain geographic area if there is evidence that the defect is primarily found in vehicles registered in that area .

for example , the recall of takata airbags was initially deemed a regional recall because excess humidity seemed to play a role , so only vehicles in more humid parts of the country were subject to the recall .

critics contended that a regional recall was inappropriate because vehicles registered in other areas at the time of the recall could subsequently be sold or moved to high - humidity areas , putting owners and passengers at risk .

the takata recall was broadened to a national recall after airbag defects were found in vehicles in other parts of the country .

legislation proposed during the consideration of the fast act would have eliminated regional recalls .

the security and privacy in your car act of 2017 ( s. 680 ) would direct nhtsa and the federal trade commission to establish federal standards to secure connected features and other motor vehicle data from hackers and data trackers .

the legislation would also require the two agencies to develop a "cyber dashboard" rating that would show on a vehicle window sticker how well each vehicle model protects security and privacy of vehicle owners .

the security and privacy in your car study act of 2017 ( h.r .

701 ) would require nhtsa to report to congress after conducting a study to determine the appropriate cybersecurity standards for motor vehicles , including how critical vehicle software systems can be separated from other software systems , and techniques necessary to prevent intrusions into motor vehicle software systems .

the obama administration asked congress to increase the maximum civil penalty on a manufacturer for selling vehicles that violate federal motor vehicle safety standards from $35 million to $300 million per violation .

the fast act increased the maximum penalty to $105 million .

