congress has passed several laws requiring that goods purchased by federal agencies be produced in the united states .

among these are two separate but closely related laws applying to national security agencies .

the berry amendment covers direct department of defense ( dod ) purchases of textiles , apparel , footwear , food , and hand or measuring tools .

the kissell amendment is more limited , applying to textiles , apparel , and footwear procured by certain department of homeland security ( dhs ) agencies .

under these two laws , the purchased items must be 100% domestic in origin , unless exemptions laid out in the laws apply .

the two laws are controversial .

proponents argue the amendments are important to the u.s. economy by helping to preserve the u.s. industrial base and creating manufacturing jobs for american workers .

they also claim domestic preference laws may lessen dependence on foreign sources for certain critical u.s. military and nonmilitary needs , and that these laws encourage some foreign manufacturers to invest within the united states so that their products can be sold to the u.s. government .

on the other hand , opponents believe the laws give monopolies to certain companies , raise the government's procurement costs , and fail to fully utilize the international supply chains that many u.s. manufacturers rely on to meet their production needs .

the berry amendment ( 10 u.s.c .

ยง2533a ) is the popular name of a 1941 statute enacted as part of the fifth supplemental national defense appropriations act ( p.l .

77-29 ) .

it has been amended numerous times .

it became a permanent part of the u.s. code when it was codified by the fy2002 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

107-107 ) .

proposals to alter the berry amendment typically are advanced during consideration of defense appropriations acts and the national defense authorization act .

dod implements the berry amendment through its defense federal acquisition regulation supplement ( dfars ) .

the berry amendment specifies that affected products purchased directly by dod must be "entirely grown , reprocessed , reused , or produced in the united states. .

unless dod grants a waiver because domestic firms do not make the product or because other exceptions in the law are met , the entire production process of an affected product , from the production of raw materials to the manufacture of all components to final assembly , must be performed in the united states .

as an example , when dod purchases a military uniform , it must be sewn in the united states using fabric , thread , buttons , and zippers made in the united states from raw materials of u.s. origin .

the berry amendment mandates a much higher level of domestic content than the buy american act of 1933 , which generally governs the procurements of other federal agencies .

under the buy american act , the final product must be mined , produced , or manufactured in the united states , and if manufactured , either at least 50% of the cost of its components , by value , must be manufactured in the united states , or the end product must be a commercially available off - the - shelf item .

a second law , sometimes referred to as the kissell amendment ( 6 u.s.c .

ยง453b ) , is modeled on , but not identical to , the berry amendment .

the kissell amendment was enacted as section 604 of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) .

it applies to the coast guard and the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , both of which are within dhs .

it is implemented through the homeland security acquisition regulation , which imposes domestic content restrictions on certain clothing , textile , and footwear products acquired by particular dhs agencies when an item is directly related to national security .

in introducing the amendment , representative lawrence kissell noted he was particularly interested in supporting the domestic textile industry .

thus , the narrowly defined purpose of the kissell amendment is to ensure that dhs purchases of textile , apparel , and footwear products are wholly produced in the united states .

the law covers clothi ng ( including materials and components ) , canvas or textile products , natural and synthetic fabrics , individual equipment items , and footwear products .

if these items are related to "the national security interests of the united states," they must be "domestically grown , reprocessed , reused , or produced in the united states" to the greatest extent possible .

unlike the berry amendment , the kissell amendment does not apply to food or to hand or measuring tools .

the berry amendment includes several exemptions , which may apply at the discretion of dod .

for example , dod may buy covered items from non - u.s. sources when products are unavailable from american manufacturers at satisfactory quality and in sufficient quantity at market prices ; items are used in support of combat operations or contingency operations ; products are purchased by vessels in foreign waters ( eg , a navy ship is docked overseas and the crew needs to purchase textile , clothing , or footwear items ) ; products contain noncompliant fibers , if the value of those fibers is not greater than 10% of the product's total price ; items are for emergency acquisitions ; products are intended for resale at retail stores such as military commissaries or post exchanges ; or the purchase is part of a contract whose value is below the simplified acquisition threshold , generally $150,000 , beneath which certain federal procurement regulations do not apply .

kissell amendment exemptions are often the same as those in the berry amendment , such as purchases beneath the simplified acquisition threshold .

but there are also some notable differences .

for example , the kissell amendment has "national security" limiting language that is not included in the berry amendment .

this restricts kissell amendment coverage to purchases intended for or used by dhs to protect against internal or external threats to the united states .

thus , if an item , such as curtains for a dhs office , is not related to activities to protect the united states from internal or external national security threats , its procurement most likely would not be subject to the kissell amendment .

appendix a shows the differences between the berry amendment , the kissell amendment , and the buy american act .

sales to dod in the four berry - applicable product categories totaled $2.4 billion in fy2016 ( see figure 1 ) .

dod expenditures on berry amendment products accounted for roughly 1% of the department's spending on products and services in fy2016 , according to figures from the federal procurement data system - next generation ( fpds - ng ) .

one reason for the drop in spending on berry - related products in recent years is the decrease in armed forces end strength .

the number of active - duty personnel fell to 1.38 million in 2016 from 1.51 million in 2010 , when the u.s. military was more actively engaged in iraq and afghanistan .

if there is a higher level of defense spending in coming years , this could result in increased dod demand for berry - applicable products .

in fy2016 , the coast guard and tsa combined accounted for more than $30 million in procurement obligations for kissell items .

most of this amount involves uniforms .

tsa provides 14 different uniform items to new hires .

proponents of the berry and kissell amendments assert that the laws serve to keep certain u.s. production lines operating .

they argue that the u.s. military should not be dependent on foreign sources for critical items , including those covered by the berry and kissell amendments , and that dependence on foreign sources for military and national security items could lead to supply problems during times of war or military mobilization .

critics of the amendments point out that the laws may raise procurement costs and lengthen delivery times by requiring the purchase of domestic products when less expensive imports are available .

they claim that the amendments are inconsistent with modern practices in manufacturing , which often involve supply chains that source components and raw materials from multiple countries , and that domestic purchase requirements may alienate foreign trading partners , thereby potentially provoking retaliation and harming foreign sales .

this controversy notwithstanding , congress has not considered repeal of the berry or kissell amendments .

legislative action has centered on the scope of the amendments , the requirements for obtaining waivers , and the use of audits to determine the laws' effectiveness .

there have been attempts over the years to reduce the scope of the berry amendment .

for example , lawmakers have offered bills that would have eliminated fpi / unicor's federal contract mandate and made changes to the simplified acquisition threshold , such as raising the berry and kissell thresholds to $500,000 .

the higher limit would reduce the number of purchases covered by the berry and kissell amendments , making foreign suppliers eligible to bid on more dod and dhs procurement contracts .

none of these proposals has passed .

in recent congresses , lawmakers have introduced bills that would have widened the scope of these domestic preference laws .

for instance , in the 115 th congress , the homeland production security act , h.r .

1811 , would amend the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) to prohibit the use of funds appropriated to dhs for the procurement of uniforms not manufactured in the united states .

such a change would expand the kissell amendment to the customs and border patrol , the secret service , and federal emergency management agency ( fema ) of dhs .

according to dla troop support , more than a dozen domestic nonavailability determinations were approved between 2005 and 2015 ( see appendix b for more information about selected determinations ) .

these waivers of berry act requirements generally apply only for a specific time period .

in some cases , waivers remain in force until a domestic source or a substitute material can be found .

on april 18 , 2017 , president donald trump issued an executive order directing executive branch agencies "to maximize , consistent with law ... the use of goods , products , and materials produced in the united states" and directing them to "minimize the use of waivers , consistent with applicable law. .

an explicit reference to the berry amendment was mentioned in a white house background briefing on the executive order .

it is unclear how the executive order will affect dod and dhs interpretations of waiver requirements under the berry and kissell amendments , respectively .

pursuant to the fy2014 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

113-66 ) , congress directed dod's office of inspector general to conduct periodic audits to ensure compliance by the military services with the berry amendment and the buy american act .

three recent audits found the navy fully complied with the berry law in 12 of 23 contracts , the air force in 15 of 21 contracts , and the army in 29 of 33 contracts .

in addition , senator christopher murphy has requested the government accountability office ( gao ) to investigate u.s. government compliance with the berry amendment and the buy american act .

the committee report on the senate - reported 2016 dhs appropriations bill ( s. 1619 ) requested that gao audit dhs's compliance with the kissell amendment .

this legislation was incorporated in the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

gao expects to complete its study in 2017 .

appendix a .

comparison of berry amendment , kissell amendment , and buy american act appendix b .

selected berry amendment domestic nonavailability waivers ( dnad ) since 200 .

