growth in north american crude oil and natural gas production has resulted in efforts to expand the domestic oil and natural gas pipeline network .

pipelines can be a cost - effective and comparatively safe means of hydrocarbon transport .

pipelines and their routes also can be controversial locally , regionally , or nationally .

while many new or expanded pipelines have been proposed and completed in recent years , other proposed pipelines have been unable to satisfy all the requirements to obtain federal authorizations , have faced barriers among state regulatory agencies , and have been the subject of litigation .

congress has a long - standing interest in pipeline development and the regulation of pipelines because of the critical role of pipelines in the domestic energy markets .

failure to construct pipelines may result in various potential effects , such as greater reliance on road or rail transport and constraints on getting oil and natural gas resources to refineries , power plants , and other consumers — all of which can create economic inefficiencies .

local interests along proposed pipeline routes regularly have raised concerns about the local environmental and other impacts of pipeline construction ; they also have expressed concerns about the risks during pipeline operations of accidents that could affect the environment and human health .

in recent years , stakeholders interested in reducing u.s. reliance on fossil fuels or promoting other energy sources and energy conservation have brought greater public attention both to oil and natural gas pipelines and to federal and state decisions related to new pipelines in particular .

some of these pipeline opponents argue that pipelines may facilitate the use of oil and natural gas , thereby indirectly contributing to the human health , welfare , and environmental effects of oil and natural gas production and use .

pipeline proponents argue that the impacts of development and use of natural gas may be less than impacts associated with other energy sources and that both oil and natural gas pipelines contribute to the nation's energy security and provide broad benefits to the u.s. economy .

this report discusses how the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) administers its responsibilities related to certain pipeline segments that require corps authorizations .

the corps is one of many federal agencies with responsibilities that may relate to oil and natural gas pipelines .

interest in federal approvals and requirements for pipelines relates to a broader policy issue before congress: what is the appropriate federal role in protecting the environment , public health , national economy , and domestic energy security when reviewing and authorizing activities associated with private development of energy - sector or other infrastructure ? .

the role of the corps in authorizing oil and natural gas pipelines is limited to ( 1 ) the agency's regulatory authorities for authorizing activities affecting regulated water bodies and wetlands and activities that alter or obstruct navigable waters and ( 2 ) its civil works authorities , including allowing a pipeline to cross a corps water resource project and related lands .

because most pipelines cross regulated water bodies , the corps must authorize the activities at those crossings before construction at those locations can commence .

because the corps has no broad authority related to pipelines along their entire domestic routes , the agency's analyses to support its authorization decisions are scoped to focus on the application of corps authorities to specific pipeline segments .

controversy regarding the dakota access pipeline ( dapl ) , a crude oil pipeline from north dakota to illinois , focused attention on the corps' authorizations and approvals .

this attention to the corps may continue , given the renewed efforts for the international keystone xl , proposed domestic pipelines , and related litigation .

this report provides an overview of the agency's role with respect to oil and natural gas pipelines .

because the corps' pipeline - related decisions can be controversial , the report also introduces some of the issues raised .

after an overview of the corps and the broader federal role in approving private oil and natural gas pipelines , the remainder of the report discusses how the corps' regulatory responsibilities apply where pipelines cross water bodies and wetlands ( i.e. , corps regulatory program ) ; how the corps' civil works authorities may apply if a pipeline may alter or affect a corps water resource project or may cross corps - managed land ( i.e. , corps civil works program ) ; how the corps complies with various federal statutes as it arrives at pipeline - related decisions , including the environmental documentation requirements of the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) and the historic preservation requirements of the national historic preservation act ( nhpa ) ; and how the agency's role in pipelines raises or illustrates various policy issues for decisionmakers .

siting , construction , and operation of oil and natural gas pipelines may be subject to a number of local , state , tribal , and federal requirements .

whether the entire pipeline will require federal agency authorization generally depends on the commodity the pipeline would transport and whether it would cross state lines .

specifically , the siting , construction , and operation of interstate natural gas pipelines must be authorized by the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) , in accordance with requirements established under section 7 ( c ) of the natural gas act of 1938 ; in contrast , domestic oil pipelines and intrastate natural gas pipelines are not subject to a similar federal authorization for their entire routes .

federal pipeline safety standards also could affect pipeline siting , construction , operation , and maintenance .

the department of transportation's pipeline and hazardous materials safety administration ( phmsa ) is the principal federal agency charged with ensuring the safe interstate movement of natural gas and hazardous liquids , including crude oil .

congress tasked the department of transportation , working through phmsa , with regulating key aspects of interstate pipeline safety , including design , construction , operation and maintenance , and spill response planning .

for more information on the department of transportation's safety program , see crs report r44201 , dot's federal pipeline safety program: background and key issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] , and see the box later in this report titled "phmsa pipeline safety regulation and corps permit conditions related to safety. .

specific aspects or activities associated with pipelines may be subject to federal agency approval .

for example , separate federal agency authorization ( in the form of a permit or other approval ) may be required if the proposed pipeline , in whole or in part , would cross federal land or potentially would affect an environmental , natural , or cultural resource protected under federal law .

as discussed below , the involvement of the corps in pipelines generally is limited to those pipeline segments that would cross corps - managed federal land ( hereinafter referred to as corps land ) or a corps - managed federal flood easement on nonfederal land and to those pipeline activities that may affect or cross waters and wetlands regulated by the agency .

the corps is responsible for authorizing activities that may affect waters over which it has jurisdiction under section 404 or section 10 .

the agency performs this work as part of its regulatory program .

the types of projects that may cause impacts to regulated waters vary widely , including navigation , coal mining , riverbank stabilization , and transportation projects .

one category of activities is a water or wetland crossing by a utility line , which includes oil and natural gas pipelines .

the corps' regulatory authorities are limited by statute to activities affecting waters and wetlands regulated pursuant to the section 404 and section 10 authorities .

that is , the agency's regulatory jurisdiction does not extend to a pipeline's entire route ; it is limited to the crossings of regulated waters , as shown in figure 1 .

therefore , the corps generally does not regulate the largest components of pipeline projects because it does not have regulatory jurisdiction over portions of the pipeline that cross upland areas .

authorizations pursuant to the corps regulatory authorities fall under two categories of permits — individual permits and general permits .

actions authorized through general permits represented almost 94% of the corps' 53,825 regulatory actions in fy2016 .

if a proposed nonfederal pipeline of any type or other nonfederal activity would cross or otherwise use federal lands , the developer generally is required to obtain the appropriate real estate interest ( eg , an easement providing a right - of - way for the pipeline ) from the federal agency authorized to administer that land .

the corps owns 7.6 million acres of land and manages another 4.1 million acres , often through federal flowage easements on nonfederal , frequently private , land .

the corps is responsible for these lands because they are part of corps civil works projects .

the agency's inventory of civil works projects includes 702 dams and associated reservoirs and 14,500 miles of corps - constructed levees .

a pipeline developer also is required to obtain the agency's permission prior to altering or otherwise affecting the operations of a corps civil works project .

for requests to have pipelines cross below , on , or above corps land and non - corps land with a corps real estate interest , the corps generally will decide on whether or not to grant both a permission to alter a corps civil works project and an easement to cross corps land or a consent to cross non - corps land with a corps real estate interest .

as previously noted , corps regulatory actions and civil works actions may be subject to other federal statutes , such as nepa , nhpa , and esa .

part of the compliance may include consultation or input from other entities .

table 1 lists selected federal laws that , if applicable to a corps pipeline - related action , may require the corps to consult with relevant state or tribal entities or with other federal agencies .

most requirements listed in the table are limited to actions taken by federal agencies .

for example , an oil pipeline constructed on private land that does not require a federal agency approval ( eg , a pipeline that does not cross corps jurisdictional waters or federal lands ) would not be subject to nepa or nhpa .

as shown in table 1 , federal licenses and approvals , such as corps individual permits , generally are conditioned on the permittee obtaining a state or tribal water quality certification pursuant to section 401 of the clean water act and a state or tribal consistency concurrence pursuant to the coastal zone management act .

for the nwps , compliance with section 401 of the clean water act is accomplished by satisfying gc 25 .

the state or tribe can certify all activities authorized by an nwp or require that verifications of certain activities under an nwp obtain state or water quality certification .

the state or tribe can approve , deny , or condition its certification .

although the corps is not part of the process for the permittee to obtain a state or tribal water quality certification , the denial of a water quality certification can affect the corps' regulatory authorizations for pipelines .

for example , the developer of the northern access pipeline to transport natural gas from pennsylvania to new york has planned on using the nwp 12 for 276 wetland and 192 stream crossings .

in april 2017 , the new york state department of environmental conservation ( nysdec ) denied the state water quality certification pursuant for the april 2016 application for the 94-mile pipeline .

until the pipeline developer complies with section 401 of the clean water act , the corps will be unable to allow the permittee to proceed in new york under nwp 12 because of the permit's gc 25 on water quality .

individual permits also require state water quality certification .

the pipeline developer can address the concerns that led to the nysdec denial and submit a new application to nysdec for a state water quality certification or pursue a public hearing within 30 days of the denial consistent with new york regulations .

a detailed discussion of how state approvals , and the state water quality certification in particular , may affect federal approvals for pipelines is beyond the scope of this report .

the remainder of this section addresses two agency - specific procedures that the corps has adopted for its regulatory program: nepa procedures and historic properties procedures .

growth in north american crude oil and natural gas production has led to efforts to expand the domestic oil and natural gas pipeline network .

pipeline construction and operation may impact the environment , human health , and welfare .

the interest in expanding the domestic pipeline network and the concerns about the local , regional , and national effects of pipeline construction and operation have raised policy questions about how the corps' regulatory authorities and civil works processes may influence the development and approval of pipelines and their routes .

the corps is authorized as part of its regulatory program to regulate certain pipeline activities that may affect certain waters and wetlands ; it also is authorized to grant permissions , easements , and consents for pipeline segments that cross corps water resources projects and associated lands .

these corps roles in pipelines are not without controversy .

some of the issues raised center on the following policy questions: i mpacts .

how does the corps determine the geographic area for its evaluations of impacts on the environment , historic properties and cultural resources , communities , and specific population groups ? .

how does the corps evaluate cumulative impacts ? .

limits of agency authority .

when a pipeline is largely a nonfederal undertaking and the federal role is limited to discrete segments , to what extent should the federal government shape siting and other aspects of the pipeline ? .

risk and safety .

to what extent is the corps authorized to address oil and natural gas pipeline safety ( eg , risk of spills ) as part of its regulatory authorizations and civil works decisions ? .

how are low - probability , high - consequence safety risks considered and addressed in the corps' decisionmaking processes ? .

public interest .

how does the corps arrive at and document its assessment of public interest in its pipeline - related regulatory and civil works activities ? .

that is , how are anticipated costs and benefits ( both monetized and non - monetized ) for one group weighed relative to costs and benefits for another group , and how is the national public interest considered ? .

general permits .

how does the use of general permits ( rather than individual permits ) for corps - regulated pipeline segments affect the agency's review of proposed water crossings , the information available to stakeholders and the public , and compliance with the requirements of nhpa ? .

an extensive discussion of each of these questions is beyond the scope of this report .

many of these questions are not unique to pipelines or to the corps ; that is , many of them have been the subject of past ( and ongoing ) court cases related to other corps approvals or to similar actions by other federal agencies .

as congress considers the corps' current and future roles and the federal role in pipelines more broadly , these questions reflect some of the basic debates about federal actions associated with private infrastructure .

