congress has granted many federal agencies the authority to issue regulations that carry the force of law .

this grant of authority raises the issue of how those agencies should be held accountable for the regulations they implement .

one method of maintaining accountability is requiring agencies to analyze the potential effects of new regulations — sometimes called regulatory analysis or regulatory impact analysis — before implementing them and making the analyses public during the rulemaking process .

an important and commonly performed type of regulatory analysis is a cost - benefit analysis ( cba ) — a systematic examination , estimation , and comparison of the economic costs and benefits resulting from the implementation of a new rule .

by performing and making public such analyses , an agency demonstrates that it has given reasoned consideration to the necessity and efficacy of a rule and the effects it will have on society .

most agencies regulating the financial industry are not subject to certain statutes or other requirements that apply to most executive branch agencies , allowing them to operate with a relatively high degree of independence from the president and congress .

these financial regulators — along with other agencies that have similar independence — are often referred to as independent regulatory agencies .

agencies are given this independence in part so that experts writing technical rules have some degree of insulation from political considerations .

one aspect of these regulatory agencies' independence is that they are not subject to certain requirements that direct other agencies to perform cbas with certain parameters and executive review .

some observers argue that this independence is appropriate and that subjecting financial regulators to increased requirements would inhibit implementing necessary , beneficial regulation .

however , others argue that financial regulators should be subject to greater requirements to increase accountability .

the debate has drawn increased attention in recent years as regulators promulgate and continue to promulgate rules mandated and authorized by the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( p.l .

111-203 ) .

in response , a number of bills in recent congresses have proposed increased requirements .

this report examines issues related to financial regulators and cbas , including potential difficulties facing such regulators and methods available to them when preforming a cba ; the analytical requirements the agencies currently face ; and the arguments for and against increasing requirements on financial regulators .

this report also briefly describes several examples of proposed legislation that would change the requirements facing financial regulators .

cba can help ensure that regulators demonstrate that their decisions are based on an informed estimation of likely consequences during the development , issuance , and implementation of rules .

in the analysis , economists and other experts use theory , modeling , statistical analysis , and other tools to estimate the likely outcomes if a particular regulation were to be implemented .

these outcomes are compared with the likely outcomes if no regulation or a different regulation were implemented .

then the good outcomes ( benefits ) can be weighed against bad outcomes ( costs ) of a regulatory action to determine whether and to what degree a regulation is on net beneficial to society .

benefits may include such outcomes as deaths and injuries avoided , acres of rare habitat saved , or a decreased probability of financial crisis .

costs may include outcomes such as increased production costs for companies , regulation compliance cost to companies , and increased prices for consumers .

externalities — the effects experienced by parties that are not directly involved in the market transactions covered by the regulation — also should be included in the analysis to the extent possible .

if it were the case that regulators were expected to make decisions with complete information , all societal costs and benefits would need to be accurately and precisely estimated .

these outcomes would be quantified ( assigned accurate numerical values ) and monetized ( assigned an accurate dollar value ) .

proposed rules would be finalized and implemented only if benefits were expected to exceed costs , and in a form that maximized net benefits .

however , societal costs and benefits may be difficult to accurately estimate , quantify , and monetize .

therefore , performing most cbas involves some degree of subjective human judgement and uncertainty , and predicted results are often expressed as a range of values .

as discussed in more detail in the " financial regulator requirements debate " section , some argue that performing cbas for financial regulation is particularly challenging , due largely to the high degree of uncertainty over precise regulatory costs and outcomes .

this raises questions about the appropriate scope , level of detail , and degree of quantification that should be required of analysis performed in the rulemaking process .

on one hand , overly lenient requirements could allow agencies to implement overly burdensome regulation with limited benefit without due consideration of consequences .

in addition , a cba can be an informational tool that estimates the potential effects of a rule and informs the agency and the public as various groups advocate for certain policies — and potentially exaggerate or minimize risks , costs , or likely outcomes of a certain regulation .

in contrast , overly onerous analytic requirements could risk impeding the implementation of necessary , beneficial regulation because performing the analysis would be too time consuming , too costly , or simply not possible .

another concern is that if agencies face highly burdensome requirements , they may have an incentive to achieve policy goals through other methods — such as issuing policy statements , guidance documents , and technical manuals — that create less accountability than the rulemaking process .

in addition , a cba itself can be costly and is performed by departments and agencies funded by general taxes and fees on industry .

finally , requiring uncertain and contestable cbas may allow self - interested parties to impede socially beneficial regulation by challenging agency analysis in court and offering their own subjective analysis .

for these reasons , stringent cba requirements may themselves generate more costs than benefits .

as mentioned above , cba can be a useful tool for ensuring good regulations are implemented and that regulatory agencies are accountable .

however , requirements to perform such analyses may restrict agencies from effectively regulating .

this section examines current cba requirements , including those that apply to nonfinancial regulators and those that direct financial regulators more specifically .

it also reviews certain government reports examining the methods and results of recent regulatory cbas performed by financial regulators under the existing requirements .

cba of any type of regulation faces challenges in making an accurate assessment of the regulation's effects .

over recent decades , academics and agency experts have developed sophisticated and useful techniques to do these types of analyses , but they generally contain a degree of uncertainty .

some challenges include behavioral changes of people as they adapt to a new regulation , which are difficult to predict ; quantification that must overcome uncertainty over the causal relationship between the regulation and outcomes ; and monetization , which is difficult for outcomes that do not have easily discernable monetary values .

variations of cbas address some of these difficulties , including cost - effectiveness analysis , which compares costs of alternative regulation when benefits cannot be accurately quantified or monetized ; breakeven analysis , which can establish the likelihood or under what conditions a regulation would be beneficial ; qualitative analysis with expert judgement , in which experienced professionals describe and explain likely effects that cannot be quantified and make a judgement as to how costs compare with benefits ; and retrospective analysis , which estimates the realized costs and benefits following some period of time — often years — after implementation of rules .

this section examines these challenges and variants as they relate to cba generally .

there is debate over whether the challenges are particularly daunting for financial regulation cba and to what degree different types of analysis can solve these problems .

an examination of the arguments related to financial regulator cba requirements can be found in the following section , entitled " financial regulator requirements debate . .

most observers agree that performing cba is often a useful tool for the regulatory rule - writing process .

however , whether financial regulators should be required to perform cbas with specified parameters that would be subject to review is a matter of long - standing debate , probably at least in part due to their exemption from e.o .

12866 .

in addition , the issue may have attracted increased attention in recent years as many financial regulations have been implemented in response to the financial crisis , particularly after the enactment of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act .

some observers argue that financial regulators should maintain a relatively high degree of discretion over the role and form of cbas in the rule - writing process .

they assert certain characteristics of the finance industry — discussed in detail below — necessitate cbas with more easily contestable assumptions and uncertain results than in other industries ; and performing highly contestable and uncertain cbas does not discipline agencies , but instead may provide an opportunity for interested parties to impede socially beneficial regulation .

others argue that financial regulators should be subject to more stringent requirements than is currently the case .

they assert performing cbas for regulation of the finance industry does not pose greater difficulties than for regulation of other industries , and imposing requirements on financial regulators would spur them to overcome methodological and other challenges ; and financial cbas — despite contestable and uncertain results — would be the best tool for ensuring that regulation is implemented responsibly with due consideration of consequences .

this section presents the two sides of this debate .

a number of bills have been introduced and seen action in recent congresses that would impose additional regulatory impact analysis requirements on financial regulators , including bills that would impose more stringent cba requirements .

examples include bills that would impose certain requirements on all agencies , including the financial regulators ; bills that address independent or financial regulators specifically ; and bills affecting only one financial regulator .

congress likely will continue to face questions over what appropriate cba requirements for financial regulators should be .

a reasoned and systematic examination of likely consequences of a regulation is a useful practice to ensure good and avoid bad regulation .

however , calibrating requirements to reach this outcome is difficult .

excessively lenient requirements could allow bad regulation to be implemented , because regulators could promulgate regulations without due consideration of their likely effects .

in contrast , excessively stringent requirements could block good regulation from being implemented , because the time and resources required to perform the analysis could make the cost to regulators prohibitively high .

the calibration is complicated by the difficulties and uncertainties involved in performing cba .

additional lack of clarity is involved in financial regulation , because experts disagree over whether cba is especially difficult and uncertain in that field .

these factors suggest that the question of what cba requirements financial regulators should face may not be easily settled .

