in 2013 , then - secretary of defense leon panetta warned that "budget uncertainty could prompt the most significant military readiness crisis in more than a decade. .

four years later , observers are debating whether a readiness crisis has indeed come to pass , disagreeing on how ready the u.s. military currently is , and debating what steps should be taken to improve military readiness .

little consensus has emerged , partly because the term readiness is not used in the same way by all observers or participants in the debate .

recently , dod has made readiness a central justification for increased funding as necessary to address "immediate and serious readiness challenges. .

dod's funding request for fy2017 favors preparations that improve the military's capability in future years , like buying new equipment , whereas the fy2018 budget request favors more immediate training and maintenance shortfalls .

in both cases , however , the request is justified in terms of improving readiness , contributing to the confusion by using the term readiness in different ways .

as these examples show , "readiness" is used both in a narrow sense to discuss the military's current level of training and the status of its maintenance , and in a broader sense to describe the military's overall capability , which includes how large the force should be and what kinds of weapons it should have , even if those changes will not take effect for several years .

to help congress understand the different uses of the term readiness , this report explores these two common uses of the term with examples , attempts to clarify the two uses , and discusses why it is so difficult to define the term .

it also provides historical examples of when the two uses of the term readiness received different priorities than they do today .

the report then considers how the different uses of the term readiness inform how congress might evaluate certain issues: is there a readiness crisis ? .

what should the u.s. military be ready for ? .

how should readiness be measured ? .

how does the fy2018 budget request affect the u.s. military's readiness ? .

while this report discusses how differing uses of the term readiness affect the debate , it does not evaluate the current state of the u.s. military's readiness or provide a conclusive definition of readiness .

today , when someone uses readiness in the broad sense they usually also assume it is good to maintain high levels of readiness in the narrow sense .

few in the contemporary debate argue for forces — no matter how large — that are not ready in the narrow sense .

in earlier eras , however , observers argued readiness in the narrow sense came at the expense of other , more important goals , which could leave the military less ready in the broader sense .

three eras stand out .

in the first era , the time between world war i and world war ii , most observers assumed the size of the military forces needed to fight a war would be many times larger than those the united states would maintain during peacetime .

almost everyone assumed the u.s. military was not and would not be ready in the narrow sense .

the army chief of staff , general of the armies john pershing , explicitly argued to maintain standing forces at a lower level of readiness in the narrow sense in order to be ready in the broader sense: had the united states in the spring of 1917 possessed twenty - five or thirty divisions completely organized and equipped , but only sufficiently trained to meet the requirements of the 'national position in readiness' above outlined , each of these divisions would have been advanced many months as compared with the entirely new divisions that it was necessary to create .

in the second era , the early cold war , president eisenhower came to office in 1953 believing the soviet union posed a long - term threat that had to be met not just with military strength but economic power .

to maintain u.s. economic competitiveness and readiness in the broad sense , he was willing to accept less ready forces in the narrow sense: [eisenhower] underscored his administration's recognition 'that the time has clearly come when the united states must take conclusive account , not only of the external threat posed by the soviets , but also of the internal threat posed by the long continuance and magnitude of federal spending.'.. .

[eisenhower] went on , truman's quest to build up america's military strength 'to a state of readiness on a specified d - day' had 'largely overlooked or totally ignored the length of time over which this costly level of preparedness would have to be maintained. .

in the third era , following the collapse of the soviet union in 1991 , some observers expected a lengthy respite from international military conflict .

as a result , they argued u.s. defense resources should be devoted to developing leap - ahead technologies , which would better ready the u.s. military for future challenges .

they argued this future readiness in the broad sense made sacrificing current readiness , in the narrow sense , worthwhile: the 'transformation approach' is based on the belief that the united states should accept greater short - term risk by limiting global engagement , canceling procurement of current or next - generation weapons systems , selectively lowering current readiness and operational tempo , cutting some force structure , and shrinking the defense infrastructure in order to accelerate the development and adoption of advanced systems , concepts , and organizations .

in all three eras , some officials were willing to sacrifice readiness in the narrow sense , usually because of how they prioritized the contingencies for which the military should be ready and at what point in time the force needed to be ready .

these past views suggest that broader readiness need not require readiness in the narrow sense , although most observers assume so today .

the trump administration has made readiness a central justification for its request for increased defense spending .

at the same time , readiness is used in differing ways that cloud the debate on how ready the military is and what steps would make it more ready .

clarifying how readiness is used in particular cases may assist congress to determine what steps and what level of spending are needed to maintain readiness or redress any identified shortfalls .

the term readiness is frequently used for more particular cases than the two principal uses described in the section " two principal uses . .

common examples include the following: medical readiness: "a healthy and fit fighting force that is medically prepared to provide the military departments with the maximum ability to accomplish their deployment missions throughout the spectrum of military operations ; " dental readiness: whether servicemembers have dental issues , particularly issues that might affect whether the servicemember can deploy ; family readiness: "support to the individual service member and their family to successfully balance life , career and mission events ; " financial readiness: focused on servicemembers' personal finances , including indebtedness , consumer advocacy and protection , money management , credit , financial planning , insurance and consumer issues ; physical readiness: usually called physical fitness ; equipment readiness: how maintenance and parts availability affect equipment's operating status ; logistics readiness: whether units and bases have supplies and equipment on - hand or can access them in a timely manner ; and contingency contracting readiness: evaluating whether officers approved to sign contracts are prepared to deploy in support of military operations .

these uses of the term differ from the two principal uses largely because they are not mission - specific ( arguably excepting medical readiness ) .

servicemembers are fit or not regardless of what tasks they are performing .

servicemembers' families are making sound financial choices or not regardless of the servicemember's role in the military .

equipment has its needed parts or not regardless of the unit's mission .

readiness in these senses may help determine whether the force is ready both in the narrow or broader sense of the two principal uses of readiness .

a military is not likely to win a war , if most of its servicemembers are sick or most of its equipment is missing parts .

only in extreme cases will being ready in one of these areas offset disadvantages in other areas .

healthier servicemembers will not likely compensate for missing parts for equipment .

in contrast , better training in the narrow sense of readiness may compensate for less effective weapons ( thus affecting the broader sense of readiness ) .

used in these even - narrower senses , the term readiness invokes operational need without identifying the specific operation for which it is intended .

medical readiness medical readiness can be an exception .

when used as above , medical readiness is an example of an even - narrower use of readiness .

medical readiness , often called individual medical readiness , equals whether servicemembers are cleared as healthy or not regardless of what they are deploying to do .

medical readiness is also sometimes used to describe whether the military medical force is able to support tasks the military is asked to accomplish , as in the below statement: our medical forces must stay ready through their roles in patient - centered , full tempo healthcare services that ensure competence , currency , satisfaction of practice , while fostering innovation .

we can't separate care from home — care at home from readiness , as what we do and how we practice at home every day translates into the care we provide when we deploy .

used this way — describing the readiness of the medical forces themselves — medical readiness is still a sub - component of the narrow sense of readiness , but one that is interdependent with other components of the broader sense of readiness .

if the military is operating where injured personnel have access to peacetime medical infrastructure , medical readiness may not affect the military's broader readiness .

if the military is operating with no access to peacetime medical infrastructure and suffering casualties , medical readiness may be the most important factor in the force's broader readiness .

the interdependence is further complicated by the military medical establishment's dual mission to provide care for military beneficiaries and to provide medical care to military servicemembers during wartime or contingency operations .

by being more ready to provide medical care in war , the military medical establishment may be less ready to provide beneficiary care and vice versa .

