india — south asia's dominant actor with about 1.3 billion citizens and the world's third - largest economy by purchasing power — has been characterized as a nascent great power and "indispensable par tner" of the united states .

many analysts view india as a potential counterweight to china's growing international clout .

for more than a decade , washington and new delhi have pursued a "strategic partnership. .

in 2005 , the united states and india signed a ten - year defense framework agreement to expand bilateral security cooperation ; in 2015 , the agreement was renewed for another decade .

bilateral trade in goods and services has grown significantly , valued at over $115 billion in 2016 , more than double the amount in 2006 .

indians accounted for 70% of all h1-b ( non - immigrant work ) u.s. visas issued in fy2016 , and more than 165,000 indian students are attending u.s. universities , second only to chinese .

the influence of a relatively wealthy community of about 3 million u.s. residents of indian descent is reflected in senate and house india caucuses , among congress's largest country - specific caucuses .

president barack obama sought to build upon the deepened u.s. engagement with india that began under president bill clinton in 2000 and expanded under president george w. bush .

an annual , bilateral strategic dialogue , established in 2009 , met five times before its september 2015 "elevation" as the "strategic and commercial dialogue" ( s&cd ) .

indian prime minister narendra modi — the bharatiya janata party ( bjp ) leader who took office in may 2014 — made his first visit to the united states as prime minister in september 2014 , when u.s. and indian leaders issued a vision statement entitled "forward together we go. .

president obama made his second state visit to india in 2015 , becoming the first u.s. president to visit india twice while in office .

the resulting joint statement's 59 points were the most extensive and detailed ever produced by the two countries .

the two countries issued a new "joint strategic vision for the asia - pacific and indian ocean region," which affirms the importance of safeguarding maritime security and includes language that could be seen as directed at a chinese audience , with direct reference to the disputed south china sea .

following the second s&cd in august 2016 , u.s. officials issued a joint statement with their indian counterparts that expressed "deep satisfaction" with the course of bilateral ties .

cooperation has come through dozens of institutionalized dialogue mechanisms , as well as through people - to - people contacts ; investment partnerships , infrastructure and "smart cities" collaboration ; environment ; science , technology , and space ; health and education ; persistent efforts to bolster a growing defense partnership through trade and joint exercises ; and myriad cooperative initiatives in energy and climate .

india's decades of economic growth and new status as a donor government have contributed to a reduction in u.s. foreign assistance to india over time , from more than $150 million in fy2005 to $85 million in fy2016 .

president donald trump's administration has requested $33.3 million in aid for fy2018 ( see table 2 ) .

to date , the administration has made public only one major policy change likely to affect aspects of the course and scope of the u.s. - india partnership: a june announcement of u.s. withdrawal from the paris agreement on climate change , discussed below .

new delhi is closely monitoring other potential shifts in u.s. policy .

india's long - held focus on maintaining "non - alignment" in the international system — more recently conceived by indian officials as "strategic autonomy" — is , in the current century , shifting toward increased bilateral engagements , perhaps especially with the united states and with greater energy under the modi government .

at present , the most important state actors when india looks outward are pakistan ( which is often described by new delhi as "an epicenter of terrorism" and urgent "threat" ) and china ( a growing "challenge" now increasingly present in india's neighborhood ) .

india shares lengthy disputed borders with both countries and sits astride vital sea lanes .

new delhi has long sought a permanent seat on the un security council , a goal for which the u.s. government indicated support in 2010 , when president obama told a joint session of india's parliament that he looked forward , "in the years ahead ... to a reformed un security council that includes india as a permanent member. .

new delhi today insists that it has all necessary credentials , as well as support from four of the five current permanent members ( the outlier , china , has not publicly opposed ) .

what follows is a brief review of five key indian bilateral relations having direct bearing on perceived u.s. national interests , those with pakistan , afghanistan , china , japan , and iran .

new delhi is also pursuing an "act east" policy in southeast and east asia that in some aspects dovetailed with the obama administration's policy of "rebalance" toward asia .

the obama administration focused increased attention on development of closer u.s. - india defense relations during 2016 ; then - secretary of defense ashton carter was in india in mid - year for his fourth meeting with his indian counterpart .

the visit produced a joint statement reviewing "important steps" taken over the preceding year and identifying priorities for the next , including expanding collaboration under the defense technology and trade initiative ( dtti ) , supporting new delhi's "make in india" efforts to boost indigenous manufacturing , and new opportunities to deepen cooperation in maritime security and maritime domain awareness , among others .

before leaving office , secretary carter met with his indian counterpart twice more , and departed lauding the strategic and technological progress made during his tenure .

proponents of deeper bilateral defense engagement — government officials and independent analysts , alike , in both capitals — expressed appreciation for the principal - level attention carter brought to india within the u.s. government ; some privately express alarm that may not be the case going forward .

while dtti engagement remains robust at the middle levels , the absence of senior - level confirmed appointees in several leadership positions in the u.s. administration is seen by some as likely to obstruct better progress , and there currently are no new arms sales in the pipeline meeting the threshold for congressional notification .

president obama recognized india as a "major defense partner" during prime minister modi's june 2016 visit to washington , dc , a designation allowing india to receive license - free access to dual - use american technologies that was formalized by congress in december .

the dtti and joint technical group ( jtg ) both met in new delhi in mid - 2016 , with u.s. officials accompanied by representatives of several american defense firms .

during the visit india inked a $1.1 billion contract to purchase an additional four boeing p - 8i poseidon maritime patrol aircraft .

the india - u.s. defense policy group — moribund after india's 1998 nuclear tests and ensuing u.s. sanctions — was revived in 2001 and has met annually since .

its four subgroups — a military cooperation group , a joint technology group , a senior technology security group , and a defense procurement and production group — have met throughout the year .

in 2005 , the united states and india signed a ten - year defense pact outlining planned collaboration in multilateral operations , expanded two - way defense trade , increased opportunities for technology transfers and co - production , and expanded collaboration related to missile defense .

in 2015 , the pact was both enhanced and renewed for another ten - year period .

u.s. - india security cooperation has blossomed in the 21 st century in a relatively new dynamic of both asian and global geopolitics .

this new u.s defense engagement with india has developed despite a concurrent u.s. rapprochement and military alliance with india's main rival , pakistan .

u.s. diplomats have rated military cooperation among the most important aspects of transformed bilateral relations , viewed the bilateral defense partnership as "an anchor of global security," and extoled india's growing role as a net provider of security in the indian ocean region ( ior , see figure 3 ) .

however , other observers call attention to what they view as significant and ongoing limitations on india's ability to fully embrace this role .

despite general optimism among u.s. officials and independent boosters about india's potential in this realm , some analysts contend that india's ability to influence regional security dynamics significantly will continue to remain limited in coming years and decades .

moreover , signs that "new delhi remains a priggish suitor in the face of washington's ardent embrace," as articulated by one analyst — a perceived indian hesitance rooted largely in wariness about u.s. - pakistan ties and an aversion to antagonizing china — may present further obstacles .

some indian observers continue to express concern that the united states is a fickle partner on which india may not always rely to provide the reciprocity , sensitivity , and high - technology transfers it seeks , and that may act intrusively in defense affairs .

this contributed to new delhi's years - long political resistance to signing three "foundational" defense cooperation accords with the united states ( more recently called "facilitating" agreements by u.s. officials ) : the communications interoperability and security memorandum of agreement ( cismoa ) , the basic exchange and cooperation agreement for geospatial cooperation ( beca ) , and the logistics exchange memorandum of agreement ( lemoa ) .

in what could represent a meaningful step forward in confidence - building between the two defense establishments , new delhi in august 2016 signed a lemoa .

the accord has yet to be operationalized , however , and reports suggest that new delhi is showing little interest in finalizing a cismoa or beca .

the united states has viewed india — one of the world's fastest - growing economies and its third - largest on a purchasing power parity ( ppp ) basis — as an important strategic partner in advancing common interests regionally and globally .

in a january 2017 call between president trump and prime minister modi , the two sides discussed "opportunities to strengthen the partnership between the united states and india , including the economy.... " despite its large economy and population , india is a relatively small u.s. trading partner .

two - way goods and services trade between the united states and india stood at about $115 billion in 2016 ( figure 1 ) — about one - fifth of u.s. - china goods and services trade that year .

india ranked as the 9 th largest source of u.s. goods imports and 18 th largest goods export market .

it is also a top u.s. partner for trade in services .

meanwhile , the united states is india's largest country destination for goods exports ( the eu as a whole is india's largest destination ) and second largest source of goods imports after china .

many observers contend there would be potential for greater bilateral trade between the united states and india if india's extensive trade and investment barriers were lessened .

in 2013 , the two countries expressed interest increasing their annual bilateral trade five - fold to $500 billion , including through increased engagement and initiatives .

however , india's uneven economic reform and the limited effectiveness of bilateral engagement present potential obstacles to further expanding u.s. - india commercial ties .

india has made strides in trade liberalization since it began adopting market - oriented reforms in the 1990s .

under the modi government , india's foreign trade policy for 2015-2020 aims to increase india's exports of goods and services globally from $466 billion in 2013-2014 to about $900 billion by 2019-2020 and to raise india's share in world exports from 2% to 3.5% .

the modi government has announced a number of domestic initiatives , such as make in india , digital india , and smart cities , to support india's manufacturing sector and promote jobs .

these initiatives may support new foreign investment opportunities .

nevertheless , protectionist policies persist in india .

some observers have attributed this to india's poverty challenges , concerns about the international competitiveness of its manufacturing and agriculture sectors , and regional economic competition with china , with which india has a large merchandise trade deficit .

president trump's call for a shift in the direction of certain aspects of u.s. trade policy raises further questions about the prospects for enhancing bilateral trade and investment .

enforcement of u.s. trade laws is a key trade priority for the administration , with a focus on addressing "unfair" trade practices .

in one development , on march 31 , 2017 , president trump directed key agencies to prepare a report within 90 days on significant trade deficits with u.s. trading partners , including a focus on unfair trade practices and the impact of the trade deficit on u.s. production , employment , wages , and national security .

the u.s. merchandise trade deficit with india was $24.4 billion in 2016 — the 10 th largest .

as noted above , an issue of keen interest to some potential workers from india is access to visas for temporary work in the united states , also referred to as nonimmigrant visas .

reforming the h - 1b visa has been of interest to congress for a number of reasons .

some are concerned that employers hiring h - 1b nonimmigrants are displacing u.s. workers and that there are not sufficient mechanisms in place to protect u.s. workers .

however , others argue that the need for more h - 1b nonimmigrant workers is justified because there may not be enough qualified u.s. workers to fill open positions .

another criticism of the h - 1b visa stems from an apparent lack of accountability and oversight of employers .

this concern has been exacerbated by companies that contract h - 1b workers through staffing companies .

those concerned about fraud and abuse within the h - 1b visa category have cited a need for more stringent requirements for employers , the closing of perceived legislative "loopholes" that may disadvantage american workers , and increased oversight and investigative authority for relevant agencies , such as the department of labor .

in april , u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) announced that the agency will be taking "multiple measures to further deter and detect h - 1b visa fraud and abuse. .

uscis stated that it will continue its site visits to h - 1b petitioners and the worksite of h - 1b employees .

more specifically , apart from random site visits , uscis will be targeting employers with larger proportions of h - 1b employees in their workforce , employers that place h - 1b workers off - site ( i.e. , at another location or with another company ) , and cases where the employer's information cannot be validated through commercially available information .

in addition , uscis has created an email address that allows individuals to submit reports of suspected h - 1b fraud or abuse .

most recently , the department of labor published a brief highlighting recent cases of h - 1b fraud that have been successfully investigated ; the cases involved several indian nationals .

india's large economy and its leader's aspirations to lift millions out of poverty make for growing energy demands , and india remains highly dependent on imported energy sources .

coal - fired capacity continues to account for the bulk ( more than two - thirds ) of india's total power installation .

while india has embarked on a plan to dramatically increase renewable energy sourcing , it is also seeking to extend access to electricity to the roughly 20% of citizens who lack it .

this effort , along with rapidly expanding indian demand for space cooling capabilities , indicates that the country's power usage rates will continue to grow into the foreseeable future .

it remains unclear whether significant u.s. - india cooperation on clean energy development and other related projects pursued under the obama administration will continue under the trump administration .

the u.s. - india energy dialogue , through which such projects as the eight - year - old partnership to advance clean energy ( pace ) were coordinated , was considered by indian officials to be a vital forum for bilateral engagement .

many experts have argued that india's status among the world's emitters of greenhouse gases — by one accounting it contributed 6.8% of global co2 emissions in 2015 — makes it a necessary participant in any comprehensive solution to the problems posed by climate change .

india's co2 emissions increased 67% from 1990 to 2012 and today are roughly the same as russia's , meaning the country can variously be ranked third , fourth , or fifth in the world depending on the aggregation or disaggregation of european union member - state data .

however , india's large population makes it the world's tenth - largest emitter on a per capita basis .

india signed the paris agreement on climate change in april 2016 and ratified the agreement in october .

by some metrics , india and china are outpacing the united states on efforts to address climate change .

during a visit to paris shortly after the june announcement of u.s. withdrawal from the agreement , prime minister modi reportedly told the french president that india intended to "go above and beyond" the agreement's targets .

new delhi has pledged to boost india's use of non - fossil fuel energy to 40% by 2030 .

within this renewables mix will be greatly expanded power generation from solar , wind , and nuclear sources .

india may be in the midst of one of history's largest energy transformation project , with a rapidly growing renewables sector .

indians are also working to address the huge power losses that come through wastage .

the country has seen at drastic decline in the cost of generation from solar and wind sources ; a kilowatt hour of solar power that recently cost 12 cents now costs less than 4 , about one - quarter cheaper than the same amount of energy from coal .

this has led the indian government to cancel some planned new coal plant projects and cut its coal production target by nearly 10% .

according to successive u.s. state department country reports on human rights practices , many of india's citizens suffer human rights abuses: the most significant human rights problems involved instances of police and security force abuses , including extrajudicial killings , torture , and rape ; corruption , which remained widespread and contributed to ineffective responses to crimes , including those against women , children , and members of scheduled castes ( scs ) or scheduled tribes ( sts ) ; and societal violence based on gender , religious affiliation , and caste or tribe .

other human rights problems included disappearances , hazardous prison conditions , arbitrary arrest and detention , and lengthy pretrial detention .

court backlogs delayed or denied justice , including through lengthy pretrial detention and denial of due process .

the government placed restrictions on foreign funding of nongovernmental organizations ( ngos ) , including some whose views the government believed were not in the "national or public interest," curtailing the work of civil society .

there were instances of infringement of privacy rights .

the law in six states restricted religious conversion , and there were reports of arrests but no reports of convictions under those laws .

some limits on the freedom of movement continued .

rape , domestic violence , dowry - related deaths , honor killings , sexual harassment , and discrimination against women and girls remained serious societal problems .

child abuse , female genital mutilation and cutting , and forced and early marriage were problems .

trafficking in persons , including widespread bonded and forced labor of children and adults , and sex trafficking of children and adults for prostitution , were serious problems .

societal discrimination against persons with disabilities and indigenous persons continued , as did discrimination and violence based on gender identity , sexual orientation , and persons with hiv .

a lack of accountability for misconduct at all levels of government persisted , contributing to widespread impunity .

investigations and prosecutions of individual cases took place , but lax enforcement , a shortage of trained police officers , and an overburdened and under resourced court system contributed to infrequent convictions .

international human rights watchdogs also identify widespread abuses .

press freedoms in india also appear to be under threat .

although religious discrimination and intolerance of social dissent are hardly new to india , the 2014 elevation of the hindu nationalist bjp to majority status at the federal level — the party won 52% of parliament's lower - house seats in 2014 elections — triggered concerns among human rights advocates that agents of hindu nationalist majoritarianism would be empowered .

born as the political wing of the rashtriya swayamsevak sangh ( rss or "national volunteer organization" ) , a militant hindu and social service group — the bjp is a primary political purveyor of hindutva or "hindu - ness" in indian society .

prime minister modi is a life - long rss member , and his 2014 election victory evoked fears that a victorious bjp would pursue hindu majoritarian policies .

three years later , expressions of repression and bigotry persist , and may be recently compounded by the bjp's sweeping win in march 2017 state elections in uttar pradesh .

this win led the party to seat a controversial hindu nationalist , yogi adityanath , as state chief minister .

adityanath , a cleric described as "a deeply divisive figure for his militant , misogynistic , and anti - muslim rhetoric," has moved to crack down on butchers who sell beef ( cows are sacred in hinduism ) and men loitering in public , a moral campaign that critics say targets muslims .

some observers are concerned that the bjp may now intend to pursue a hindu majoritarian approach to governance that could significantly erode india's secular , pluralist traditions .

most recent u.s. congressional attention to human rights issues in india has fallen into one of four general categories: religious freedom ( communal repression or violence targeting india's religious minorities , anti - conversion laws , cow protection ) ; human trafficking / slavery ; female infanticide and feticide ; and legal constraints on the operations of health and human rights ngos in india .

some members have noted the abuses listed by the u.s. committee on international relations freedom's annual reports , and attacks on india's christian minority have generated some constituent interest .

distress over the scope of india's human slavery problem has repeatedly been voiced by the current chairman and ranking member of the senate foreign relations committee , among others .

given traditional societal discrimination against females , uneven female - to - male ratios persist in india , and the incidence of female infanticide and gender - selective abortions remains a serious human rights issue .

finally , senior members of the house have taken direct interest as the new delhi government enforces restrictive laws on ngo operations in india that have served to constrain and even curtail the provision of charitable health and other human services there .

a total of about $16.6 billion in direct u.s. aid went to india from the country's 1947 independence through 2016 , nearly all of it in the form of economic grants and more than half as food aid .

in 2007 , in response to several years of rapid indian economic expansion and new delhi's new status as a donor government , the state department announced a 35% reduction in assistance for india .

the bulk of the cuts came from development assistance and food aid programs .

another smaller decrease came in 2008 in recognition of the continuing growth of the indian economy and the ability of the new delhi government to fund more development programs .

under the obama administration , however , increases in ghcs funds , along with some added development assistance , reverted aid close to its levels of the early 2000s .

in 2011 , the most recent year that india received u.s. food aid , the u.s. agency for international development identified india as one of two emerging market countries to join the ranks of donors of humanitarian and development assistance ( the other being brazil ) , and noted that much of this has been delivered in the form of in - kind food aid .

the trump administration's approach to the u.s. - india relationship remains uncertain , and new delhi is closely monitoring potential shifts in u.s. policy .

as described in this report , key legislative and oversight considerations for congress in u.s. - india relations include the following: what levels of u.s. foreign assistance to provide india ; whether to continue bilateral clean and renewable energy cooperation programs even in the absence of the administration's support for the paris agreement ; whether to enact legislation tightening u.s. immigration policy , especially with respect to h - 1b visas ; how vigorously to support bilateral defense trade with india , including whether to allow or otherwise seek to influence potential future major arms sales and / or co - production agreements , such as the one recently proposed for f - 16 combat aircraft ; what avenues of engagement on u.s. - india trade and investment issues to support , including whether to advocate for continuing u.s. - india bit negotiations ; whether to renew u.s. support for apec membership for india ; whether to support u.s. trade promotion and financing programs , such as ex - im bank , opic , and tda , that have been active in india ; whether to reconsider india's gsp status in light of concerns with the country's ipr protection and enforcement ; whether to continue efforts supporting india's membership in the nuclear suppliers group and other expert control regimes ; and how to respond to human rights abuses in india , among others .

with these and other issues confronting congress , u.s. - india relations are likely to remain a prominent area of legislative interest for the 115 th congress .

