instability in central america — particularly the "northern triangle" nations of el salvador , guatemala , and honduras — is one of the most pressing challenges for u.s. policy in the western hemisphere .

these countries are struggling with widespread insecurity , fragile political and judicial systems , and high levels of poverty and unemployment .

the inability of the northern triangle govern ments to address those challenges effectively has had far - reaching implications for the united states .

transnational criminal organizations have taken advantage of the situation , utilizing the region to traffic approximately 90% of cocaine destined for the united states , among other illicit activities .

the region also has become a significant source of mixed migration flows of asylum seekers and economic migrants to the united states .

in fy2017 , u.s. authorities apprehended nearly 163,000 unauthorized migrants from the northern triangle along the southwest border ; about 63% of those apprehended were unaccompanied minors or families , many of whom were seeking humanitarian protection .

these mixed migration flows have continued over the past year , with some migrants banding together in large "caravans" to make the journey .

the obama administration determined that it was "in the national security interests of the united states" to work with central american governments to improve security , strengthen governance , and promote economic prosperity in the region .

accordingly , the obama administration launched a new , whole - of - government u.s. strategy for engagement in central america and requested significant increases in foreign assistance to implement the strategy , primarily through the state department and u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) .

congress has appropriated an estimated $2.1 billion in aid for the region since fy2016 but has required the northern triangle governments to address a series of concerns prior to receiving u.s. support .

the trump administration has begun to adjust the central america strategy as part of its broader reevaluation of u.s. foreign policy .

although the updated strategy maintains the objectives that were adopted during the obama administration , the trump administration's policy toward central america places more emphasis on preventing illegal immigration , combating transnational crime , and generating export and investment opportunities for u.s. businesses .

the trump administration also has sought to scale back — and occasionally threatened to cut off — u.s .

assistance to central america .

congress has not approved most of those proposed cuts , however , and any additional shifts in funding priorities or levels will depend on legislation adopted during the 116 th congress .

this report examines the u.s. strategy for engagement in central america , including its formulation , objectives , funding , and relationship to the alliance for prosperity plan put forward by the northern triangle governments .

the report also analyzes the preliminary results of the strategy and several policy issues that the 116 th congress may assess as it considers the future of u.s. policy in central america .

these issues include the funding levels and strategy necessary to meet u.s. objectives ; the extent to which central american governments are addressing their domestic challenges ; the utility of conditions placed on assistance to the region ; and how changes in u.s. immigration , trade , and drug control policies could affect conditions in the region .

congress may examine a number of policy issues as it deliberates on potential changes to the u.s. strategy for engagement in central america and future appropriations for the initiative .

these issues include the funding levels and strategy necessary to meet u.s. objectives in the region , the extent to which central american governments are demonstrating the political will to undertake domestic reforms , the utility of the conditions placed on assistance to central america , and the potential implications of changes to u.s. immigration , trade , and drug control policies for u.s. objectives in the region .

congress has appropriated nearly $2.1 billion of foreign aid since fy2016 to promote prosperity , strengthen governance , and improve security in central america .

those are difficult , long - term endeavors , however , and u.s. efforts are little more than a year into implementation .

although central american nations have made some tentative progress over the past three years in addressing long - standing challenges , the region is at serious risk of backsliding .

political and economic elites that benefit from the status quo are working to undermine anti - corruption efforts , and the trump administration has begun to withdraw the diplomatic pressure and foreign aid that had incentivized structural reforms .

to achieve success in the medium and long terms , central american nations would need to redouble their efforts to strengthen institutions , bolster their tax bases , and create opportunities for young people , and international donors would need to provide extensive support over an extended period .

absent such efforts , conditions are likely to remain poor in several central american countries , contributing to periodic instability that — as demonstrated by recent migration flows — is likely to affect the united states .

