paid family leave ( pfl ) refers to partially or fully compensated time away from work for specific and generally significant family caregiving needs , such as the arrival of a new child or serious illness of a close family member .

although the family and medical leave act of 1993 ( fmla ; p.l .

103-3 ) provides eligible workers with a federal entitlement to unpaid leave for a limited set of family caregiving needs , no federal law requires private - sector employers to provide paid leave of any kind .

currently , employees may access pfl if offered by an employer .

in addition , some states have created family leave insurance ( fli ) programs , which provide cash benefits to eligible workers who engage in certain ( state - identified ) family caregiving activities .

in these states , workers can access pfl by combining an entitlement to unpaid leave with state - provided insurance benefits .

some congressional proposals to expand national access to paid family leave expand upon these existing mechanisms .

a new tax credit , created in december 2017 ( p.l .

115-97 ) , seeks to expand voluntary employer - provided pfl , and — similar to the state insurance approach — the family and medical insurance ( family act ; s. 463 / h.r .

1185 ) , which proposes to create a national wage insurance program for persons engaged in family caregiving activities or who take leave for their own serious health condition .

the new parents act ( s. 920 / h.r .

1940 ) would allow parents of a new child to receive social security benefits , to be repaid at a later date , for the purposes of financing parental leave .

others proposals , such as the working parents flexibility act of 2019 ( h.r .

1859 ) and the freedom for families act ( h.r .

2163 ) , would amend the tax code to provide tax - advantages to individuals with caregiving responsibilities .

members of congress who support increased access to paid leave generally cite as their motivation the significant and growing difficulties some workers face when balancing work and family responsibilities , and the financial challenges faced by many working families that put unpaid leave out of reach .

in general , expected benefits of expanded access to pfl include stronger labor force attachment for family caregivers and greater income stability for their families , and improvements to worker morale , job tenure , and other productivity - related factors .

potential costs include the financing of payments made to workers on leave , other expenses related to periods of leave ( eg , hiring a temporary replacement or productivity losses related to an absence ) , and administrative costs .

the magnitude and distributions of costs and benefits will depend on how the policy is implemented , including the size and duration of benefits , how benefits are financed , and other policy factors .

this report provides an overview of paid family leave in the united states , summarizes state - level family leave insurance programs , notes pfl policies in other advanced - economy countries , and notes recent federal legislative action to increase access to paid family leave .

throughout their careers , many workers encounter a variety of family caregiving obligations that conflict with work time .

some of these are broadly experienced by working families but tend to be short in duration , such as episodic child care conflicts , school meetings and events , routine medical appointments , and minor illness of an immediate family member .

others are more significant in terms of their impact on families and the amount of leave needed , but occur less frequently in the general worker population , such as the arrival of a new child or a serious medical condition that requires inpatient care or continuing treatment .

although all these needs for leave may be consequential for working families , the term family leave is generally used to describe the latter , more significant , group of needs that tend to require longer periods of time away from work .

as defined in state law and federal proposals , family caregiving activities that are eligible for pfl or leave insurance benefits generally include caring for and bonding with a newly arrived child and attending to the serious medical needs of certain close family members ; some also allow leave or benefits for workers with certain military family needs .

in practice , day - to - day needs for leave to attend to family matters ( eg , a school conference or lapse in child care coverage ) , minor illness ( eg , common cold ) , or preventive care are not included among family leave categories .

many advanced - economy countries entitle workers to some form of paid family leave .

whereas some provide leave to employees engaged in family caregiving ( eg , of parents , spouse , and other family members ) , many emphasize leave for new parents , mothers in particular .

as of 2016 , the organization for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) family leave database counts 34 of its 35 members as providing some paid parental leave ( i.e. , to care for children ) and maternity leave , with wide variation in the number of weeks and rate of wage replacement across countries .

this is shown in figure 1 , which plots the oecd's estimates of weeks of full - wage equivalent leave available to mothers .

weeks of full - wage equivalent leave are calculated as the number of weeks of leave available multiplied by the average wage payment rate .

for example , a country that offers 12 weeks of leave at 50% pay would be said to offer 6 full - wage equivalent weeks of leave ( i.e. , 12 weeks x 50% = 6 weeks ) .

a smaller share ( 27 of 35 ) of oecd countries provides paid leave to new fathers .

in some cases , fathers are entitled to less than a week of leave , often at full pay ( eg , greece , italy , and the netherlands ) , whereas others provide several weeks of full or partial pay ( eg , portugal provides five weeks at full pay , and the united kingdom provides two weeks at an average payment rate of 20.2% ) .

some countries provide a separate entitlement to fathers for child caregiving purposes .

this type of parental leave can be an individual entitlement for fathers or a family entitlement that can be drawn from by both parents .

in the latter case , some countries ( eg , japan , luxembourg , and finland ) set aside a portion of the family entitlement for fathers' use , with the goal of encouraging fathers' participation in caregiving .

figure 2 summarizes paid leave entitlements reserved for fathers in oecd countries in 2016 ; it plots the oecd's estimates of weeks of full - wage equivalent paternity leave and parental leave reserved for fathers .

the oecd examined the availability of family caregiver leave among its member countries in 2011 and found that of the 25 countries for which it could identify information , 14 had polices providing paid leave to workers with ill or dying family members ; these are summarized in table 3 .

qualifying needs for leave , leave entitlement durations , benefit amounts , and eligibility conditions varied considerably across the countries included in the oecd study .

the overarching goal of pfl legislative activity in the 116 th congress has been to increase access to leave by reducing the costs associated with providing or taking leave .

the strong families act , which became law in december 2017 ( p.l .

115-97 ) , allows employers to claim tax credits for a portion of wages paid to certain employees taking family or medical leave ; this approach potentially increases access to pfl for workers while reducing the costs to employers of providing the leave .

a second approach addresses costs incurred by workers taking leave .

for example , the establishment of a national family leave insurance program , such as that proposed in the family and medical insurance leave act ( family act ; s. 463 / h.r .

1185 ) , would provide cash benefits to eligible individuals who are engaged in certain caregiving activities , potentially making the use of unpaid leave ( eg , as provided by fmla or voluntarily by employers ) affordable for some workers .

proposals such as the new parents act ( s. 920 / h.r .

1940 ) would allow eligible new parents to receive to up to three months of social security benefits , in return for deferring retirement ( or early retirement ) by a period of time determined by the social security administration to cover the costs of the parental benefit .

other approaches include proposals to create tax - advantaged parental leave savings accounts ( eg , the working parents flexibility act of 2019 , h.r .

1859 ) and tax - advantaged distributions from health savings accounts for family and medical leave purposes ( eg , the freedom for families act , h.r .

2163 ) .

in addition , the president's fy2020 budget proposes to provide six weeks of financial support to new parents through state unemployment compensation ( uc ) programs .

a similar approach was taken in 2000 by the clinton administration , which — via department of labor regulations — allowed states to use their uc programs to provide uc benefits to parents who take unpaid leave under the fmla , other approved unpaid leave , or otherwise take time off from employment after the birth or adoption of a child .

the birth and adoption unemployment compensation rule took effect in august 2000 , and it was later removed from federal regulations in november 2003 .

