the u.s .

refugee admissions program ( usrap ) , which is managed by the department of state ( dos ) , resettles refugees from around the world in the united states .

under u.s. law , a refugee is a person fleeing his or her country because of persecution or a well - founded fear of persecution on account of race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion .

once a refugee case is approved for u.s. resettlement , the usrap determines where in the country the refugee ( s ) will be resettled .

this determination is made through dos's reception and placement program ( r&p ) , which provides initial resettlement services to arriving refugees .

the placement of refugees , especially syrians , in the united states has been highly controversial in recent years .

some states have attempted to stop the resettlement of syrian refugees within their borders .

in his march 6 , 2017 , executive order , "protecting the nation from foreign terrorist entry into the united states," president trump expressed support for greater state and local government involvement in the placement of refugees: the secretary of state shall examine existing law to determine the extent to which , consistent with applicable law , state and local jurisdictions may have greater involvement in the process of determining the placement or resettlement of refugees in their jurisdictions , and shall devise a proposal to lawfully promote such involvement .

the refugee act of 1980 amended the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) to establish a process for refugee admissions and authorize federal assistance to resettle refugees in the united states .

the latter provisions established the office of refugee resettlement ( orr ) in the department of health and human services ( hhs ) and authorized various forms of refugee resettlement assistance , including a program for initial resettlement of refugees in the united states .

the refugee act gave the president the authority to determine whether this initial resettlement program should be administered by orr or another office ; dos had previously been responsible for initial refugee resettlement .

president jimmy carter subsequently determined that dos should retain administration of this program , known as the reception and placement program .

each year , dos's bureau of population , refugees , and migration ( prm ) requests proposals from public and private nonprofit organizations that are interested in providing services and assistance to refugees under the r&p program ; prm enters into a cooperative agreement with each successful applicant .

the organizations , sometimes referred to as voluntary agencies , maintain nationwide networks of local affiliates to provide services to refugees .

the services include pre - arrival services ( eg , placement ) ; reception upon arrival in the united states ; basic needs support ( eg , housing , furnishings , food , and clothing ) for at least 30 days ; and help accessing health , employment , education , and other services , as needed .

the r&p program primarily serves aliens who are admitted to the united states as refugees , but others , such as iraqi and afghan special immigrants , may also receive benefits .

the resettlement agencies participating in the r&p program provide initial resettlement services using a combination of r&p program funds and contributions from other sources .

table 1 shows obligated funds for the reception and placement program since fy2011 .

this funding includes a per refugee grant , which is provided to the local affiliate resettling the refugee .

for fy2017 , the per - refugee grant is $2,075 .

of this total , $1,125 must be used for direct support of refugees and $950 is available to the local affiliate to spend on its staff and infrastructure .

this table shows the number of refugee arrivals that were initially placed in each state , the district of columbia , and puerto rico during fiscal years 2011 through 2017 ( as of may 31 , 2017 ) .

it does not show the total refugee population in each state in each year .

the total for each column represents the total number of refugee admissions to the united states in the corresponding year .

