in the past several congresses , critics of the environmental protection agency ( epa ) have focused much of their attention on the agency's regulatory actions under the clean air act ( caa ) .

 ( for a summary of those actions , see crs report r41561 , epa regulations: too much , too little , or on track ? .

 , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed]. ) .

during this time , the obama administration promulgated numerous caa regulations .

in general , these regulations came in response to congressional authority or mandates under the clean air act amendments of 1970 , 1977 , and 1990 .

a number were also in response to court decisions that remanded to the agency regulations that the agency had promulgated — often under previous administrations .

critics have maintained that many of these regulatory actions would be too costly , harming a wide range of industries , and would not be justified by the benefits obtained .

the clean air act is not consistent in whether it allows or requires the consideration of costs and benefits in setting standards .

 ( see " clean air act authorities ," below. ) .

the act requires or authorizes the epa administrator to promulgate regulations or set standards in more than 60 sections or subsections .

in 25 of these sections or subsections , cost is not mentioned or implied as a factor to be considered .

in the remaining sections and subsections where the administrator is required or authorized to promulgate regulations — more than 40 of them in all — cost is either identified explicitly or implied as a factor to be considered .

whether or not the statute requires a consideration of cost , epa has prepared cost estimates for all economically significant rules since the carter administration as the result of executive orders .

under executive order ( e.o. ) .

12866 , each economically significant regulatory action taken by executive branch agencies ( under any statutory authority ) must include estimates of the cost and benefits of the action in a regulatory impact analysis ( ria ) before it is proposed , and again before it is promulgated .

rias play a major role in the interagency review process overseen by the office of management and budget , which precedes the publication of significant rules in the federal register .

thus , there is a process for considering the costs and benefits of all clean air act ( and other ) economically significant regulations .

how well this process works is the question .

one issue raised by epa's critics is whether the agency underestimates the cost and other negative impacts of rules in these rias by considering them individually , and not considering cumulative impacts .

a second criticism is that the agency relies for most of its caa benefit assessments on the effects of reducing a single category of pollutants , particulate matter ( pm ) .

research has tied pm to tens of thousands of premature deaths , and epa often finds that reductions in pm emissions justify regulation , even where the target of the regulations is a different pollutant .

a third issue critics raise is whether the methodology used to place monetary value on the avoidance of premature death — a technique referred to as calculating the "value of a statistical life" — inflates the estimated benefits of regulation .

a fourth issue , not generally raised by critics , but often noted by regulators , concerns the difficulty of identifying and estimating the full range of costs and benefits of environmental regulations .

this report examines these issues in the context of clean air act ( caa ) regulations .

it begins with a review of epa's caa authorities and the role of cost considerations in caa standard - setting .

the clean air act , originally enacted in 1955 and amended numerous times since then , gives epa sweeping powers to "protect and enhance the quality of the nation's air resources so as to promote the public health and welfare and the productive capacity of its population. .

in the statute , congress directs the epa administrator to , among other things set national ambient air quality standards ; set emission standards for both stationary and mobile sources of air pollution ; reduce emissions of 187 hazardous air pollutants that congress itself listed in the statute ; protect air quality in relatively pristine areas from significant deterioration ; regulate fuels and fuel additives , both to protect public health and welfare and to prevent the impairment of emission control devices ; require the use of renewable transportation fuels ; control acid deposition ; protect the stratospheric ozone layer by requiring the phase - out of ozone - depleting substances ; issue permits and enforce the act's emission limits ; and develop and enforce federal implementation plans in states that fail to implement the act's requirements .

the specific authorities given to the administrator are established in more than 60 different sections and subsections of the act , which range from broad authority to protect public health with an adequate margin of safety to detailed requirements that specify numerical emission limits or require that standards be at least as stringent as the emission limitation achieved by the best controlled similar source .

although the statute prohibits the consideration of cost in setting some standards , epa is subject to executive orders that require the estimation of costs and benefits any time an agency develops "economically significant" regulations .

executive order 12866 defines an "economically significant" regulation as any rule that may "have an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more or adversely affect in a material way the economy , a sector of the economy , productivity , competition , jobs , the environment , public health or safety , or state , local , or tribal governments or communities. .

the term "effect on the economy" means that a rule may be considered economically significant if it has costs or benefits of over $100 million .

the cost and benefit estimates are to be provided by the regulatory agency before rules are proposed for public comment , and again before they are issued in final form .

e.o .

12866 states that , "each agency shall assess both the costs and the benefits of the intended regulation and , recognizing that some costs and benefits are difficult to quantify , propose or adopt a regulation only upon a reasoned determination that the benefits of the intended regulation justify its costs. .

omb has issued a number of guidance documents that agencies are required to follow when estimating costs and benefits of regulations .

omb's most significant guidance document is circular a - 4 on "regulatory analysis. .

the circular states that it was "designed to assist analysts in the regulatory agencies by defining good regulatory analysis ... and standardizing the way benefits and costs of federal regulatory actions are measured and reported. .

epa's agency - specific document , "guidelines for preparing economic analyses ( 2010 ) ," is built on the analytical framework of circular a - 4 .

circular a - 4 states that a "good regulatory analysis should include the following three basic elements: ( 1 ) a statement of the need for the proposed action , ( 2 ) an examination of alternative approaches , and ( 3 ) an evaluation of the benefits and costs — quantitative and qualitative — of the proposed action and the main alternatives identified by the analysis. .

with regard to analytical approaches , the circular states that agencies should use both cost - benefit analysis ( cba ) and cost - effectiveness analysis .

cost - benefit analysis , in this context , involves the systematic identification of all of the costs and benefits associated with a forthcoming regulation , including nonquantitative and indirect costs and benefits , and how those costs and benefits are distributed across different groups in society .

cost - effectiveness analysis seeks to determine how a given goal can be achieved at the least cost .

when all benefits and costs can be expressed in monetary units , cba can clearly indicate which approach is most efficient in terms of net benefits .

however , in many ( and perhaps most ) cases , agencies are not able to express all of the benefits or costs in monetary units .

in such cases , cost - effectiveness analysis is available to consider the most economically efficient approaches .

a number of issues have been raised regarding epa's cost - benefit analyses for clean air act rules .

four issues are discussed below .

although many parts of the clean air act require the epa administrator to promulgate regulations without mentioning consideration of cost , epa is bound by the statute in some cases and by executive orders in the case of each economically significant rule to provide estimates of the costs and benefits during the rulemaking process .

the agency has indicated that benefits exceed costs , usually by a wide margin , for the vast majority of its caa rules: as noted earlier , according to epa , the estimated cumulative benefits of caa regulations during the period 1990-2020 will exceed the estimated costs by more than 30 to 1 .

projecting that benefits will exceed costs may not be sufficient under the trump administration , however .

the president has spoken repeatedly of the need to reduce the cost of regulation , which he believes has restrained the growth of the economy and "killed" jobs .

on january 30 , 2017 , he signed executive order 13771 , "reducing regulation and controlling regulatory costs. .

a second executive order , e.o .

13783 , "promoting energy independence and economic growth," signed march 28 , 2017 , addressed specific clean air act regulations .

the first of these two executive orders addressed regulations promulgated by all federal agencies .

press coverage focused on its requirement that " ... whenever an executive department or agency ... publicly proposes for notice and comment or otherwise promulgates a new regulation , it shall identify at least two existing regulations to be repealed. .

other elements of the order are also worth noting: first , the executive order does not mention the benefits of regulation .

it focuses exclusively on costs .

second , it establishes a process under which agencies shall be given an annual regulatory budget , with the director of omb identifying "a total amount of incremental costs that will be allowed for each agency in issuing new regulations and repealing regulations for the next fiscal year. .

for fy2017 , the e.o .

directs that "the total incremental cost of all new regulations , including repealed regulations , to be finalized this year shall be no greater than zero , unless otherwise required by law or consistent with advice provided in writing by the director of the office of management and budget.... " third , it requires the director of omb to "provide the heads of agencies with guidance on the implementation of this section .

such guidance shall address , among other things , processes for standardizing the measurement and estimation of regulatory costs ; standards for determining what qualifies as new and offsetting regulations ; standards for determining the costs of existing regulations that are considered for elimination ; processes for accounting for costs in different fiscal years ; methods to oversee the issuance of rules with costs offset by savings at different times or different agencies ; and emergencies and other circumstances that might justify individual waivers of the requirements of this section. .

guidance was issued on april 5 , 2017 .

fourth , it states that , "nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect ... the authority granted by law to an executive department or agency , or the head thereof.... " how this order will affect caa rules remains to be seen .

it gives the omb director new authority in tasking him with the provision of guidance , the identification of regulatory budgets , and the discretion to grant waivers from the order's requirements .

the april 5 , 2017 , guidance reinforces this , stating in numerous places that omb ( in the form of the director of its office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) ) will address issues "on a case - by - case basis. .

some rules under the clean air act might be exempt from the executive order's requirements .

whether this is the case will depend on what interpretation is given to the order's language exempting from the regulatory budgets regulations that are "otherwise required by law. .

the authority granted by law to the epa administrator in at least 25 sections or subsections of the caa ( identified in table 2 ) directs the administrator to set or review standards without subjecting that authority to cost considerations .

in many other cases — whether or not the caa allows consideration of costs — binding deadlines for epa rulemaking have been established by the courts .

the omb guidance describes such cases as "judicially required rulemaking," and includes in this category rules for which deadlines have been established by a settlement agreement or consent decree .

this might cover a substantial number of caa rules .

the second of the two orders , e.o .

13783 , requires reviews of all agency actions "that potentially burden the development of domestically produced energy resources , with particular attention to oil , natural gas , coal , and nuclear energy resources. .

the order addresses specific caa regulations , including the clean power plan for existing fossil - fueled electric generating units ( egus ) and two proposed rules related to it , the new source performance standards for new and modified egus , and the new source performance standards for the oil and natural gas sector .

each of these rules would control emissions of greenhouse gases from an energy - producing sector .

the e.o .

directs epa to review these rules "for consistency with the policy set forth in section 1 of this order," and , if appropriate , to "suspend , revise , or rescind" them .

section 1 lists many goals , including to "promote clean and safe development of our nation's vast energy resources," "ensure that the nation's electricity is affordable , reliable , safe , secure , and clean," "take appropriate actions to promote clean air and clean water," and ensure that "necessary and appropriate environmental regulations comply with the law , are of greater benefit than cost , when permissible , achieve environmental improvements for the american people , and … employ the best - available peer - reviewed science and economics. .

most of the commentary on this executive order has presumed that the purpose of the reviews will be to rescind the rules in question ; but the rules were originally justified by epa as measures that would achieve most of section 1's listed goals .

rescinding the rules would likely require a new justification that can withstand judicial scrutiny .

thus , "review" of the rules does not automatically equate with "rescind. .

whatever becomes of these specific rules , epa's administration of the clean air act under the trump administration is likely to function differently than it did in the obama administration .

the caa gives the epa administrator broad discretion in deciding whether regulations are necessary and how stringent they should be: many sections of the act , even some that don't allow consideration of cost , include phrases such as "in the judgment of the administrator" or "as determined by the administrator. .

such language would seem to allow the administrator a measure of discretion that will continue to shape clean air act and other epa regulations — both in deciding on the stringency of new regulations and in deciding whether new regulations are warranted .

unless this language is modified , it will also continue to provide fertile ground for legal arguments regarding the power that congress delegated to epa when it fashioned the various authorities that the act provides .

