the federal government provides homeownership incentives based on the belief that there are benefits to society of having a high homeownership rate .

for example , owners may have a greater attachment to their neighborhood than renters , and this could be reflected in better exterior home maintenance , greater civic participation , and more involvement with local schools .

however , some analysts have questioned whether homeownership causes these behaviors , or is only correlated with them ( that is , it may be that people who are already inclined toward greater civic participation are more likely to become homeowners ) .

critics of homeownership policies have argued that homeownership can make it more difficult for people to move to areas with better employment opportunities and places the risk of unanticipated repairs on the homeowner .

some have also argued that even if homeownership conveys certain benefits , it is not the federal government's role to intervene in housing markets , or that there may be more efficient ways for the government to advance these outcomes .

some recommend homeownership as a way to accumulate wealth , but others warn that house prices can decline , resulting in large losses to homeowners .

one way in which the federal government supports homeownership is through programs that insure , guarantee , or directly provide mortgages to certain eligible homebuyers .

these programs reduce or eliminate a lender's loss when a homeowner does not make the scheduled mortgage payments and may make lenders more likely to offer mortgages to certain borrowers that would otherwise not be well - served by the private market .

in other cases , the programs may increase the amount of capital available for mortgage lending by bringing more investors into the mortgage market .

this report analyzes the following four federal programs or entities that provide guarantees to lenders or investors on certain types of mortgages , and discusses the maximum mortgage amounts eligible under these programs: fannie mae and freddie mac , congressionally chartered government - sponsored enterprises ( gses ) , purchase mortgages from companies that originate them .

these purchases are subject to a maximum loan amount , which is higher in certain areas of the nation , but there are no limits on home value or income .

the federal housing administration ( fha ) , part of the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , insures mortgages subject to a maximum loan amount .

the maximum amount varies across the nation based on housing prices .

the fha fully guarantees the qualifying mortgages .

there is no fha income limit .

the department of veterans affairs ( va ) guarantees mortgages taken out by veterans .

there is a maximum guaranty amount , but not a maximum mortgage or income limit .

the guaranty limit applies nationwide .

the department of agriculture's rural housing service ( rhs ) has two mortgage programs .

one guarantees mortgages , and the other makes direct mortgages in rural areas .

these programs have income limits and limits on the value of the homes purchased .

although there is some overlap , the four federal mortgage guarantee programs discussed in this report generally have different missions or target different populations .

these differences are discussed in the " possible policy considerations " section .

the following sections summarize the limit on the dollar amount of a mortgage that is eligible for each of these programs .

in addition to these size limits , the programs have other restrictions ( such as minimum down payments ) and eligibility criteria , but these are not addressed in this report .

this section summarizes the limits on federal insurance , guarantees , and direct mortgages .

loan limits on government - backed mortgages arise from a number of policy considerations: the reasons for the programs , the risks and costs to the government of the programs , and government's role in the mortgage market .

because each program and entity described in this report has a somewhat different mission and different target population , these policy considerations may be weighed differently for different programs .

all of the mortgage programs discussed in this report have the goal of making mortgages and homeownership more affordable and more available , but they emphasize different aspects .

the va mortgage guaranty program was created as part of the package of benefits offered to those who served in the armed services during world war ii .

the va program has been expanded to cover those who have served more recently and meet additional criteria .

the fha , the gses , and the usda programs were created to remedy various market imperfections .

the fha and the gses were created , at least in part , to stimulate the mortgage market and housing .

during the great depression , when the fha and the gses were established , there were restrictions on the number of branches a bank could have , interstate banking , and lending very far from a lender's location .

the explicit and implicit government support for the fha and the gses made the mortgage market more national , but there were limits on the flow of money between the states , and interstate differences in interest rates continued until the riegle - neal interstate banking and branching efficiency act of 1994 allowed interstate banking .

the fha , fannie mae , and freddie mac are intended to increase liquidity in the mortgage market more broadly by making it easier for lenders to sell mortgages to investors .

the fha and gses are intended to support middle - class homeownership and affordable housing more generally , rather than being targeted specifically to those who might otherwise have difficulty qualifying for a mortgage .

the usda programs are designed to facilitate the financing of rural housing .

part of the mortgage review process , called underwriting , is to compare the price that the mortgage applicant is willing to pay to what similar housing has recently sold for .

this comparison is designed to protect the lender in the event of foreclosure .

in rural areas , it can be difficult to find similar homes that have been sold recently .

this can make rural housing more risky to lenders , and the usda housing programs are designed to either assume that risk by making mortgages to homeowners or reduce the risk to lenders by insuring mortgages .

in addition , the usda mortgage programs complement the usda's rural development program , which benefits less - developed rural areas by supporting a wide range of essential rural services such as housing , economic development , and health care .

a general case for loan limits is made by some who argue that a case can be made for providing assistance in purchasing basic shelter , but the case is much weaker ( or nonexistent ) for aiding the purchase of upscale housing .

given that average house prices vary widely across the country , the case for loan limits that vary by region is based partly on equity concerns .

homebuyers with conforming , fha - insured , and va - guaranteed mortgages receive an indirect benefit from the federal government in the form of lower interest rates than they might otherwise be able to obtain , or by being able to obtain a mortgage sooner or more easily than might otherwise be the case .

because housing prices vary across the nation , the geographic distribution of this benefit is uneven .

if there were a nationwide loan limit , households living in high - cost areas such as new york , san francisco , and miami would be less able to take advantage of the programs .

even within a given area , differences in house prices across neighborhoods can affect who benefits from these programs .

the costs of federal mortgage guarantee programs are an important consideration for many policymakers .

government mortgage programs control costs by limiting availability , limiting risks , and operating efficiently .

for the purposes of this report , risks can be considered as costs that might or might not occur .

underwriting mortgages reduces the risk of loss on mortgages by reviewing a borrower's credit history and obtaining an independent appraisal of the value of the home being financed .

the borrower's credit history is used to understand the risk that the borrower might default on the mortgage , and the appraisal suggests the likely losses in the event of a foreclosure .

the fha and the conforming loan limits attempt to reduce risk by limiting the size of the mortgages guaranteed , thereby limiting the amount of risk transferred from the lender to the federal government .

the va limits the amount of the guaranty , but not the amount of the mortgage it will provide , which shares the risk with the lender instead of assuming all of it .

homeowners borrowing under the programs are charged fees ( sometimes rolled into the interest rate ) for participating and indirectly pay a user cost to the federal government .

not all costs are covered by users .

for example , although the fha program is sometimes considered to be self - funding , with borrowers and / or lenders paying fees to cover the costs of the insurance or guarantees , a dministrative and other operating costs are appropriated by congress .

the government also faces the risk that the programs' fees will not cover costs and could result in a transfer from the government .

 ( in economic terms , to the extent that the fees do not cover the government's costs , the programs are subsidized. ) .

the fha , the va , and the usda programs present a risk that their reserves will be insufficient and require additional funds from congress .

the gses were designed to be nongovernmental entities with no budget impact .

observers argued that the gses' charters created an implicit federal guarantee that if the gses were unable to honor their guarantee of timely payment of principal and interest , the federal government would make the payments .

this amounts to insurance for which the federal government does not receive payment .

since september 2008 , the gses have been in conservatorship , and treasury has provided $187 billion in support to them .

as previously noted , a key aspect of the programs' costs is the size of each program's loan limits .

higher loan limits may have the effect of increasing financial risk to the federal government , both because they can lead to the government insuring or guaranteeing larger individual mortgages and because they may increase the overall number of mortgages backed by the federal government , as more borrowers may qualify for and seek out these types of mortgages .

however , the extent to which overall risk to the government is actually increased will also depend on a variety of additional factors , including the credit quality of the mortgages insured .

some policymakers argue that the federal government ( i.e. , fha , fannie mae , and freddie mac ) is currently playing too large of a role in the mortgage market .

these policymakers would like to take steps to reduce the federal government's role while increasing the role of private capital .

reducing the loan limits for some or all federal mortgage programs could be one way to reduce the government's role in the mortgage market .

it may reduce the financial risks facing the government but may also limit credit availability for some borrowers .

