the national security council ( nsc ) was established by statute in 1947 to create an interdepartmental body to advise the president on matters of national security .

more specifically , the nsc was created to integrate domestic , foreign , and military policies related to national security , and to facilitate cooperation among the military services and other government departments and agencies in matters of national security .

currently , statutory members of the nsc are the president , the vice president , the secretary of state , the secretary of defense , and , since 2007 , the secretary of energy .

other senior officials participate in nsc deliberations at the president's request .

the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff and the director of national intelligence are statutory advisers .

the president clearly holds final decisionmaking authority in the executive branch .

over the years , however , the nsc staff has emerged as a major factor in the formulation ( and at times in the implementation ) of national security policy .

similarly , the head of the nsc staff , the national security adviser , has played an important , and occasionally highly public , role in policymaking .

this report summarizes the evolution of the nsc from its creation to the present .

the organization and influence of the nsc have varied significantly from one administration to another , ranging from highly structured and formal systems to loose - knit teams of experts .

although it is universally acknowledged that the nsc staff should be organized to meet the particular goals and work habits of an incumbent president , the history of the nsc provides ample examples of the advantages and disadvantages of different types of policymaking structures .

congress enacted the statute creating the nsc and has altered the character of its membership over the years .

congress annually appropriates funds for its activities , but congress does not , routinely , receive testimony on substantive matters from the national security adviser or from nsc staff .

proposals to require senate confirmation of the security adviser have been discussed but not adopted .

according to title 50 , u.s.c .

§3021 , the national security council today has three primary functions: 1. advise the president with respect to the integration of domestic , foreign , and military policies relating to the national security so as to enable the armed forces and the other departments and agencies of the u.s. government to cooperate more effectively in matters involving the national security ; 2. assess and appraise the objectives , commitments , and risks of the united states in relation to the actual and potential military power of the united states , and make recommendations thereon to the president ; and 3. make recommendations to the president concerning policies on matters of common interest to the departments and agencies of the u.s. government concerned with the national security .

since its inception in 1947 , the national security council , and the institutions that support it , has evolved from a statutorily mandated meeting of cabinet - level officials into a complex system of coordination , adjudication , and in some instances formulation ( as in the case of dr. kissinger's tenure as national security advisor ) of policies among relevant departments and agencies .

as a result , when individuals refer to the "nsc," they variously refer to the decisionmaking body created in statute in the 1947 national security act , the staff that supports that decisionmaking body , or the processes used by the white house to discuss and adjudicate decisions across different agencies of the executive branch .

the national security council is the president's statutory advisory body on matters related to national and international security .

pursuant to title 50 u.s.c §3021 , the nsc's statutory members are the president , vice president , secretary of state , secretary of defense , and secretary of energy .

other senior officials , including the national security advisor , participate in nsc deliberations at the president's request .

the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff and the director of national intelligence are the nsc's statutory advisors .

the national security council is chaired by the president .

the national security council staff .

the nsc's activities are coordinated and directed by the presidentially appointed national security adviser ( nsa ) .

they are supported by a national security staff ( nss , or nsc staff ) comprising permanent employees of the executive office of the president and detailees from other government agencies serving temporary assignments .

it is organized into offices that focus on a variety of long - term strategic issues and ad hoc working groups that address emerging topics .

each president configures the nsc to address risks to u.s. global security interests according to prescribed policy priorities .

the size of the nsc staff and ratio of political appointees to detailees have varied with each administration .

in p.l .

114-328 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 , congress limited the number of policy - focused individuals serving on the nsc staff to 200 persons .

during the obama administration , the homeland security committee and national security council staffs were combined into an organization called the national security staff .

decisionmaking committees .

coordinating and managing u.s. national security affairs requires routine coordination and discussion among relevant departments and agencies .

most administrations have therefore set up a hierarchical system of committees designed to discuss , and when appropriate decide , national security matters .

these committees meet as frequently as the white house deems necessary .

the design and composition of the committee structure is the prerogative of the president , but the approach has often included some variant of the following: the principals committee ( pc ) is a level below the nsc , convened by the national security advisor .

the pc does not need to include all statutory nsc members , but it generally includes the heads of departments or agencies involved with the subject matter being discussed at a given meeting .

the deputies committee ( dc ) is convened by the deputy national security advisor , and generally includes the deputy heads of departments ( i.e. , the deputy secretary of defense or deputy secretary of state ) involved with the subject matter being discussed at a given meeting .

policy coordination committee s ( pcc ) are established by the deputies committee and are responsible for day - to - day management of national security matters on a given region or topic at the assistant secretary level from relevant agencies .

these are chaired by members of the national security staff whose subject matter portfolios are relevant to the issue at hand .

different administrations have used various titles for these committees ; under president obama , this forum was called the interagency policy committee .

overall , the nsc and its supporting processes and institutions are designed to be flexible , thereby affording the president maximum latitude to create a security advisory body that suits his unique decisionmaking style .

apart from appropriating the nsc annual budget , congress has little oversight over the executive office of the president , and the national security council system in particular , due to the fact that most national security positions within the white house itself ( as opposed to the senior levels of departments and agencies ) are not currently subject to the advice and consent of the senate .

some observers over the years have argued that the position of national security adviser should be subject to senate confirmation and available to testify before congressional committees , as are officials from other government departments and agencies .

others argue that the president is entitled to confidential advice from his immediate staff .

on april 4 , 2017 , the trump administration issued national security presidential memorandum ( nspm ) - 4: organization of the national security council , the homeland security council , and subcommittees .

nspm - 4 details how the executive branch intends to manage and coordinate national and homeland security issues among relevant departments and agencies .

this nspm augments an earlier articulation from the trump administration regarding the management of national security matters , as expressed in nspm - 2 , which was issued on january 28 , 2017 .

based on the existing documentation , the following key observations can be made: role of the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff ( cjcs ) and the director of national intelligence ( dni ) .

nspm - 2 language on the role of cjcs at nsc and pc meetings was nearly identical to that defined by the george w. bush administration .

in their roles as statutory advisors to the national security council , cjcs and dni were invited to attend all national security council meetings .

cjcs and dni were also invited to attend meetings of the principals committee "where issues pertaining to their responsibilities and expertise are to be discussed. .

the obama administration departed from the george w. bush administration formula by making cjcs and dni "regular members" of the principals committee. .

under nspm - 2 , it was not clear whether the trump administration's reversion to the bush formulation amounted to an actual change to either the chairman's or dni's roles and participation in senior national security meetings , although the cjcs himself maintained that he would "remain a full participant" in the national security interagency process .

considerable controversy arose as a result of the trump administration's return to george w. bush administration formula , as it was widely perceived to be a diminution of the cjcs and dni in senior - level national security policymaking .

nspm - 4 therefore returned to the obama administration formula , inviting cjcs and dni as regular attendees of nsc and pc meetings .

nspm - 4 also establishes the director of the cia ( d / cia ) as a regular attendee of nsc and pc meetings .

it is unclear what effect this might have on dni's status and role as statutory adviser to the nsc , due to the fact that d / cia is subordinate to dni in the current intelligence community organizational hierarchy established by p.l .

108-458 ( intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ) .

inclusion of the assistant to the president and chief strategist as a regular nsc and pc attendee in nspm - 2 .

while previous presidents have , on occasion , requested the attendance of their chief political strategist at nsc meetings , the trump administration appears to be the first to include a political adviser as a regular , permanent attendee of nsc and pc meetings .

the law is silent on the inclusion of political advisors as nsc regular attendees .

nspm - 4 does not list the assistant to the president and chief strategist as a regular attendee of nsc and pc meetings , although it should be noted that the president may invite that individual to any specific nsc meeting , should he choose to do so .

role of the secretary of energy .

the secretary of energy is a statutory member of the nsc and , as such , is invited to attend all nsc meetings .

in contrast with the obama administration ( although in keeping with the george w. bush administration structures ) , the trump administration initially excluded the secretary of energy from pc meetings , based on nspm - 2 .

this decision was reversed with nspm - 4 ; the secretary of energy is now invited as a regular attendee to nsc and pc meetings .

the relationship between the nsc and homeland security council ( hsc ) .

the hsc was created by president george w. bush soon after the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks in the united states with the responsibility of " ensuring coordination of homeland security - related activities of executive departments and agencies and effective development and implementation of homeland security policies . .

post - 9 / 11 administrations have undertaken different approaches to the interaction between the nsc and hsc .

under president bush , the nsc and hsc focused separately on international and domestic security issues .

soon after taking office , president obama merged the nsc and hsc into a national security staff with the focus of "support ( ing ) all white house policy - making activities related to international , transnational , and homeland security matters. .

the trump administration retains both an nsc , responsible for "advis ( ing ) the president with respect to the integration of domestic , foreign , and military policies relating to the national security" and an hsc responsible for "advising the president on matters pertaining to homeland security. .

while no specific statement in the presidential memorandum discusses whether these two entities are organizationally combined or the hierarchy among the leaders of each council , under nspm - 4 , the following statement in the document suggests the assistant to the president for national security affairs has authority over both entities: the assistant to the president for national security affairs ( national security advisor ) shall be responsible , as appropriate and at the president's direction , for determining the agenda for the nsc or hsc , respectively , ensuring that the necessary papers are prepared and recording council actions and presidential decisions in a timely manner .

the assistant to the president for homeland security and counterterrorism ( homeland security advisor ) may , at the sole discretion of the national security advisor , perform those functions .

inclusion of the director , office of management and budget ( omb ) , and nsc executive secretary as regular attendees of nsc and pc meetings .

neither office had been included as regular attendees or members of these meetings in prior administrations .

with the issuance of nspm - 2 , the director of omb was invited to attend both nsc and pc meetings .

further , according to nspm - 2 , the executive secretary was also invited to attend pc meetings .

under nspm - 4 , the role of the omb director remains the same , although the executive secretary is no longer invited to attend pc meetings .

retention of the representative of the united states to the united nations as a regular attendee of nsc meetings .

the representative of the united states to the united nations ( usun ) was first placed on the nsc by the clinton administration , removed from the nsc by the george w. bush administration , and placed back on the nsc by the obama administration .

under nspm - 2 , the usun representative was invited to attend pc meetings "as appropriate" ; nspm - 4 invites the usun representative to be a regular attendee of both nsc and pc meetings .

as noted earlier , the 1947 national security act established the nsc in order to "advise the president with respect to the integration of domestic , foreign , and military policies relating to the national security so as to enable the military services and the other departments and agencies of the government to cooperate more effectively in matters involving the national security. .

presidents have latitude to structure and use the nsc as they see fit .

in practice , the nsc staff's activities now extend somewhat beyond providing policy advice .

first , as one former nsc official notes , "white house involvement is often needed for precise execution of policy , especially when secrecy is required to perform delicate tasks. .

second , the rise in strategic importance of transnational threats such as terrorism and narco - trafficking , along with post - cold war military campaigns in the balkans , iraq , and afghanistan , has increasingly necessitated "whole of government" responses that leverage diplomatic , military , and development tools from a variety of different u.s. government agencies .

the nsc often coordinates such responses , and as the international security environment has become more complex , whole - of - government responses to individual crises have become more frequent , translating into even greater nsc involvement .

this expanding role is leading many scholars and practitioners to question the appropriate size , scope and role for the nsc .

as part of the executive office of the president , the nsc does not have the same relationship with congress and its committees that the member departments and agencies have .

most briefings on intelligence matters are undertaken by the cia and dia or by the dni ; information on diplomatic and military matters comes primarily from the departments of state and defense .

as noted above , the national security adviser is not subject to confirmation by the senate .

over the years , there have been a considerable number of congressional hearings and reports relating to the nsc .

however , many have had to do with topics peculiar to a given period: wiretaps against nsc staff members allegedly ordered by henry kissinger , the unauthorized transfer of nsc documents to officials in the joint chiefs of staff , and information on al qaeda prior to 9 / 11 .

more recently , as part of the 2017 national defense authorization act deliberations , congress examined the appropriate size of the national security council staff , and whether it was inappropriately "micromanaging" the operations of the departments it oversees .

annual hearings are held concerning the nsc budget , and occasional hearings have been held concerning nsc organization and procedures .

very few of these hearings and reports have served as briefings for congress on current issues that the nsc might have been considering .

nsc appropriations are handled by the subcommittees on financial services and general government of the house and senate appropriations committees .

congress's role in nsc matters and its relationship with the nsc are limited .

as noted above , the senate does not approve the appointment of the national security adviser , although it does confirm statutory nsc members .

congress does have authority over the designation of those positions that are to have statutory nsc membership , as well as budgetary authority over the nsc .

in 2007 , as part of the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-140 , §932 ) , congress added the secretary of energy to the nsc .

however , notwithstanding the legislative provisions enacted as part p.l .

114-328 , congress has little direct say in matters of nsc organization , procedure , role , or influence , although a number of hearings on these topics have been held .

the nsc is not a primary and regular source of national security information for congress .

national security information is for the most part provided by those departments and agencies that are represented on the nsc .

the nsc , as a corporate entity , rarely testifies before or briefs congress on substantive questions , although in some administrations informal briefings have been provided .

the nsc is an organ devoted to the workings of the executive branch in the broad area of national security .

its role is basically that of policy analysis and coordination and , as such , it has been subject to limited oversight and legislative control by congress .

both in its staff organization and functioning , the nsc is extremely responsive to the preferences and working methods of each president and administration .

it would be difficult to design a uniform nsc structure that would meet the requirements of chief executives , who represent a wide range of backgrounds , work styles , and policy agendas ; however , some observers believe that the general pattern that has been followed since the george h.w .

bush administration will continue into the future .

appendix a .

comparative charts of individuals named as members or attendees of nsc and / or pc meetings table a - 1 depicts the membership of the nsc , from the reagan administration through the trump administration .

positions are listed in the order they are presented in the respective executive orders issued by each presidential administration .

this report uses the following categories to classify nsc membership: statutory members — positions specifically designated as comprising the nsc by 50 u.s.c .

§3021 during the indicated administration .

statutory advisors — positions designated by law as principal advisors to the president , the national security council , and the homeland security council during the indicated administration .

currently , 50 u.s.c .

§3023 designates the director of national intelligence as the principal adviser to the president , to the national security council , and the homeland security council for intelligence matters related to national security .

the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff is designated by 10 u.s.c .

§151 as the principal military adviser to the president , the  national security council , the homeland security council , and the secretary of defense .

other members or regular attendees — positions not statutorily designated as comprising the nsc by 50 u.s.c .

§3021 during the indicated administration , but explicitly identified as a "member" or "regular attendee" of the nsc in the presidential directive establishing the structure and function of the nsc for the indicated administration .

named attendees — positions not statutorily designated as comprising the nsc by 50 u.s.c .

§3021 during the indicated administration , but explicitly identified as an invited or required attendee of the nsc in the presidential directive establishing the structure and function of the nsc for the indicated administration .

situational attendees — positions not statutorily designated as comprising the nsc by 50 u.s.c .

§3021 during the indicated administration , but explicitly identified as an invited or required attendee of the nsc in certain specific circumstances in the presidential directive establishing the structure and function of the nsc for the indicated administration .

the table also reflects how the trump administration organized itself to manage national security matters in its two national security presidential memorandums – nspm - 2 and 4 – and notes the differences between the two nspms .

table a - 2 depicts the membership of the pc , from the george h.w .

bush administration through the trump administration .

appendix b .

national security advisers , 1953-presen .

