in the 114 th congress , the financial choice act of 2016 ( h.r .

5983 ) was sponsored by representative jeb hensarling , chairman of the house committee on financial services .

the bill was reported by the house committee on financial services on december 20 , 2016 .

in the 115 th congress , a modified version of the choice act was introduced as the financial choice act of 2017 ( h.r .

10 , fca ) on april 26 , 2017 .

it passed the house on june 8 , 2017 .

this report describes the fca as passed in the 115 th congress .

the congressional budget office estimated that a similar version of the bill would reduce budget deficits by $33.6 billion over the next 10 years .

the fca is a wide - ranging proposal with 12 titles that would alter many parts of the financial regulatory system .

many of the provisions can be categorized as providing regulatory relief to financial firms , investors , or borrowers .

other provisions alter the financial regulatory architecture or change the relationship between financial regulators and congress or the judiciary .

for background and reference , table 1 lists the federal financial regulators and their general responsibilities .

many parts of the fca would repeal or amend provisions of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ) , a broad package of regulatory reform legislation passed following the 2007-2009 financial crisis that initiated the largest change to the financial regulatory system since at least 1999 ( see appendix a ) .

president trump has called for the dodd - frank act to be "dismantled," and chairman hensarling has characterized the fca as "work ( ing ) with the president to end and replace the dodd - frank mistake. .

the minority on the house financial services committee stated that the fca "dismantles critical safeguards included in the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank ) , the law that was put in place to protect the american economy from another financial crisis .

dodd - frank improves accountability in the financial system and protects consumers , investors , and the economy from abusive wall street practices. .

although many of the provisions of the bill focus on parts of the dodd - frank act , others would address long - standing or more recent issues .

this report highlights major policy proposals in the version of the bill as passed in the 115 th congress , but it is not a comprehensive summary of the bill .

it provides context for these proposals in the form of background and policy debate .

this report also includes an experts' contact list for fca topics in appendix c .

as financial regulators have implemented the dodd - frank act and other reforms , some members of congress argue that the pendulum has swung too far toward excessive regulation .

as a result , they argue that additional regulatory burden — the cost associated with government regulation and its implementation — has stymied economic growth and restricted consumer and business access to credit .

other members , however , contend the current regulatory structure has appropriately strengthened financial stability and increased protections for consumers and investors .

they are concerned that regulatory relief for financial institutions could negatively affect consumers and market stability .

in determining whether to provide regulatory relief , a central question is whether an appropriate trade - off has been struck between the benefits and costs of regulation .

in other words , can relief be provided while maintaining the stability of the financial system and ensuring taxpayers , consumers , and investors are protected , or would relief undermine those goals ? .

regulatory relief is generally focused on the financial services providers — such as banks , broker - dealers , and other institutions — but what effect would relief have on consumers , investors , particular markets , and market stability more broadly ? .

the answers to these and other policy questions will vary based on the particulars of the relief being proposed .

the fca would provide regulatory relief to two broad categories — banks and securities markets' participants .

the fca would provide regulatory relief to banks through more than two dozen provisions .

some of the proposals are aimed at assisting community banks , whereas others would apply to all banks , regardless of size .

some provisions provide relief from regulations , whereas others target supervisory practices .

many would modify or repeal rules stemming from the dodd - frank act , whereas others target long - standing regulatory practices .

this report highlights two provisions providing relief to banks — the volcker rule and the leverage ratio .

many of the securities - related provisions in the fca provide regulatory relief with the aim of facilitating capital formation .

among the over three dozen securities - related provisions in the fca are provisions that relax restrictions on who is eligible to invest in certain types of securities , including venture capital investors ; provisions that relax regulatory requirements on licensed professionals in the securities industry , including private equity advisers , private funds , municipal advisors , investment fund researchers , and credit rating agencies ; and provisions that relax regulatory requirements for firms that issue capital or securities , including emerging growth companies , risk retention requirements for nonmortgage securitizers , firms subject to disclosures on conflict minerals , and companies raising funds via crowdfunding or from angel investors .

many of these issues are discussed in further detail below .

although "too big to fail" ( tbtf ) has been a long - standing policy issue , it was highlighted by the near - collapse of several large financial firms in 2008 , including bear stearns , fannie mae , freddie mac , lehman brothers , and aig , which led to a worsening of the financial crisis .

with the exception of lehman brothers ( which filed for bankruptcy ) , all of these firms received government assistance under emergency authority to avoid insolvency .

financial firms are said to be tbtf when policymakers judge that the firms' failure would cause unacceptable disruptions to financial stability .

financial firms can be perceived as tbtf because of their size or interconnectedness .

in addition to fairness issues , economic theory suggests that market expectations that the government will not allow a firm to fail create moral hazard — if the creditors and counterparties of a tbtf firm believe that the government will protect them from losses , they have less incentive to monitor the firm's riskiness ( referred to as market discipline ) .

if this is the case , a firm that is perceived to be tbtf could have a funding advantage , which some call an implicit subsidy , compared with other firms .

conventional wisdom regarding regulators is that the structure and design of the organization matters for policy outcomes .

these agencies have been given certain characteristics that enhance their day - to - day independence from the president or congress , which may make policymaking more technical and less political or partisan , for better or worse .

independence also may make regulators less accountable to elected officials and can reduce congressional influence .

from a practical perspective , independence and accountability take various forms and each regulator has a unique group of characteristics that , along with tradition , determine its relative independence and accountability .

two of the most independent regulators , the fed and the cfpb , would see their independence reduced and congressional oversight increased by the fca .

the rest of this section discusses issues raised by the fca related to independence and accountability , with added focus on the cfpb and the fed .

the annual appropriations processes and periodic reauthorization legislation provide congress with opportunities to influence the size , scope , priorities , and activities of an agency .

most financial regulators determine their own budgets and assess fees to cover expenditures , as shown in table 3 , typically subject to some general language regarding proportionality of budget and mission .

currently , the two financial regulators whose funding is primarily determined through the appropriations process and who are subject to periodic reauthorizations are the cftc and the sec .

most financial regulators generate income from various sources , particularly fees or assessments on entities that they oversee .

the two financial regulators that do not largely raise their own revenues are the cftc and the cfpb .

the cftc's funding comes from general revenues and cfpb funding is transferred from the federal reserve's revenues .

the appropriations and authorization processes provide congress regular opportunities to evaluate an agency's performance .

during these processes , congress might also influence the activities of these agencies by legislating provisions that reallocate resources or place limitations on the use of appropriated funds to better reflect congressional priorities .

through line - item funding , bill text , or accompanying committee report text , congress can encourage , discourage , require , or forbid specific activities at the agency , including rulemaking .

alternatively , congress can adjust an agency's overall funding level if congress is supportive or unsupportive of the agency's mission or conduct .

thus , congressional control over an agency's funding reduces its independence from ( and increases its accountability to ) congress .

to the extent that agency budget requests exceed appropriations in practice , bringing agencies into the appropriations process could result in lower agency funding levels , for better or worse .

the fca would bring the rest of the financial regulators — the fdic , fhfa , ncua , occ , fed , and clea — as well as fsoc into the appropriations process .

for the fed , spending related to monetary policy would remain outside of the appropriation process .

for the fdic , the deposit insurance fund would remain outside of the appropriations process .

the clea , replacing the cfpb , would not receive transfers from the federal reserve and thus would not have a dedicated source of revenues .

fees and assessments that agencies currently collect to fund themselves would appear as offsetting collections in the federal budget with certain exceptions .

agencies that are currently permanently authorized would remain so .

the fca would also reauthorize the sec through 2022 and the clea through 2018 .

cbo estimates that moving these agencies to appropriations would reduce direct spending ( and therefore decrease the deficit ) by $18.4 billion over 10 years .

to the extent that these agencies were funded through future appropriations acts , discretionary spending would rise and offset that reduction in the deficit .

before title x of the dodd - frank act ( entitled the consumer financial protection act ) went into effect , federal consumer financial protection regulatory authority was split between five banking agencies — the occ , fed , fdic , ncua , and office of thrift supervision ( ots ) — as well as the federal trade commission ( ftc ) and the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) .

these seven agencies shared ( 1 ) the authority to write rules to implement most federal consumer financial protection laws ; ( 2 ) the power to enforce those laws ; and ( 3 ) supervisory authority over the individuals and companies offering and selling consumer financial products and services .

the jurisdictions of these agencies varied based on the type of institution involved and , in some cases , based on the type of financial activities in which institutions engaged .

the regulatory authority of the banking agencies varied by depository charter .

the occ regulated depository institutions with a national bank charter .

the fed regulated the domestic operations of foreign banks and state - chartered banks that were members of the federal reserve system ( frs ) .

the fdic regulated state - chartered banks and other state - chartered depository institutions that were not members of the frs .

the ncua regulated federally insured credit unions , and the ots regulated institutions with a federal thrift charter .

the banking agencies were charged with a two - pronged mandate to regulate depository institutions within their jurisdiction for safety and soundness , as well as consumer compliance .

the focus of safety and soundness regulation is ensuring that institutions are managed in a safe and sound manner so as to maintain profitability and avoid failure .

the focus of consumer compliance regulation is ensuring that institutions abide by applicable consumer protection and fair lending laws .

to reach these ends , the banking agencies held broad authority to subject depository institutions to up - front supervisory standards , including the authority to conduct regular , if not continuous , on - site examinations of depository institutions .

they also had flexible enforcement powers to redress consumer harm , as well as to rectify proactively compliance issues found in the course of examinations and the exercise of their other supervisory powers , potentially before consumers suffered harm .

the ftc was the primary federal regulator for nondepository financial companies , such as payday lenders and mortgage brokers .

unlike the federal banking agencies , the ftc had little up - front supervisory or enforcement authority .

for instance , the ftc did not have the statutory authority to examine nondepository financial companies regularly or impose reporting requirements on them as a way proactively to ensure they were complying with consumer protection laws .

instead , the ftc's powers generally were limited to enforcing federal consumer laws .

however , because the ftc lacked supervisory powers , it generally initiated enforcement actions in response to consumer complaints , private litigation , or similar "triggering events [that] postdate injury to the consumer. .

additionally , both depository institutions and nondepository financial companies were subject to the federal consumer financial protection laws .

together , these federal laws establish consumer protections for a broad and diverse set of activities and services , including consumer credit transactions , third - party debt collection , and credit reporting .

before the dodd - frank act went into effect , the rulemaking authority to implement federal consumer financial protection laws was largely held by the fed .

however , the authority to enforce the federal consumer financial protection laws and regulations was spread among all of the banking agencies , the ftc , and hud .

some scholars and consumer advocates contended that this arguably complex , fragmented federal consumer financial protection regulatory regime failed to protect consumers adequately and created market inefficiencies to the detriment of both financial companies and consumers .

some argued that these problems could be corrected if federal consumer financial regulatory powers were strengthened and consolidated in a single regulator with a consumer - centric mission and supervisory , rulemaking , and enforcement powers akin to those held by the banking agencies .

the dodd - frank act established the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb , or bureau ) , in part to address these concerns .

the cfpb is established as an independent agency within the federal reserve system .

the bureau is headed by a single director who is appointed by the president of the united states , subject to the advice and consent of the senate , and may only be removed from office "for inefficiency , neglect of duty , or malfeasance in office. .

the bureau is funded primarily through transfers of nonappropriated funds from the federal reserve system's combined earnings in an amount "determined by the director to be reasonably necessary to carry out the authorities of the bureau," subject to specified caps .

the cfpb has regulatory jurisdiction over a broad array of consumer financial products and services , as well as the entities that sell them .

the dodd - frank act significantly enhances federal consumer protection regulatory authority over nondepository financial companies , for instance , by providing the cfpb with supervisory and examination authority over such companies akin to those powers long held by the banking agencies over depository institutions .

although the dodd - frank act consolidates in the cfpb much of the federal consumer financial protection authority , at least six other agencies — the occ , fed , fdic , ncua , hud , and ftc — retain some powers in this field .

the dodd - frank act also explicitly exempts certain industries from cfpb regulation .

the dodd - frank act transferred from the banking agencies to the bureau primary consumer compliance authority over banks , thrifts , and credit unions with more than $10 billion in assets .

however , the banking agencies continue to hold safety and soundness authority over these "larger depositories," as well as both consumer compliance and safety and soundness authority over "smaller depositories" ( i.e. , bank , thrifts , and credit unions with $10 billion or less in assets ) .

the cfpb has significant rulemaking authority .

the dodd - frank act transferred to the bureau the primary rulemaking authority over 19 "enumerated consumer laws," which , with one exception , were enacted prior to the dodd - frank act .

these laws , which include the truth in lending act ( tila ) and the real estate settlement procedures act of 1974 ( respa ) , govern a broad and diverse set of consumer activities and services .

additionally , the cfpb is authorized to prohibit unfair , deceptive , and abusive acts or practices associated with consumer financial products and services that fall under the bureau's general regulatory jurisdiction .

the bureau also is authorized to enforce consumer financial protection laws either through the courts or administrative adjudications .

the cfpb is authorized by statute to redress violations of consumer financial protection laws through the assessment of civil monetary penalties , restitution orders , and various other forms of legal and equitable relief .

since the cfpb was established , some have argued that the agency has overly broad powers , too much independence , and not enough accountability .

much of the policy discussion around it has focused on two main questions .

first , is the cfpb as an institution structured appropriately to achieve the correct balance between independence on the one hand and transparency and accountability on the other ? .

those who criticize the cfpb's policy choices often attribute some of the perceived shortcomings to what they see as the cfpb's excessive independence , insularity , and lack of sufficient accountability .

the presence of a director rather than a board , some argue , leads to a lack of diverse viewpoints at the cfpb .

some also cite funding that is outside the traditional appropriations process as a contributing factor to the cfpb's independence .

supporters of the cfpb highlight other aspects of its structure that they argue provide sufficient transparency and accountability , including the director's biannual testimony before congress and the cap on cfpb funding .

other structural characteristics , they argue , are important for ensuring that the cfpb is somewhat insulated from political pressures and can focus on the technical aspect of policymaking .

the second major policy question is whether the substance of the cfpb's rulemakings has struck an appropriate balance between protecting consumers and ensuring that consumers have access to financial products while also safeguarding lenders from unduly burdensome regulations .

one of the long - standing issues in the regulation of consumer financial services is the perceived trade - off between protecting consumers and ensuring the providers of financial services are not unduly burdened .

if regulation intended to protect consumers increases the cost of providing a financial product , a company may reduce how much of that product it is willing to provide and to whom it is willing to provide it .

those who still receive the product may benefit from the enhanced disclosure or added legal protections of the regulation but at the cost of a potentially higher price .

some members of congress believe the cfpb has struck an appropriate balance in its rulemaking between protecting consumers and ensuring that credit availability is not restricted due to overly burdensome regulations on financial institutions .

others counter that some of the cfpb's rules have imposed compliance costs on lenders of all sizes that will result in less credit available to consumers and restrict the types of products available .

an analysis of whether recent rulemakings have restricted the availability of credit is complicated by the effects of the financial crisis on the supply of and demand for credit , as well as by the fact that many of the more significant cfpb rulemakings only took effect in early 2014 .

the fca would replace the cfpb with a "consumer law enforcement agency" ( clea ) and would make numerous other significant alterations to the federal consumer financial regulatory system put in place by the dodd - frank act .

although the clea would take over some of the bureau's regulatory functions , the clea would not acquire all of the powers currently held by the cfpb , and the clea would have a substantively distinct administrative structure .

similar to the cfpb , the clea would be headed by a single director , but unlike the cfpb director , who can only be removed by the president for cause , the clea director would be removable at - will by the president .

the clea would be funded through appropriations , rather than through a transfer of nonappropriated funds from the federal reserve system , as is the case for the cfpb .

the clea , in contrast to the cfpb , would not be authorized to conduct examinations of or engage in other supervisory activities involving covered financial institutions .

however , the clea would have at its disposal many of the same enforcement powers that currently are held by the cfpb .

the clea also would acquire the cfpb's rulemaking authority over the 19 "enumerated consumer laws. .

however , prior to initiating an enforcement action , entering a consent order , or issuing a regulation , the fca would require the clea to analyze the costs and benefits of such an action and evaluate how such an action would affect "consumer choice , price , and access to credit products. .

unlike the cfpb , the clea would not serve as the primary consumer compliance regulator for larger depositories .

instead , the fca would transfer those powers to the relevant banking agencies .

the clea also would not have the cfpb's authority to prohibit unfair , deceptive , and abusive acts or practices in consumer financial markets .

the federal reserve is unique among financial regulators in that , in addition to its regulatory role , it is responsible for conducting monetary policy and operating parts of the payment system .

the federal reserve system is comprised of a board of governors and 12 regional federal reserve banks .

monetary policy is set by the federal open market committee ( fomc ) , comprised of all seven governors , the president of the new york fed , and four of the regional bank presidents ( selected on a rotating basis among the other 11 banks ) .

the fed's financial statements are annually audited by a private sector auditor , and its policies are regularly evaluated by gao , subject to statutory restrictions .

the dodd - frank act allowed the fed's monetary policy and lending activities to be audited by gao for the first time , but limited the scope of those audits to waste , fraud , and abuse .

in normal conditions , the fed lends minimally to banks through its discount window and does not provide any credit to nonbank financial firms .

during the 2007 to 2009 financial crisis , it provided extensive credit to banks and nonbanks , the latter through its emergency powers found in section 13 ( 3 ) of the federal reserve act .

some criticized the fed's use of section 13 ( 3 ) in the bailouts of bear stearns and aig , although the funds were repaid in full with interest .

the dodd - frank act restricted section 13 ( 3 ) to prohibit assistance to failing firms , while still allowing the fed to provide liquidity to healthy firms through broadly based facilities .

to shield monetary policy from undue political influence , congress made the federal reserve more independent from congress and the administration than other financial regulators .

it currently has broad discretion to set monetary policy as it sees fit to achieve its dual statutory mandate of maximum employment and stable prices .

nevertheless , it is still subject to congressional oversight .

recent congresses have debated whether the balance should be tilted toward greater congressional oversight and less independence , notably by expanding the scope of gao audits of the fed and reducing the fed's discretion over monetary policy .

the fca contains 11 fed - related sections , including provisions that would remove statutory restrictions on government accountability office ( gao ) audits of monetary policy and require an annual audit that is not subject to current statutory provisions , such as confidentiality requirements .

effectively , this provision would expand gao's powers to allow it to evaluate the economic merits of fed policy decisions .

require the fed to formulate a mathematical rule ( called the "directive policy rule" ) that would instruct it how to set monetary policy so as to achieve its mandate of stable prices and maximum employment based on macroeconomic variables .

the provision would also require the fed to calculate a traditional taylor rule ( called the "reference policy rule" in the bill ) and compare it to the directive policy rule .

if the fed did not comply , it would trigger a gao audit and testimony by the fed chair before the committees of jurisdiction .

change the voting membership of the fomc .

the provision would dilute the voting power of the fed governors and the new york fed president by expanding the votes of the other regional bank presidents .

further restrict the fed's emergency lending powers .

it would limit eligible collateral and eligible firms , establish a minimum "penalty" interest rate , and require approval by at least nine fed bank presidents .

create a commission whose voting members are composed of eight members of congress from the majority party and four members from the minority party , split evenly between the house and senate .

the commission would examine and make recommendations on monetary policy , the dual mandate , macroprudential regulation , and lender of last resort functions .

the fca would also enhance oversight at the expense of fed independence by moving the fed's nonmonetary policy activities to appropriations ( see the section entitled " appropriations " ) and subjecting fed rulemaking to cost - benefit analysis requirements ( see the section entitled " cost - benefit analysis " ) .

rulemaking is one of the basic tools that federal agencies use to implement public policy .

in enacting legislation , congress often grants agencies rulemaking authority , under which they are required or permitted to set standards and prescribe the details of certain federal policies and programs .

some rules an agency issues are promulgated under the agency's inherent authority , while others are in response to the specific requirements of legislation .

when they issue those regulations , agencies are generally required to follow a certain set of procedures established by congress .

the most long - standing and broadly applicable federal rulemaking requirements are in the administrative procedure act ( apa ) of 1946 , which applies to all executive agencies , including independent regulatory agencies .

the apa contains rulemaking requirements and procedures for agency adjudications , and it provides for judicial review of rulemaking and agency actions .

three proposals in the fca — requiring cost - benefit analysis ( cba ) , modifying the congressional review act ( cra ) , and overturning the judicial chevron doctrine — would affect regulator discretion and accountability in the rulemaking process .

in the rulemaking process , cost - benefit analysis is the systematic examination of estimated total costs incurred and benefits accrued if a proposed rule were to be implemented .

many regulatory agencies are required to perform some analysis of the potential effects of the rule prior to finalizing it , but not necessarily a quantified cba .

the scope of consideration and the level of detail required of the analysis can vary between different departments and agencies , and financial regulators generally are not required to quantify and evaluate total economic costs and benefits .

financial regulators generally face requirements that involve a relatively narrow analysis of a specific effect of a regulation — such as the effect on small businesses or the burden of recordkeeping and reporting necessary to comply with a new regulation — or that leave the parameters of a cba to the discretion of the issuing agency .

also , because financial regulators are generally classified as independent regulatory agencies , they are exempted from executive order ( eo ) 12866 .

eo 12866 establishes analytical principles for federal cba and a review process — performed by the office of information and regulatory affairs within the office of management and budget — to ensure rulemaking adheres to those principles .

cba requirements help to ensure that regulators are held accountable during the development , issuance , and implementation of rules , by requiring regulators to demonstrate that their decisions are based on an informed estimation of likely consequences .

however , a statutory requirement for financial regulators to perform certain types of cbas that are subject to judicial , presidential , or congressional review would change the balance between their independence and accountability .

one side of the debate asserts that financial regulators should not be subject to rigid legal structure when performing cba — especially in regard to quantification of costs and benefits .

one argument for this position is that attempts to quantify the effects of financial regulation are imprecise and unreliable , because they entail making causal assumptions that are contestable and uncertain and often face issues concerning data availability and accuracy .

the reason for this imprecise analysis is that financial regulation aims to induce behavioral , microeconomic , and macroeconomic responses , and its effects can be harder to quantify than other types of regulation , which generally require firms to take actions with more measurable effects .

some warn that increasing rulemaking requirements could lead to "ossification" of the rulemaking process , meaning agencies find it difficult to regulate because the rulemaking process becomes difficult , costly , and time consuming .

others assert that financial regulators should be subject to stricter cba requirements than is currently the case .

they argue that the cba — even in the case of financial regulation , when it might yield a wide range of estimates of costs and benefits or when technical experts might disagree over the accuracy — is necessary because it disciplines agencies in regard to what rules they implement and allows for an assessment of whether a regulation is desirable .

some also argue that the challenges of performing cba for financial regulations are not greater than for other industries , arguing that the necessary data are available and estimations of benefits and costs — while challenging — are possible .

the fca would require the financial regulators listed in table 1 to perform cba as part of the rulemaking process and lists 12 specified areas of analysis .

the 12 areas relate to verifying the necessity , efficacy , benefits , and costs of the rule , and include a quantitative and qualitative assessment of all anticipated direct and indirect costs and benefits of the regulation .

other provisions would restrict the implementation of rules depending on the findings of the cba and the agencies' adherence to the requirements of the bill .

for example , agencies would be prohibited from issuing a final rule if the expected quantified costs were greater than expected quantified benefits , unless congress granted a waiver by joint resolution .

also , the bill would entitle parties adversely affected by regulation to bring action to the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit for judicial review .

the court may vacate a rule if it finds the agency did not comply with certain requirements .

finally , the bill would require each financial regulator to conduct certain additional cba after the rule is issued and implemented , a type of analysis often referred to as retrospective analysis .

the congressional review act is an oversight tool that congress can use to invalidate a final rule issued by a federal agency .

the cra provides congress with a special set of expedited parliamentary procedures , which congress can use to consider legislation striking down agency rules it opposes .

these "fast track" parliamentary procedures , which are available primarily in the senate , limit debate and amendment on a joint resolution disapproving a rule and ensure that a simple majority can reach a final up - or - down vote on the measure .

members of congress have specified time periods in which to submit and act on a joint resolution of disapproval invalidating the rule .

if both houses agree to such a joint resolution , it is sent to the president for his signature or veto .

if a cra joint resolution of disapproval is enacted , either by being signed by the president or by being enacted over his veto , the agency final rule in question "shall not take effect ( or continue ) . .

the act also provides that if a joint resolution of disapproval is enacted , a new rule may not be issued in "substantially the same form" as the disapproved rule unless the rule is specifically authorized by a subsequent law .

the cra prohibits judicial review of any "determination , finding , action , or omission under" the act .

prior to 2017 , the cra mechanism had successfully overturned one agency final rule: a 2000 occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) rule related to workplace ergonomics standards .

thus far in the 115 th congress ( 2017-2018 ) , congress has passed , and president trump has signed into law , 13 cra disapproval resolutions aimed at rules issued by the obama administration .

the cra was enacted in 1996 in response to concerns expressed by members of both parties about congress's ability to control what many viewed as a rapidly growing body of administrative rules .

simply put , many members felt that as congress delegated more power to agencies to implement law , the traditional oversight tools congress possessed were not adequate .

congressional concern about administrative rules is arguably as high as ever , but in recent years , there has been a growing bipartisan consensus that the cra has not been particularly effective as an oversight tool .

as one house 2015 committee report noted of the expedited disapproval mechanism , "despite its conceptual promise , the cra has produced few results. .

it is too early to tell if the increased successful use of the cra in the 115 th congress has influenced or will influence this viewpoint or perhaps give rise to new opinions of the act .

prior to 2017 , perhaps the most widely cited reason why the cra had overturned only one agency rule in 20 years is the de facto two - thirds supermajority of both houses of congress required to enact a cra resolution of disapproval .

this is because a president is likely to veto a joint resolution that attempts to strike down a final rule proposed by his or her own administration or by a like - minded independent agency .

as a result , observers have argued that the structure of the cra disapproval process tilts the playing field away from congress and toward the president in a way that renders the cra largely unworkable as an oversight mechanism .

such observers argue that the cra can only be generally effective during periods when there is a change in party control of the white house to match that of the party controlling congress .

these are the exact circumstances in force at the beginning of the 115 th congress .

such concerns have led in recent congresses to the introduction of several proposals that would restructure the cra disapproval mechanism from a resolution of disapproval to a resolution of approval .

under proposals of this type , instead of rules automatically going into force unless congress could enact a measure stopping them , some or all rules would become effective only upon the enactment of a law approving them .

chief among proposals of this type is the regulations from the executive in need of scrutiny act ( reins act ; h.r .

26 ) .

the reins act would keep the cra process the same for nonmajor agency rules but would require congress to vote to approve all so - called "major" rules before they could become effective .

h.r .

26 passed the house on january 5 , 2017 .

supporters of these proposals argue that amending the cra mechanism in this way would properly "flip" the balance of power in agency rulemaking to favor congress — the lawmaking branch — by requiring affirmative congressional action for significant rules to become effective .

opponents of such an approach have expressed concern that it could make it difficult or impossible for agencies to issue needed rules and might significantly increase congressional workload .

in the case of financial regulators , the approach would reduce their independence from — and increase their accountability to — congress .

the fca would amend the cra in a manner virtually identical to that proposed in h.r .

26 , described above .

unlike h.r .

26 , however , the fca would apply this revised cra approval mechanism only to rules promulgated by a "federal financial agency," a term it defines as the financial regulators listed in table 1 .

the fca would require the agency to meet a number of reporting requirements to congress when issuing a rule .

the fca would require a joint resolution of approval for major financial agency rules to be enacted under "fast track" consideration before such rules could take effect .

 ( as noted above , currently , major rules automatically take effect unless a joint resolution disapproving them is enacted .

the bill defines "major rule" using the same definition as is currently contained in the cra. ) .

the fca would provide that if a joint resolution of approval is not enacted by the end of 70 session days or legislative days ( as applicable ) after the financial agency proposing the rule submits its report on the rule to congress , the major rule is not approved and will not take effect .

the fca would , however , permit a major financial rule to take effect for one 90-calendar - day period without congressional approval if the president determined that the rule was necessary because of an imminent threat to health or safety or other emergency , for the enforcement of criminal laws , for national security , or to implement an international trade agreement .

unlike the current cra , the fca would allow a court to review whether a financial agency has completed the necessary requirements for a final rule to take effect .

the fca contains a provision that would change how agency interpretations of the law would be reviewed .

before discussing the benefits or drawbacks of such an approach , it is important to discuss the current legal framework in which courts generally review agency interpretations of the law .

an administrative agency may generally only exercise that authority that is provided to it by congress .

often , however , congressional delegations of authority may be imprecise and , as a result , agencies often must construe ambiguous terms and make interpretive decisions to implement congress's delegation .

the supreme court , in chevron u.s.a. , inc. v. natural resources defense council , inc. , envisioned a limited role for courts in reviewing agency interpretations of law .

chevron has been a cornerstone of administrative law since being handed down more than three decades ago , having been cited and followed thousands of times by federal courts .

the chevron test requires courts to enforce the clearly expressed intent of congress .

in the absence of such clarity , generally chevron instructs reviewing courts to defer to an agency's construction of an ambiguous statute if the agency's interpretation is reasonable .

when assessing the reasonableness of an agency's interpretation , reviewing courts generally "will consider whether the agency's position comports with the overall purpose and goal of the statute in question. .

thus , under chevron , it is generally left to federal agencies , and not the courts , to resolve ambiguities necessary to interpret and implement authority provided to the agency by congress .

although chevron did not directly involve a federal financial regulator , courts have applied chevron's principles to statutory interpretations of the federal financial agencies .

the chevron court explained that when congress has delegated the authority to interpret the statute to the administrative agency , a judge must not substitute his or her own interpretation of the statute in question when the agency has provided a permissible construction of the statute .

in reaching its decision , the supreme court established a two - part test , commonly referred to as the " chevron two - step," to be applied when a court is reviewing an agency's statutory interpretation .

the court announced when a court reviews an agency's construction of the statute which it administers , it is confronted with two questions .

first , always , is the question whether congress has directly spoken to the precise question at issue .

if the intent of congress is clear , that is the end of the matter ; for the court , as well as the agency , must give effect to the unambiguously expressed intent of congress .

if , however , the court determines congress has not directly addressed the precise question at issue , the court does not simply impose its own construction on the statute , as would be necessary in the absence of an administrative interpretation .

rather , if the statute is silent or ambiguous with respect to the specific issue , the question for the court is whether the agency's answer is based on a permissible construction of the statute .

in chevron , the supreme court elucidated several reasons for favoring a restrained judicial role when reviewing an agency interpretation of an ambiguous statute .

first , the court noted that when congress enacts an ambiguous statute , it has , in effect , delegated to the agency the authority to clarify the ambiguity .

in other words , congress made a conscious choice in selecting a specific agency to implement the statutory delegation , and the courts , the supreme court reasoned , should respect congress's decision by granting the agency leeway in interpreting the statute .

moreover , the court noted that interpreting a statutory ambiguity is akin to making a policy decision on how to implement a statutory program .

in the court's view , agencies and legislators are best suited to balance applicable considerations and to resolve debates regarding competing , acceptable interpretations of an ambiguous delegation .

second , according to the court , agencies have technical expertise in the field in which they are acting and are , therefore , in a better position to make appropriate policy decisions as part of a large and complex regulatory scheme .

courts , on the other hand , generally lack such expertise .

in chevron , the court specifically acknowledged that "judges are not experts in the field" and thus "may not substitute [their] own construction of a statutory provision for a reasonable interpretation made by the administrator of an agency. .

finally , the chevron court noted that administrative agencies are politically accountable — though not directly — through the democratic process .

although courts are called to reconcile political preferences in certain circumstances , they should not do so when the power to implement the statute has been delegated to an administrative agency .

in the court's view , an administration has the authority to implement its policy judgments through the permissible interpretation of a statute .

if the agency's , and by extension the administration's , permissible construction of a statute is undesirable , the electorate may have its voice heard through the democratic process .

on the other hand , when a federal court interprets a statute , the electorate cannot voice similar concerns to the unelected court .

these general justifications for chevron deference are arguably applicable with regard to agency enforcement of federal financial laws , which typically are broadly worded , and allow expert agencies to craft more specific rules in a highly technical environment .

some have argued , however , that judicial deference under chevron has allowed administrative agencies to exercise too much "power to expand the scope of their own authority ... to decide what and who they can regulate , and how to regulate," risking abrupt deviations from long - standing statutory interpretations .

thus , the argument has been made that a recalibration of judicial review of administrative interpretations of law is necessary to ensure that federal statutes are interpreted as intended by congress and to effectively hold the federal financial agencies accountable in how they implement federal law .

by contrast , such a recalibration of the judicial review over agency interpretations of statutes arguably could result in courts more closely scrutinizing agency decisions .

a departure from chevron also might increase the number of legal challenges to agency rulemakings , which could delay the time it takes for new regulations to take legal effect , as well as increase the costs of promulgating regulations .

the fca would upend chevron's policy of judicial deference to interpretations of the law that are issued by the clea , fed , cftc , fdic , fhfa , occ , ncua , and sec .

in lieu of deferring to the covered agencies' reasonable interpretations of silent or ambiguous statutes in accordance with chevron , the fca would require courts to apply a de novo review of administrative actions — that is , review wherein a court reviews an administrative agency's interpretation of a law without any deference .

de novo review would require courts to independently interpret a covered agency's statutory authority , rather than deferring to that agency's reasonable interpretation of the law .

 ( it should be noted that , while the focus of this section is on regulations , the fca would require de novo review on not just administrative rulemakings but also the broader set of "final agency actions," which are subject to varying degrees of judicial deference. ) .

the fca would bar reviewing courts from "rely[ing] on [a] gap or ambiguity [in the law] as a justification either for interpreting agency authority expansively or for deferring to the agency's interpretation on the question of law. .

although the bill would not explicitly prohibit courts from taking into account the relevant agency's reasoning and technical expertise of the subject matter , courts would appear to have much greater latitude to set aside , overrule , and modify agency interpretations if the fca were enacted into law .

this provision would go into effect two years after the fca is enacted .

another major administrative tool held by the federal financial agencies is their power to enforce laws within their jurisdictions .

the strength and effectiveness of an administrative agency's enforcement power can be affected by , among other things the scope of the agency's statutory authority ( eg , the types of entities that fall within its enforcement jurisdiction ) ; the type of enforcement powers ( eg , civil penalties , criminal penalties , restitution , and disgorgement , in the agency's arsenal ; maximum and minimum penalties available for certain violations ) ; and the enforcement - related resources ( eg , financial , personnel ) at its disposal .

the way in which federal financial regulators exercise their enforcement powers requires a balance between protecting consumers and investors from unlawful conduct , on the one hand , and ensuring that law - abiding financial institutions are not pushed out of certain markets and the costs of their products and services for consumers and investors are not unduly increased , on the other .

the fca would make a number of changes that would directly or indirectly affect the enforcement authorities of the federal financial regulators .

for example , the fca would increase the maximum civil penalties that could be assessed for violations of various laws , including section 8a of the securities act of 1933 and section 951 ( b ) of the financial institutions reform , recovery , and enforcement act of 1989 .

the bill also would constrain the enforcement powers of certain federal financial regulators .

for example , the bill would repeal the sec's current statutory authority to , under certain circumstances , permanently or temporarily prohibit individuals from serving as an officer or director of a securities issuer .

the fca would also restrict the ability of the federal financial regulators , as well as the department of justice , department of housing and urban development , and rural housing service of the department of agriculture , from entering into legal settlements that allow or require a party to "direct or provide for a payment to any person who is not a victim of the alleged wrongdoing. .

additionally , the fca's proposals to modify the way in which various federal financial regulators are funded ( see the " appropriations " section , above ) could indirectly impact the enforcement resources at the disposal of those regulators .

appendix a .

the financial choice act and the dodd - frank act this table provides a brief overview of selected changes that the financial choice act makes to the dodd - frank act on a title - by - title basis for the 16 titles in the dodd - frank act .

appendix b .

provisions of the financial choice act included in fy2018 appropriations bills selected provisions of the financial choice act were included in the fy2018 financial services and general government appropriations act ( h.r .

3280 ) .

on september 5 , 2017 , the house rules committee combined h.r .

3280 with selected other appropriation bills in h.r .

3354 .

the financial choice act provisions are found in division d of h.r .

3354 as passed by the house on september 14 , 2017 .

table b - 1 provides an overview of the provisions of the financial choice act that were included in h.r .

3354 .

two notable policy changes were included in both bills in different versions .

first , h.r .

10 repealed the conflict minerals provision ( section 1502 ) of the dodd - frank act , whereas h.r .

3354 prohibited the use of appropriated funds toward enforcing the rule implementing it .

second , h.r .

3354 contains section 841 ( a ) of h.r .

10 , repealing the department of labor's 2016 fiduciary rule , but does not contain the rest of section 841 .

appendix c. authors of this report and areas of researc .

