scientific research indicates that in recent years , the frequency and geographic distribution of harmful algal blooms ( habs ) have been increasing nationally and globally .

habs can be detrimental to human health , animals , aquatic ecosystems , and local economies .

in 2014 , a major hab in lake erie caused the city of toledo , ohio , to issue a "do not drink" order for tap water that left more than 500,000 people without drinking water for two days and had an estimated impact of $65 million in lost benefits .

in the summer of 2016 , a massive hab in lake okeechobee — florida's largest freshwater lake — resulted in beach closures , losses to the tourism industry , and negative impacts on marine life .

according to the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) , between january 1 and august 12 , 2016 , states reported at least 266 notices for freshwater habs , including cautions , warnings , public health advisories , and public health warnings .

congress , many federal agencies , states , localities , and other partners have taken and continue to take steps to address the rising trend in habs and their impacts .

however , there are many gaps in current scientific understanding of habs among the research and management communities and considerable debate as to how best to address the issue from a regulatory standpoint .

this report explores these issues as they pertain to habs in freshwater systems .

specifically , it addresses the conditions and activities that contribute to the occurrence of freshwater habs ; steps that congress , federal agencies — particularly epa — and their partners are taking to address and mitigate their occurrence ; and the current knowledge gaps on this issue .

this report is focused on freshwater habs , not marine or coastal habs or issues associated with habs in drinking water supplies .

in addition to the challenges of reducing nutrient pollution contributing to habs , scientists widely recognize key research gaps that hinder the ability to prevent , predict , minimize , and suppress habs .

in reauthorizing habhrca in 2014 , as discussed above , congress directed noaa — through the iwg - habhrca — to prepare a comprehensive research plan and action strategy to address marine and freshwater harmful algal blooms and hypoxia .

the february 2016 task force report includes a discussion of the key challenges in hab and hypoxia management and discusses the many gaps in the research and management communities' knowledge of hab and hypoxia events .

federal agencies — including usgs , epa , and noaa — and research efforts sponsored by these agencies cite similar gaps and areas needing continuing research .

the following text box summarizes some of these key research areas .

congressional interest in habs has largely focused on funding further research and coordinating the efforts of federal agencies and their partners to study and address habs .

in the 115 th congress , the senate passed s. 1057 , which would , among other things , reauthorize habhrca for fy2019-fy2023 , add the army corps of engineers to the interagency task force , and allow the administrators of noaa ( marine ) or epa ( freshwater ) to declare a hab or hypoxia event as an event of "national significance. .

such a determination would prompt authority for the administrators to provide funding to the affected state or local government .

a related bill , h.r .

4417 , has been introduced in the house .

the senate also passed s. 129 , which would reauthorize the national sea grant program and make funds available for hab research through that program .

the bill would authorize grants for university research on several targeted topics , including "the biology , prevention , and forecasting of harmful algal blooms. .

a related bill , h.r .

4306 , has been introduced in the house .

the great lakes and fresh water algal bloom information act ( h.r .

1893 ) in the 115 th congress would require noaa to create an electronic database of research and information on the causes of , and corrective actions being taken with regard to , algal blooms in the great lakes , their tributaries , and other surface fresh waters and for other purposes .

h.r .

3661 would establish a program to award prizes for the development of innovative , environmentally safe solutions for reducing , mitigating , and controlling harmful algal blooms and for other purposes .

three bills have been introduced that would seek to address issues specific to lake okeechobee and the florida everglades: h.r .

2137 seeks to address concerns arising from the hab outbreak that occurred in lake okeechobee , fl , during the summer of 2016 .

record rainfalls and an impending hurricane season prompted the u.s. army corps of engineers to release water from the lake into rivers and estuaries in an attempt to keep the lake from overflowing .

the releases occurred at a time when a lake - wide hab was forming , allowing nutrients and algae to move downstream , eventually reaching area beaches and requiring beach closures and cleanups that had substantial impacts on the local and state economy .

florida's governor requested a federal state of emergency declaration , which the federal emergency management agency denied because it determined that supplemental federal assistance under the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act was not considered appropriate for the event .

h.r .

2137 would direct the president to treat a harmful algal bloom "caused by certain activities of the federal government" as an emergency for the purposes of the stafford act .

h.r .

3665 would require the iwg - habhrca to prepare an assessment and a plan for reducing , mitigating , and controlling habs and hypoxia in the greater everglades region , similar to what the working group has completed at a national level and for the great lakes region .

h.r .

6645 would — similar to s. 1057 and h.r .

4417 — reauthorize habhrca but would also , like h.r .

3665 , require an assessment and action plan for the everglades region .

recent hab events highlight the public health , economic , and environmental consequences that communities in the united states may continue to experience , perhaps on a more frequent basis .

epa , noaa , and other federal agencies are working together to conduct important hab - related research in an effort to close the gaps in the scientific and management community's understanding of how best to prevent , predict , minimize , and suppress habs .

epa , states , and their partners are working to identify and restore waterbodies that are affected by habs and the excess nutrients that contribute to their formation .

congress has passed legislation to help drive and fund research efforts and improve collaboration among the many federal agencies involved in hab - related activities .

moving forward , congress may be interested in oversight of the administration's efforts to implement habhrca and other hab - related authorities .

while congress , federal agencies , and states are taking steps to address habs , many observers assert that further action is needed to make progress that outpaces the growing consequences of nutrient pollution .

most observers agree that further research is needed to understand the most appropriate way to predict , minimize , and suppress hab outbreaks , including whether and how to regulate algal toxins .

these advocates assert that congress should ensure that adequate funding is available for such research .

to control habs , some advocate for regulation of nonpoint source pollution , arguing that point sources are disproportionately regulated and that nonpoint sources are the larger contributors to nutrient pollution .

instead of regulation , some argue that epa and other federal agencies should continue to focus on collaborative , voluntary watershed - level efforts to address nonpoint source pollution that contributes to hab formation and that congress should ensure that financial assistance for these efforts continues .

controlling nonpoint sources of excess nutrients that contribute to hab formation is challenging .

they are diffuse and pervasive and often attributable to many sources and activities rather than a single cause .

yet , scientists generally agree that the current trends in overenriched waters and hab events cannot be corrected without addressing nonpoint source nutrient pollution in a significant way and that controlling point sources alone is not enough .

given the consequences of habs and the difficulty in controlling nonpoint sources of the nutrients that contribute to their formation , challenges and issues associated with habs are likely to remain of interest to congress .

