prescription drug affordability has gained renewed attention in the past few years , as retail drug spending has risen at the fastest pace in more than a decade .

there are several reasons for the increase in drug spending .

manufacturers have been introducing new drugs at a record rate and raising prices for existing brand - name products .

 ( see " what is behind the recent volatility in retail drug spending ? .

," below. ) .

at the same time , fewer brand - name drugs have lost patent protection than in previous years , which has meant lower savings from new generic substitutes .

the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) forecasts that retail drug spending could average 6.3% annual growth from 2017 to 2026 .

although that growth rate would be a reduction from recent , more rapid levels , cms expects retail drug spending to increase faster than other areas of medical spending in this 10-year period .

this report will address frequently asked questions about government and private - sector policies that affect drug prices and availability .

among the prescription drug topics covered are federally funded research and development , regulation of direct - to - consumer advertising , legal restrictions on reimportation , and federal price negotiation .

the report provides a broad overview of the issues and references to more in - depth crs products .

the appendix provides references to relevant congressional hearings ( see appendix ) .

in general , the federal government tends to focus on basic or preclinical research — such as the work conducted or supported by the national institutes of health — and the pharmaceutical industry tends to concentrate more of its research funding on clinical trials rather than on discovery activity .

when trying to assign credit for specific therapeutic advancements , drawing a line between basic and applied research can be challenging .

for example , without a major underlying basic advance , such as recombinant dna , the development of whole new classes of drugs would not exist .

various studies have attempted to quantify the contribution of publicly funded research to the discovery of new drugs , as compared to the contribution from private industry .

a study published in 2003 found that of the 284 new drugs approved by fda from 1990 through 1999 , only 6.7% originated from sources other than private industry .

a 1993 study found that 7.6% of new drugs approved from 1981 through 1990 originated from nonindustry sources .

however , rather than focusing on all drug approvals — including many "me - too" drugs ( see table 1 , above ) — another way to answer this question is to look at the origin of truly innovative new drugs , what fda calls new molecular entities ( nmes ) .

nmes are drugs that have not been approved by fda previously and frequently provide important new therapies for patients .

a 2010 study found that of the nmes and new biologics that received fda approval between 1998 and 2007 , 24.1% originated from work that was publicly funded .

a study by ashley j. stevens et al .

published in 2011 claims to take a more comprehensive look at the contribution of publicly funded research to the discovery of new drugs than these earlier investigations .

the stevens study found that of the 1,541 drugs approved by fda from 1990 through 2007 , 143 , or 9.3% , resulted from work conducted in publicly funded labs .

of the 1,541 total drug applications , fda granted priority review to 348 applications , and 66 of these ( 19% ) resulted from publicly funded research .

the authors stated that "viewed from another perspective , 46.2% of the new - drug applications from psris [public - sector research institutions] received priority reviews , as compared with 20.0% of applications that were based purely on private - sector research , an increase by a factor of 2.3. .

an fda designation of priority review is for "the evaluation of applications for drugs that , if approved , would be significant improvements in the safety or effectiveness of the treatment , diagnosis , or prevention of serious conditions when compared to standard applications. .

according to the authors , their data "suggest that psris tend to discover drugs that are expected to have a disproportionately important clinical effect. .

the 2011 stevens study considered a psri "to have participated in the applied phase of research that led to discovery of a drug if it , solely or jointly , created intellectual property specific to the drug that was subsequently transferred to a company through a commercial license. .

the methodology used by the stevens study "excluded the role of psris in the development of platform technologies that have contributed to the development of whole new classes of drugs. .

these platform technologies enabled the development of many of the products approved by fda during the period evaluated in the study .

the platform technologies were excluded "because the psri scientists who developed the platforms generally did not use them to develop specific drug candidates. .

for example , the following platform technologies were all developed with public funds and were excluded from the study: recombinant dna technology ( cohen - boyer patents ) ; bacterial production methods for recombinant dna ( riggs - itakura patents ) ; production and chimerization methods for antibodies ( cabilly patents ) ; methods to produce glycosylated recombinant proteins in mammalian cells ( axel patents ) ; and , methods of gene silencing with the use of small interfering rnas ( mello - fire patents ) .

many new drugs were developed using these platform technologies ; if these technologies did not exist , the result may have been a vastly different economic outlook for the pharmaceutical industry .

a 2018 study found that public funding contributed to every nme approved by the fda from 2010 to 2016 .

the study , which looked at peer - reviewed literature and public data on nih grant funding , determined that funding from nih was "directly or indirectly associated with every one of 210 nmes approved from 2010-2016. .

almost a third ( 29% ) of the publications identified were directly associated with nih - funded projects .

the analysis in this study captured basic research , in addition to applied research on nmes .

the study found that up to 20% of the nih budget allocation from 2000 to 2016 , or about $100 billion , "was associated with published research that directly or indirectly contributed to nmes approved from 2010-2016. .

the authors concluded that their results suggest that "the nih contribution to research associated with new drug approvals is greater than previously appreciated. .

publicly traded pharmaceutical manufacturers release information about aggregate corporate research and development spending , but detailed information about the cost of developing specific drugs generally is not available .

over the years , academic researchers have attempted to estimate average spending for drug development .

the most often - cited academic study , by the tufts center for the study of drug development , is based on information voluntarily provided by 10 large drug manufacturers .

the study uses the manufacturers ' data to estimate average spending for clinical research on new drugs ( including experimental drugs that fail ) and the time costs of development , meaning the expected returns that investors do not realize during the years a drug is moving toward approval .

according to a 2014 tufts estimate , the pretax cost of developing a n fda - approved prescription drug wa s $2.6 billion , which include d $1.4 billion in clinical spending and $1.2 billion in time costs .

the 2014 figure is an update of other tufts studies , including a 2002 analysis t hat put the cost at $802 million .

 ( the 2014 estimates are expressed in 2013 dollars , and the 2003 study is in 2000 dollars. ) .

a cademic and government research has challenged the tufts study .

specifically , the re are questions about the study ' s assumption that drug companies must pay an effective 10.5% r ate of return to attract capital during the years that drugs are in development , the mix of drugs sampled , and whether the report captures the positive impact of federal tax breaks for re search and development spending .

a 2016 hhs study noted that estimates for new drug development range from $1.2 billion to $2.6 billion and are highly sensitive to such factors as assumptions about development time ; cost of capital ; and whether the study includes orphan drugs , which are likely to have smaller trial sizes and higher su ccess rates and which receive special federal tax breaks .

so - called transparency legislation being debated in congress and a number of state legislatures would compel drugmakers to provide data about research , marketing , and other costs for drugs that have a high price or have experienced a large price increase .

 ( see " what are u.s. states doing to address drug costs ? .

 ) price transparency legislation assumes that research and development costs are , or should be , a main factor used by drugmakers in setting prices .

several studies of specific drugs indicate that research cost was not a primary factor in pricing .

a 2015 senate finance committee investigation of gilead pharmaceutical's hepatitis c drugs sovaldi and harvoni found that gilead's research and development costs , and its expected return for buying pharmasset , inc. , which originally developed the products , "were not key considerations in determining the pricing of these drugs. .

gilead's "own documents and correspondence show its pricing strategy was focused on maximizing revenue — even as the company's analysis showed a lower price would allow more patients to be treated. .

similarly , an examination of the pfizer breast cancer drug ibrance found the main factors used by pfizer to set the drug's list price were the price of existing drugs in the same therapeutic category , likely reimbursement from insurance companies and federal programs and feedback from prescribers .

the united states is one of two nations ( along with new zealand ) that allow direct - to - consumer ( dtc ) advertising of prescription drugs .

congress has given fda the authority to regulate dtc ads to ensure they are not false or misleading , fairly balance the benefits and risks of the specific drugs , and contain facts relevant to a drug's intended uses .

under current law , businesses , including pharmaceutical companies , may take a federal tax deduction for advertising expenses .

advertising expenditures generally are treated as ordinary and necessary business expenses in the tax code and can be fully deducted in the year they are incurred .

dtc advertising is just one facet of the industry's promotion efforts .

pharmaceutical firms also market to physicians and other health care providers via professional journals , conferences , marketing calls , and samples .

pharmaceutical advertising has evolved since 1962 , when congress gave fda ( rather than the federal trade commission ) authority ( within limits ) over prescription drug advertising .

in 1969 , when fda issued regulations requiring manufactures to provide true and balanced information in drug advertising , most ads were in print journals directed at physicians .

during the 1980s , pharmaceutical firms began advertising to consumers ; fda addressed this in a 1985 federal register notice .

in 1999 , fda issued guidance on broadcast ads .

since that time , fda has published updated guidance on relevant issues , including internet advertising .

dtc prescription drug advertising expanded steadily over the decades , reaching more than $5 billion in 2006 .

advertising dipped during the 2007 recession and did not rebound to the 2006 peak until about 2014 .

recent data indicate that dtc advertising has been increasing at a more rapid pace during the past several years .

 ( see figure 8 . ) .

according to kantar media , a market research and marketing firm , pharmaceutical advertising rose 56% to more than $6 billion from 2012 to 2015 , as companies increased the number of drugs with large dedicated advertising budgets and directed more money toward advertising newly introduced drugs .

television and newspaper advertisements account for the majority of spending on pharmaceutical dtc advertising .

however , internet - based drug ads — which are less expensive than television , magazine , or newspaper ads — appear to be the fastest - growing area of dtc promotion .

federal regulations require that at the same time a drug company disseminates a prescription drug ad , it also submits the ad to fda , which assesses whether it is fair , balanced , and meets other regulatory standards .

according to an fda analysis of materials submitted from 2001 to 2014 , the number of internet prescription drug promotions is increasing , whereas television promotions are flat .

 ( the data tell how often ads are submitted to fda but not how often the ads actually appear in different media outlets. ) .

 ( see figure 9 . ) .

supporters of pharmaceutical advertising say it contributes to more informed consumers who then visit their doctors and become more involved in their own treatment , leading to better and earlier diagnosis of undertreated illnesses .

critics say the industry's presentation of the balance of drug benefit and risk information may encourage inappropriate prescribing of advertised products and ultimately may lead to higher drug spending .

advertising for new brand - name drugs with higher prices may lead consumers to seek brand - name products , substituting them for lower - priced brand or generic drugs or beginning a course of treatment where previously no drug had been used .

it is not clear , in some cases , that the new drugs are more effective or safer than other drugs or that they confer enough additional benefits compared to existing treatments to justify paying their higher prices .

recent studies suggest a link between drug advertising and increased use of prescription drugs .

a 2015 study suggested that a 10% rise in drug advertising views leads to a 5.4% increase in filled prescriptions for the advertised drugs .

a 2006 government accountability office report found that advertising may have direct benefits but also may encourage use of advertised drugs even if alternatives may be more appropriate .

a recent government survey found that 46% of the public did not think the dtc advertisements included enough information about the benefits of the drugs and 52% thought they did not include enough information about the risks .

congress has debated restricting dtc drug advertising in the past .

the issue has received new attention with two distinct goals: protecting the public's health from unsafe or ineffective drugs and protecting the public's pocketbook from unnecessary higher spending .

in november 2015 , the american medical association voted to recommend a ban on dtc drug ads .

in january 2016 , the american society of health - system pharmacists followed suit .

a ban could raise constitutional issues , given that courts in the past have ruled that product advertisements are "commercial speech" protected by the first amendment .

legislation introduced in the 114 th congress would have imposed a moratorium on advertising for new drugs .

the kantar data indicating that manufacturers are focusing ad dollars on newly introduced products underscores a long - standing concern that new drugs are being promoted to consumers before there is long - term evidence about their safety and effectiveness .

in 2006 , the institute of medicine recommended that fda restrict dtc advertising of new drugs for two years after introduction .

over the years , congress has debated , but has not approved , a moratorium on advertising for new drugs .

likewise , lawmakers during the 114 th congress introduced legislation to disallow federal tax deductions for pharmaceutical dtc advertising as a means to reduce drug spending .

congress also has debated the issue in the context of broader tax reform .

fda , under the authority of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act , regulates the sale of pharmaceuticals in the united states .

without an approved marketing application ( new drug application , abbreviated new drug application , or biologics license application ) , a manufacturer may not sell a drug in the u.s. market .

an approved marketing application has included the required clinical data on safety and effectiveness , manufacturing procedures ( supported by an inspection ) and reporting processes , and labeling , including packaging .

because the requirements are so detailed and explicit , no drug that a consumer might import would technically fulfill all the approval elements .

 ( for example , a drug must include labeling that fda has approved for u.s. sales ; the labeling of a physically identical drug packaged for foreign sale would not have the u.s. - relevant packaging codes. ) .

the prescription drug marketing act of 1987 ( pdma ; p.l .

100-293 ) clarified that , even for a drug that fda had approved for u.s. sales that had been sold or transferred to a foreign country , only the manufacturer of that fda - approved prescription drug may legally bring the drug back into the united states .

in 2000 , during a period of high prescription drug inflation , the 106 th congress enacted the medicine equity and drug safety act ( meds act ; p.l .

106-387 ) to allow pharmacists and wholesalers to import fda - approved prescription drugs .

despite outlining procedures to do so , the act , in practice , has not allowed such importation .

the meds act required that , before publishing implementing regulations to put the import provisions into effect , the hhs secretary must first certify to congress "that the implementation of this section will ( 1 ) pose no additional risk to the public's health and safety ; and ( 2 ) result in a significant reduction in the cost of covered products to the american consumer. .

congress included a reworking of the meds act provision in 2003 in the medicare modernization and prescription drug act of 2003 ( mma ; p.l .

108-173 , which also created medicare part d ) .

because no hhs secretary has ever made the necessary certifications , the importation provision has never been carried out and consumers , pharmacists , and wholesalers are prohibited from importing prescription drugs from abroad .

the pdma , meds act , and mma legislation addressed importation by entities other than the manufacturer that held the approved marketing application .

if the importation provision were implemented , therefore , a company could produce and package a drug outside the united states according to manufacturing processes , facility inspections , and u.s. - audience designed labeling as outlined in its fda approval and then bring the drug into the united states for sale .

lawmakers have tried several times to use the annual agriculture appropriations bill ( which funds fda ) to get around administrative roadblocks to prescription drug importation by individuals , pharmacies , and wholesalers .

for example , the house has passed versions of the agriculture spending bill that would prohibit fda from using funds to prevent individuals , pharmacists , or wholesalers from importing prescription drugs that comply with the core requirements of the fda drug approval system .

fda has chosen to be lenient in its enforcement of personal importation restrictions and has allowed individuals to bring into the united states a small amount ( i.e. , a 90-day supply ) of non - fda - approved drugs for personal use .

fda requires that individuals affirm in writing that the drugs are for their own use and provide the name and address of their treating physician .

when fda's personal - use import policy began , it was not envisioned as a way for consumers to bring lower - priced prescription drugs into the united states .

according to fda's policy statement on importing drugs for personal use , the intent of the personal use importation guidance is to save fda resources and to generally permit , through the exercise of enforcement discretion , medical treatments sought by individuals that are not otherwise available in the united states ( where such treatments are not promoted / commercialized in the united states ) .

thus foreign - made chemical versions of drugs available in the united states are not intended to be covered by the policy .

but where the policy once let a few people import — for personal use — cancer or aids drugs that were not available for sale in the united states , today that policy is used by consumers seeking lower foreign prices for fda - approved drugs available in the united states .

some states have attempted to enact their own laws allowing prescription drug importation .

 ( see " what are u.s. states doing to address drug costs ? " ) .

senate committee on appropriations prioritizing public health: the fda ' s role in the generic drug marketplace , 114 th cong. , 2 nd sess. , september 21 , 2016 , at http: / / www.appropriations.senate.gov / hearings / prioritizing - public - health_the - fdas - role - in - the - generic - drug - marketplace .

senate special committee on aging valeant pharmaceuticals ' business model: the repercussions for patients and the health care system , 114 th cong. , 2 nd sess. , april 27 , 2016 , at http: / / www.aging.senate.gov / hearings / valeant - pharmaceuticals - business - model - the - repercussions - for - patients - and - the - health - care - system .

sudden price spikes in decades - old rx drugs: inside the monopoly business model , 114 th cong. , 2 nd sess. , march 17 , 2016 , at http: / / www.aging.senate.gov / hearings / sudden - price - spikes - in - decades - old - rx - drugs - inside - the - monopoly - business - model .

sudden price spikes in off - patent drugs: perspectives from the front lines , 114 th cong. , 1 st sess. , december 9 , 2015 , at http: / / www.aging.senate.gov / hearings / sudden - price - spikes - in - off - patent - drugs_perspectives - from - the - front - lines .

senate committee on finance examining the proposed medicare part b drug demonstration , 114 th cong. , 2 nd sess. , june 28 , 2016 ; at http: / / www.finance.senate.gov / hearings / examining - the - proposed - medicare - part - b - drug - demonstration .

senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions the cost of prescription drugs: an examination of the national academies of sciences , engineering , and medicine report "making medicines affordable: a national imperative"115 th cong. , 1 st sess. , december 12 , 2017 , at https: / / www.help.senate.gov / hearings / the - cost - of - prescription - drugs - an - examination - of - the - national - academies - of - sciences - engineering - and - medicine - report - making - medicines - affordable - a - national - imperative .

the cost of prescription drugs: how the drug delivery system affects what patients pay , part ii , 115 th cong. , 1 st sess. , october 17 , 2017 , at https: / / www.help.senate.gov / hearings / the - cost - of - prescription - drugs - how - the - drug - delivery - system - affects - what - patients - pay - part - ii .

the cost of prescription drugs: how the drug delivery system affects what patients pay , 115 th cong. , 1 st sess. , june 13 , 2017 , at https: / / www.help.senate.gov / hearings / the - cost - of - prescription - drugs - how - the - drug - delivery - system - affects - what - patients - pay .

epipen price increases: how regulatory barriers inhibit pharmaceutical competition , field hearing , 114 th cong. , 2 nd sess. , october 7 , 2016 , at http: / / www.help.senate.gov / hearings / epipen - price - increases - how - regulatory - barriers - inhibit - pharmaceutical - competition / .

generic drug user fee amendments: accelerating patient access to generic drugs , 114 th cong. , 2 nd sess. , january 28 , 2016 , at http: / / www.help.senate.gov / hearings / generic - drug - user - fee - amendments - accelerating - patient - access - to - generic - drugs .

biosimilar implementation: a progress report from fda , 114 th cong. , 1 st sess. , september 17 , 2015 , at http: / / www.help.senate.gov / hearings / biosimilar - implementation - a - progress - report - from - fda .

continuing america ' s leadership: advancing research and development for patients , 114 th cong. , 1 st sess. , march 24 , 2015 , at http: / / www.help.senate.gov / hearings / continuing - americas - leadership - advancing - research - and - development - for - patients .

house energy and commerce committee examining the drug supply chain , 115 th cong. , 2 nd sess. , december 13 , 2017 , at https: / / energycommerce.house.gov / hearings / examining - drug - supply - chain / .

examining how covered entities utilize the 340b drug pricing program , 115 th cong. , 1 st sess. , october 11 , 2017 , https: / / energycommerce.house.gov / hearings / examining - covered - entities - utilize - 340b - drug - pricing - program / .

examining patient access to investigational drugs , 115 th cong. , 1 st sess. , october 3 , 2017 , at https: / / energycommerce.house.gov / hearings / examining - patient - access - investigational - drugs / .

modernizing fda's regulation of over - the - counter drugs , 115 th cong. , 1 st sess. , september 13 , 2017 , https: / / energycommerce.house.gov / hearings / modernizing - fdas - regulationof - counter - drugs / .

examining fda ' s prescription drug user fee progra m , 115 th cong. , 1 st sess. , march 22 , 2017 , at https: / / energycommerce.house.gov / hearings - and - votes / hearings / examining - fda - s - prescription - drug - user - fee - program .

examining fda ' s generic drug and biosimilar user fee program , 115 th cong. , 1 st sess. , march 2 , 2017 , at https: / / energycommerce.house.gov / hearings - and - votes / hearing .

the obama administration ' s medicare drug experiment: the patient and doctor perspective , 114 th cong. , 2 nd sess. , may 17 , 2016 , at https: / / energycommerce.house.gov / hearings - and - votes / hearings / obama - administration - s - medicare - drug - experiment - patient - and - doctor .

house judiciary committee antitrust concerns and the fda approval process , 115 th cong. , 1 st sess. , july 27 , 2017 , at https: / / judiciary.house.gov / hearing / antitrust - concerns - fda - approval - process / .

the state of competition in the pharmacy benefit manager and pharmacy marketplaces , 114 th cong. , 1 st sess. , november 17 , 2015 , at https: / / judiciary.house.gov / hearing / the - state - of - competition - in - the - pharmacy - benefit - manager - and - pharmacy - marketplaces / .

house committee on oversight and government reform federally funded cancer research: coordination and innovation , 115 th cong. , 1 st sess. , march 29 , 2017 , at https: / / oversight.house.gov / hearing / federally - funded - cancer - research - coordination - innovation / .

examining the impact of voluntary restricted distribution systems in the pharmaceutical supply chain , 115 th cong. , 1 st sess. , march 22 , 2017 , at https: / / oversight.house.gov / hearing / examining - impact - voluntary - restricted - distribution - systems - pharmaceutical - supply - chain / .

reviewing the rising price of epipens , 114 th cong. , 2 nd sess. , september 21 , 2016 , at https: / / oversight.house.gov / hearing / reviewing - rising - price - epipens - 2 / .

developments in the prescription drug market: oversight , 114 th cong. , 2 nd sess. , february 4 , 2016 , at https: / / oversight.house.gov / hearing / developments - in - the - prescription - drug - market - oversight / .

