the united states has been an integral part of the global energy sector for many decades .

it is a global leader in energy production , consumption , and technology , and its energy market is highly sophisticated .

its energy prices , for the most part , are determined in the marketplace and rise or fall with changes in supply and demand .

the united states is a major producer of all forms of energy — oil , natural gas , coal , nuclear power , and renewable energy .

since the beginning of the 21 st century , the u.s. energy sector has transformed from a situation of declining production , especially of oil and natural gas , to one in which the united states is a growing producer .

exports of energy are rising while imports are falling .

prices , technology , and regulations have prompted changes in the energy mix .

this report provides an overview of u.s. energy issues , and it serves as an initial resource document for related information , data , and crs contacts .

the report is organized around the major fuels and energy sources used in the united states .

it also highlights the role of the federal government , particularly the use of federal lands in energy production .

it does not focus on energy infrastructure , security , research and development , energy efficiency , or environmental issues , although those areas are also critical to the u.s. energy sector .

the united states is the second largest producer and consumer of energy in the world , behind china .

u.s. primary energy consumption ( see figure 1 ) has held relatively steady since 2000 , falling 1% ; however , the fuel mix has changed .

while oil has remained at almost 40% of the fuel mix , natural gas and renewables have increased in both percentage and absolute terms at the expense of coal .

nuclear generation has stayed flat .

the change in the u.s. fuel mix has centered on the electricity sector where there are fuel substitutes ( see " the electric power sector " ) .

electric power generation in 2017 came from coal ( 30% ) , natural gas ( 32% ) , nuclear ( 20% ) , renewables ( 17% ) , and petroleum ( < 1% ) , according the u.s. energy information administration ( eia ) .

this is a significant change from 2000 , when coal accounted for 52% of the electricity fuel mix and natural gas was 16% , nuclear was still almost 20% , and renewables were 9% .

industrial use of energy has also experienced changes , but not to the same degree as electric power generation in recent years .

on the other end of the spectrum , energy in transportation is dominated by petroleum , which made up 92% of the fuel used in transportation in 2017 , down from 97% in 2000 .

u.s. energy production between 2000 and 2017 increased 23% , a significant amount , especially considering that historically the united states was viewed as a growing importer of energy .

 ( see figure 1 . ) .

renewable energy production has increased by 83% during the time frame , the largest increase of all fuel types .

oil production has risen the next fastest , growing 64% , followed by natural gas production at 42% .

the increase in production of both these resources comes from innovations in extraction from unconventional ( or tight ) formations , such as shale ( see text box below , "shale resources make the difference" ) .

coal production , on the other hand , has declined during the time period by about 31% .

federal lands account for a significant amount of total u.s. energy production .

for example , in 2017 , as a percentage of total u.s. energy production , approximately 24% of crude oil and 13% of natural gas gross withdrawals came from federal lands .

in 2016 ( the latest year for this data ) , 40% of coal came from federal lands .

weighing energy production on federal lands against other resource values has long been a fundamental question for congress .

much of the onshore federal estate is open to energy and mineral exploration and development , including bureau of land management ( blm ) and many forest service ( fs ) lands .

however , many national park service ( nps ) lands and areas within the national wilderness preservation system , as well as certain other federal lands , have been specifically withdrawn from exploration and development .

one previously withdrawn area — the arctic national wildlife refuge — was recently opened to oil and gas development under the tax cuts and jobs act ( p.l .

115-97 ) .

the law directs the secretary of the interior to establish an oil and gas leasing program in anwr's coastal plain .

development of oil , natural gas , and coal on federal lands is governed primarily by the mineral leasing act of 1920 ( mla ) .

geothermal leasing on federal lands is conducted under the authority of the geothermal steam act of 1970 , as amended .

development of solar and wind energy sources on blm and fs lands is governed primarily by right - of - way authorities under title v of the federal land policy and management act ( flpma ) .

offshore federal resources , within and beyond the u.s .

exclusive economic zone ( eez ) , are also open for exploration and development .

the federal government is responsible for managing energy resources in approximately 1.7 billion acres of waters belonging to the united states .

these offshore resources are governed by the outer continental shelf lands act of 1953 ( ocsla ) , as amended .

federal lands also are available for renewable energy projects .

blm manages the solar and wind energy programs on about 20 million acres for each program and has the authority to manage about 240 million acres for geothermal leasing on federal lands .

geothermal capacity on federal lands represents 40% of u.s. total geothermal electric generating capacity .

production of oil in the united states rose in the latter half of the time period 2000-2017 , while consumption fluctuated .

the rise in production is attributed to increased production from unconventional or "tight" formations , discussed above .

petroleum is mostly consumed in transportation ( 71% ) , industrial use ( 24% ) , residential and commercial use ( 5% ) , and electric power generation ( 1% ) .

approximately 92% of transportation fuels come from petroleum .

no other sector in the u.s. economy is so dominated by one fuel source as is transportation , which is why fuel efficiency of vehicles ( see text box "fuel efficiency standards for vehicles" ) is so significant to energy policy .

energy independence and energy security are more associated with petroleum than with any other fuel .

the united states became a net exporter of natural gas in 2017 , the first time since 1957 .

the second u.s. liquefied natural gas ( lng ) export terminal opened in 2018 , with additional facilities under construction .

since prices peaked in 2008 , domestic gas production has risen significantly .

 ( see " u.s. supply " below. ) .

improvements in technologies such as hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling made the development of unconventional natural gas resources such as shale and other lower - permeability rock formations possible .

improved efficiency has lowered production costs , making shale gas economically competitive at almost any price and enabling large - scale exports .

as u.s. production increased and prices fell , u.s. consumption of natural gas grew , rising over 16% from 2000 to 2017 .

 ( see " u.s .

consumption " below. ) .

the rise in consumption , though , did not keep pace with production , so companies turned to exports , first by pipeline to mexico and then as lng to other parts of the world .

 ( see " u.s. exports ," below. ) .

as shown in figure 3 , production and imports ( supply ) of natural gas were still greater than consumption and exports ( demand ) in 2017 , in part because of increasing amount of natural gas held in storage .

the electric power industry is in the process of transformation .

the electricity infrastructure of the united states is aging , and uncertainty exists around how to modernize the grid , and what technologies and fuels will be used to produce electricity in the future .

unresolved questions about transmission and reliability of the grid also are arising due to potential cybersecurity threats as well as continuing interest in harnessing renewable energy and other low carbon sources of electricity .

concerns about reliability and electricity prices are complicated by environmental regulations and the rising production of electric power from unconventional resources such as shale gas .

congress has played a role already in this process ( eg , tax credits for renewable energy ) , and may continue to be faced with policy issues regarding how the modernization of this industry will unfold .

states have also played major roles in this area through renewable portfolio standards ( rps ) , and regional emissions trading programs , such as the regional greenhouse gas initiative ( rggi ) , among other programs .

the trump administration has made it clear that it would like to help revive the u.s. coal industry .

the administration has rolled back or initiated reversing several coal - related regulations that were finalized under the obama administration , including the clean power plan ( discussed above ) .

this effort coincided with the emergence of three of the largest coal producers from chapter 11 bankruptcy , higher coal prices , lower inventories , and higher natural gas prices — factors that could lead to coal being more competitive as a fuel source for electricity generation .

coal will likely remain an essential component in the u.s. energy supply picture , but how big a role it will play is an open question .

nuclear power has supplied about one - fifth of annual u.s. electricity generation during the past three decades .

in 2017 , nuclear reactors generated 20% of u.s. electricity supply , behind only coal and natural gas .

ninety - eight reactors are currently operating at 59 plant sites in 30 states .

they generated electricity at 92.2% of their total capacity in 2017 , the highest rate of any generation source .

total net generation of nuclear power in 2016 was 805 billion kilowatt - hours .

one new power reactor began commercial operation in 2016: watts bar 2 in tennessee , the first new u.s. reactor since its twin unit began operating in 1996 .

two more power reactors are currently under construction in georgia at the vogtle plant site .

ten additional new reactors have received licenses from the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) , but construction of those projects is uncertain .

no further license applications are under review .

despite the strong operational performance of existing nuclear plants , the u.s. nuclear industry has faced significant stress recently .

seven reactors have permanently closed since 2013 , and the owners of 12 more have announced their permanent closure by the mid - 2020s .

construction of two new reactors at the summer plant site in south carolina was cancelled following a bankruptcy filing in 2017 by the project's lead contractor , westinghouse electric company .

most of the closed and threatened nuclear power plants sell their electricity at competitive market prices , in contrast to plants that recover their costs ( including a reasonable rate of return ) through regulated rates .

nuclear plants that rely on power markets have seen falling wholesale power prices and stagnant demand , combined with relatively high operating and capital costs in some cases , particularly at plants with a single reactor .

 ( for more information , see crs report r44715 , financial challenges of operating nuclear power plants in the united states , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed]. ) .

some contend that electricity markets are undervaluing the reliability of nuclear generation , its role in diversifying the nation's power supply , and its importance in reducing co 2 emissions .

nuclear power accounted for 56% of u.s. sources considered to be zero - carbon electricity generation in 2017 .

a major government effort to preserve nuclear power as a non - direct carbon emitting electricity source is being implemented by the state of new york , which is providing payments in the form of zero emission credits ( zecs ) to four upstate reactors that had been at risk of retirement .

the state of illinois enacted legislation in december 2016 to provide zecs to prevent the planned closure of three at - risk reactors .

nuclear power incentives at the federal level have also been proposed , such as an investment tax credit .

a federal nuclear energy production tax credit was extended by the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-123 , sec .

40501 ) .

however , some others contend that such drawbacks as accident risk , high costs , and disposal of radioactive waste outweigh the technology's benefits .

focusing on renewable energy and energy efficiency would be far more effective in reducing carbon emissions , they argue .

it is not clear , however , that these alternatives can provide sufficient baseload power supplies to replace nuclear .

all but three of today's 98 nuclear power reactors ( figure 7 ) began operating before 1990 , and most started commercial operation before 1980 .

they were initially licensed by nrc to operate for 40 years , a period that for more than half of u.s. reactors expires before 2020 .

however , most reactors have been issued 20-year license renewals , pushing back the license expiration of almost all nuclear plants at least to the 2030s .

further 20-year renewals , for a total operating life of 80 years , are also allowed .

two plants have submitted license renewal applications for a second 20-year renewal , and another two have indicated their intent to submit in the next several years .

federal policies supporting the use of renewable energy date mainly back to the mid - 1970s , the years following the 1973 oil embargo and energy price volatility that resulted .

at that time , support for renewable energy was generally oriented towards achieving energy security goals .

although energy security remains a policy objective , much of the current debate about supporting renewable energy deployment is related to environmental policies , such as reducing ghg emissions from electric power plants .

while renewable energy is currently a relatively small portion of the total u.s. energy sector , renewables production and consumption have increased since 2000 .

renewable energy consumption increased 113% between 2001 and 2017 , as illustrated in figure 8 .

during this same period , the contribution of renewable energy to total primary energy more than doubled , rising from 5.4% to approximately 11.3% .

unlike other energy commodities , such as crude oil , renewable energy is available in a variety of distinct forms that use different conversion technologies to produce usable energy products ( eg , electricity , heat , and liquid fuels ) .

hydroelectric , biofuels , wood biomass , wind , waste , solar , and geothermal are the renewable energy categories that are tracked and reported by the eia .

each energy product derived from renewable sources has unique market and policy considerations .

renewable energy is consumed within the electric power , industrial , transportation , residential , and commercial sectors .

as indicated in table 6 , the contribution of the different renewable energy sources to each sector varies .

for example , nearly all hydro is consumed in the electric power sector and most of the industrial sector renewable energy use is in the form of biomass energy generation .

much of the growth in renewable energy consumption since 2001 has been within the electric power — mostly non - hydro renewable electricity generation — and transportation ( renewable fuels ) sectors .

the industrial sector is the second - largest renewable energy consumer , although consumption levels have been in a relatively narrow range from 1985 to 2016 and , as mentioned above , the majority of renewable energy consumed in the sector is biomass - generated .

it is beyond the scope of this report to include either detailed descriptions or analysis of each renewable energy source or a comprehensive assessment of each consumption sector .

rather , the following sections discuss renewable transportation fuels and renewable electricity generation trends since 2001 and provide some context about the policy and market dynamics that have contributed to the growth of these separate and distinct markets .

renewable energy production and consumption in the transportation sector is in the form of two primary types of renewable fuels: ethanol and biodiesel .

the primary use of ethanol is as a blending component of motor gasoline .

generally , although it can vary by vehicle type and access to high level ethanol - gasoline blends , ethanol content represents approximately 10% of gasoline by volume .

biodiesel is a direct substitute for diesel fuel refined from petroleum .

u.s. ethanol and biodiesel production and consumption in the united states have experienced growth over the last 16 years .

significant growth occurred following the establishment and expansion of the renewable fuel standard — a mandate that u.s. transportation fuel contain a minimum volume of biofuel .

u.s. ethanol production has steadily increased from approximately 1.8 billion gallons in 2001 to just under 16 billion gallons in 2017 .

ethanol consumption increased from 1.7 billion gallons in 2001 to more than 14 billion gallons in 2017 .

during the same period biodiesel production increased from 9 million gallons in 2001 to approximately 1.6 billion gallons in 2017 .

biodiesel consumption increased from 10 million gallons in 2001 to approximately 2.0 billion gallons in 2017 .

2017 ethanol consumption volumes are more than seven times that of biodiesel .

u.s. renewable electricity generation , including hydropower and non - hydro renewables , more than doubled between 2001 and 2017 .

the contribution of renewable energy to the u.s. power sector increased from 9% in 2001 to 17% in 2017 .

while hydroelectricity generation has represented 6% to 8% of total u.s. electric power generation since 2001 , essentially all of the growth in renewable electricity generation during this period was from non - hydro renewables .

non - hydro renewable energy ( i.e. , wind , solar , geothermal , and biomass ) as a fuel source for electricity generation has been supported by policies at both the state and federal level .

renewable portfolio standard ( rps ) policies instituted in many states have been the demand catalyst for renewable power .

tax incentives — in the form of investment and production tax credits , as well as accelerated depreciation — have provided a federal - level financial incentive that has resulted in renewable electricity being financially attractive to both project investors and power purchasers .

as a result of these state and federal programs and incentives , in addition to technology cost declines and conversion efficiency improvements , the use of non - hydro renewable sources of energy to generate electric power in the united states increased considerably between 2001 and 2017 .

in 2017 non - hydro renewable energy sources provided more than 9% of total u.s. electric power generation ( see figure 9 ) .

wind and solar have dominated growth in non - hydro renewable electricity generation , while generation from biomass and geothermal has remained essentially flat .

electricity generation from wind energy increased by a factor of 37 between 2001 and 2017 , growing from less than 7 million megawatt - hours ( mwh ) to more than 254 million mwh .

electricity generation from solar energy increased by more than a factor of 97 between 2001 and 2017 , growing from 0.6 million mwh to nearly 53 million mwh ( see figure 9 ) .

in terms of new utility - scale electric power capacity additions , non - hydro renewable electricity installations — the majority being solar and wind — has exceeded that of coal and natural gas combined every year since 2014 .

during calendar year 2017 , approximately 50% of gross capacity additions were non - hydro renewables ( see figure 10 ) .

the relatively large contribution of non - hydro renewable energy electricity capacity additions in recent years can be attributed to multiple factors .

first , prior to congress passing a multi - year extension and phase - out of tax credits for wind and solar electricity in 2015 , project developers for wind and solar power projects accelerated development activities in order to capture tax credit incentives before their scheduled expiration date .

second , the cost of electricity generated by wind and solar technologies has declined , primarily due to improvements in conversion efficiency and equipment cost reductions .

finally , the u.s. electricity sector is a mature market ; overall sector growth is projected to be small .

u.s. electric power demand has been relatively flat for several years and is projected to continue along a rather flat trajectory in the near to medium term .

as a result , the amount of new power generation capacity needed each year has declined .

this low - growth market , combined with increased capacity installations motivated by state requirements and federal financial incentives , has led to large contributions by renewable electricity to annual capacity additions .

in addition to the increased use of solar energy for utility - scale electric power , distributed solar electricity generation — solar power generated at a residential , commercial , or industrial location — has also increased significantly .

distributed solar generation grew by a factor of 186 between 2001 ( 129 million kilowatt - hours , kwh ) and 2017 ( 24,139 million kwh ) .

this rapid growth is the result of several policy and market factors , including ( 1 ) state - level policies that encourage residential solar development ( solar "carve - outs" and net - metering policies ) , ( 2 ) federal tax incentives , ( 3 ) decreasing costs of solar electricity generation equipment , ( 4 ) price competition with retail prices instead of lower wholesale prices , and ( 5 ) solar leasing business models that eliminate the need for homeowners and commercial users to pay for the upfront cost of a solar generation system , such as rooftop solar panels .

appendix a .

key u.s. government agencies army corps of engineers ( corps ) — part of the department of defense , the army corps of engineers manages both federal water resource development projects and regulated activities affecting certain waterways and wetlands , including activities associated with infrastructure .

corps permits are required where energy infrastructure crosses certain waterways , corps projects , or corps - controlled lands .

bureau of land management ( blm ) — part of the department of the interior , blm has oversight of federal lands and manages onshore oil and natural gas operations .

bureau of ocean energy management , regulation , and enforcement ( boemre ) — part of the department of the interior , boemre oversees the safe and environmentally responsible development of energy and mineral resources on the outer continental shelf .

u.s. coast guard — part of the department of homeland security , the coast guard has oversight of marine terminals used for the import and export of oil and natural gas as well as the security of certain hazardous fuel shipments by water .

u.s. commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) — cftc has oversight of futures markets , including those for energy .

cftc was given additional oversight responsibilities for futures and derivatives under dodd - frank legislation .

u.s. department of energy ( doe ) — a cabinet - level agency responsible for developing and implementing national energy policy , energy research and development , basic science , energy emergency preparedness and security , and defense - related nuclear activities .

energy information administration ( eia ) — an agency within doe , it provides independent data and analysis on the u.s. energy sector .

environment al protection agency ( epa ) — epa has a broad range of responsibilities regarding energy as it enforces environmental regulations and sets national standards .

epa has oversight / enforcement of all or part of the oil pollution act , resource conservation and recovery act ( rcra ) , clean water act , clean air act , energy policy act , energy independence and security act , shore protection act , among other laws .

federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) — an independent federal agency which regulates the interstate transmission of electricity , natural gas , and oil .

ferc also issues permits for lng terminals and interstate natural gas pipelines as well as licensing nonfederal hydropower projects .

u.s .

fish and wildlife service — fish and wildlife has responsibilities for environmental oversight on energy issues such as wind and hydropower production , and pipeline rights - of - way through jurisdictional lands .

u.s. forest service — part of the department of agriculture , the forest service is responsible for managing energy and mineral resources , and infrastructure development on federal onshore areas that it owns .

maritime administration ( marad ) — an agency within the department of transportation that regulates offshore lng and oil terminals .

national oceanographic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) — part of the department of commerce , noaa has jurisdiction over pipeline project construction in coastal and / or ocean areas .

nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) — an independent regulatory commission responsible for licensing and regulation of nuclear power plants and other nuclear facilities .

office of fossil energy — part of the department of energy focusing on production from u.s. oil fields .

it also has input into the construction of liquefied natural gas import and export terminals .

office of nuclear energy — part of the department of energy responsible for nuclear energy research and federal nuclear waste storage and disposal facilities .

office of energy efficiency and renewable energy ( eere ) — part of the department of energy that focuses on energy efficiency , such as appliance standards , and renewable energy .

pipeline and hazardous materials safety administration ( phmsa ) — part of the department of transportation , phmsa administers the regulatory program , through the office of pipeline safety ( ops ) , to assure the safe transportation of natural gas , petroleum , and other hazardous materials by pipeline .

ops develops regulations and other approaches to risk management to assure safety in design , construction , testing , operation , maintenance , and emergency response of pipeline facilities .

appendix b .

key energy laws appendix c. 2016 u.s. energy consumptio .

