t he constitution gives no direct role to congress in conducting federal law enforcement .

while congress enjoys the legislative power under article i of the constitution , which includes substantial authority to investigate the executive branch pursuant to its oversight function , criminal investigations and prosecutions are generally considered core executive functions entrusted with the executive branch un der article ii .

because of the potential conflicts of interest that may arise when the executive branch investigates itself , however , there have often been calls for prosecutors with independence from the executive branch .

in response , congress and the u.s. department of justice ( doj ) have used both statutory and regulatory mechanisms to establish a process for such inquiries .

these responses have attempted , in different ways , to balance the competing goals of independence and accountability with respect to inquiries of executive branch officials .

this report first analyzes the use of special prosecutors and independent counsels that were authorized under now - expired provisions of the ethics in government act of 1978 , as well as the use of special counsels that are currently authorized by doj regulations .

a glossary of terms at the beginning of the report briefly defines these italicized terms ( see table 1 ) .

the report continues with an examination of various legal questions relevant to these efforts .

as a threshold matter , some have challenged the appointment of a special counsel under the current regulations as unconstitutional under the appointments clause .

more broadly , designing a statutory framework for criminal investigations and prosecutions with independence from the executive branch raises questions about how this can be achieved consistent with the requirements of the constitution .

for instance , the supreme court upheld the constitutionality of the since - expired independent counsel statute in the 1988 case of morrison v. olson , but has not applied the reasoning of morrison in subsequent cases raising related issues .

the constitutional status of a statutory framework analogous to the independent counsel statute is thus subject to debate .

several bills introduced in the 116 th congress ( including s. 71 and h.r .

197 , which merge aspects of two preceding bills introduced in the 115 th congress , s. 1735 and s. 1741 ) statutorily insulate a special counsel from removal , echoing aspects of the independent counsel statute's provisions .

whether such proposals would withstand constitutional challenge today might ultimately turn on the continued vitality of the analysis applied in morrison .

in part to counter perceptions that executive officials suspected of criminal wrongdoing may be subject to different standards than individuals outside the government , independent investigations have sometimes been used to determine whether officials have violated the law .

the government has used a range of options to conduct these types of inquiries: special prosecutors , independent counsels , and special counsels .

executive branch officials have noted , however , that "there is no perfect solution" to achieving the goal of avoiding potential conflicts or the appearance thereof that may arise as a result of the executive branch investigating its own officials .

while special prosecutors investigated executive officials prior to the 1970s , the events commonly known as watergate led to perhaps the most famous use of an independent investigation in u.s. history .

specifically , the break - in and burglary of the democratic national committee headquarters at the watergate hotel in 1972 led to widespread allegations of wrongdoing by senior officials in the executive branch and calls for the appointment of a prosecutor who could conduct an investigation independent of political interference .

in the midst of the watergate controversy , elliot richardson , whose nomination to be attorney general was being considered by the senate committee on the judiciary , agreed to name an independent special prosecutor to pursue the watergate allegations .

once confirmed by the senate , the attorney general , under his own authority , appointed archibald cox as special prosecutor for the watergate investigation in 1973 .

the president subsequently ordered doj officials to fire the special prosecutor later that year , leading to public outcry , the appointment of another special prosecutor , and , ultimately , the initiation of impeachment proceedings by congress .

following these events , congress enacted a new mechanism — discussed in the following section — for the use of special prosecutors who would be appointed by a three - judge panel upon the request of the attorney general .

congress enacted the ethics in government act of 1978 out of a broad intent "to preserve and promote the integrity of public officials and institutions. .

the statute addressed a number of concerns about the ethical behavior of some public officials in the wake of the watergate scandal .

title vi of the statute ( hereinafter "the independent counsel statute" ) established a mechanism for the appointment of individuals to lead independent investigations and prosecutions in certain circumstances .

the statute originally designated these individuals as "special prosecutors" and later renamed them as "independent counsels. .

two of the most commonly known examples of appointments of independent counsels under the statute involved incidents known generally as iran - contra and whitewater .

in 1986 , lawrence e. walsh was appointed as independent counsel to investigate potential criminal misconduct of government officials related to the sale of arms to iran and alleged diversion of profits from the sale to support the "the military activities of the nicaraguan contra rebels" in violation of federal law .

that investigation resulted in criminal charges for 14 individuals , most of whom were convicted , though some convictions were overturned on various grounds .

in 1994 , kenneth starr was appointed as independent counsel to investigate potential violations of federal criminal or civil law related to president clinton or first lady hillary rodham clinton's relationship with madison guaranty savings and loan association , whitewater development corporation , or capital management services , as well as any allegations arising out of that investigation .

that investigation led to a myriad of charges for a number of individuals , but did not include indictments of the president or first lady .

following the expiration of the independent counsel statute , doj promulgated regulations in 1999 , which are currently still in effect , to establish procedures for the appointment of special counsels pursuant to the attorney general's general administrative hiring authority .

doj described these regulations as "strik[ing] a balance between independence and accountability in certain sensitive investigations. .

doj acknowledged at the time the regulations were promulgated , however , that "there is no perfect solution" to achieving that goal .

thus far , it appears the special counsel regulations have been invoked infrequently .

in 1999 , shortly after the regulations were promulgated , the attorney general appointed former u.s .

senator john danforth as special counsel to investigate events related to the government actions that occurred six years earlier at the branch davidian compound in waco , texas .

the special counsel's investigation found no wrongdoing on the part of federal law enforcement officials .

in may 2017 , deputy attorney general rod rosenstein — acting in place of attorney general jeff sessions , who had recused himself from the investigation — issued a publicly - available order ( public order ) appointing former federal bureau of investigation director robert s. mueller iii as special counsel .

rosenstein indicated in the public order that the appointment had been made pursuant to general statutory authority to manage doj investigations , but directed that the investigation would be subject to the agency's regulations governing the scope and administration of special counsel investigations .

specifically , the public order directed the special counsel to investigate efforts of the russian government "to influence the 2016 election and related matters. .

doj later issued a non - public memorandum that set forth in more detail the scope of the investigation and definition of the special counsel's authority .

that memorandum explained that the public order "was worded categorically in order to permit its public release without confirming specific investigations involving specific individuals. .

it should be noted that the attorney general also possesses general statutory authority to appoint doj staff to conduct or coordinate particular investigations .

doj has used this authority previously to appoint individuals who were referred to as "special counsels" to investigate particular matters .

this authority differs from the special counsel regulations because it involves assignment of an internal agency official rather than an individual from outside the government .

for example , in 2003 , then - deputy attorney general james comey ( acting in place of then - attorney general john ashcroft , who had recused himself from the investigation ) used this statutory authority to appoint patrick fitzgerald to lead an investigation of whether white house or other federal officials unlawfully leaked the identity of a central intelligence agency officer to a reporter .

while referred to as a special counsel , fitzgerald was serving as a u.s. attorney when named to lead the investigation , precluding an appointment under the special counsel regulations .

while an individual referred to as a "special counsel" thus may be appointed under either the general statutory authority or under the specific special counsel regulations , those named under the regulations might be viewed as possessing more independence , as they are appointed from outside the agency and are insulated by the regulations from removal except for cause .

doj may also task other arms of the justice department — such as the office of the inspector general — to investigate high - profile , sensitive , and resource - intensive matters regarding "the department's compliance with certain legal requirements and [internal] policies and procedures. .

for example , recently , in response to concerns raised by some members of congress with respect to "certain prosecutorial and investigative determinations made by the [department of justice] in 2016 and 2017," attorney general sessions considered , but declined to pursue , a separate special counsel inquiry related to allegations of potential misconduct within the department , noting that special counsel appointments are "by design , .

 .

 .

reserved for use in only the most 'extraordinary circumstances.' .

such circumstances , according to sessions , require the attorney general to determine that "'the public interest would be served by removing a large degree of responsibility for the matter from the department of justice.' .

instead , the attorney general indicated that doj's inspector general has been tasked with reviewing the actions that the members had suggested be the subject of the second special counsel inquiry , including allegations about doj's compliance with legal requirements and internal policies .

instead , the attorney general announced that he had tasked john w. huber , u.s. attorney for the district of utah , to lead the investigation into those allegations , emphasizing that huber would be working "from outside the washington , d.c. area and in cooperation with the inspector general. .

designing a mechanism to provide for criminal inquiries of executive branch officials by officers independent from the executive branch has raised questions about whether this goal can be accomplished in harmony with the requirements of the constitution .

under the doctrine of separation of powers , the constitution assigns each branch of government particular functions that generally may not be delegated to , nor usurped by , another branch .

in this vein , congress is entrusted with the legislative power , and may establish executive branch agencies and conduct oversight of those entities .

congress may not , however , engage in criminal prosecutions on behalf of the united states — a function generally reserved for the executive branch .

a crucial bulwark in preserving this separation of powers is the appointments clause of article ii .

that provision requires "officers of the united states" to be appointed by the president "with the advice and consent of the senate," although congress may vest the appointment of "inferior" officers "in the president alone , in the courts of law , or in the heads of departments. .

crucially , article ii also empowers the president to hold executive branch officers accountable , through removal if necessary , which the supreme court in myers v. united states explained was essential in order to "maintain administrative control of those executing the laws. .

the court has , however , recognized that congress may in certain situations restrict the president's power of removal over certain discrete offices .

the powers of appointment and removal are key to understanding congress's authority to create independent investigative offices and define their contours .

both congress and the executive branch have employed a variety of means to establish independence for certain criminal investigations and prosecutions .

the use of special prosecutors , independent counsels , and special counsels all have allowed for the investigation of executive branch misconduct .

nonetheless , efforts to provide independence for prosecutors from executive branch control often raise constitutional questions .

in turn , proposals to statutorily protect a special counsel from removal thus raise important , but unresolved , constitutional questions about the separation of powers .

as a general matter , simply insulating a future special counsel from removal except for specified reasons appears consistent with the court's opinion in morrison .

to the extent the current court might depart from the functional reasoning of that case and apply a more formal approach to the question , however , such proposals might raise constitutional objections .

likewise , constitutional objections might arise against proposals aimed to insulate a special counsel in a manner beyond the framework approved in morrison .

