in 1992 , the prescription drug user fee act ( pdufa , now called pdufa i ) gave the food and drug administration ( fda ) the authority to collect fees from the pharmaceutical industry and to use the revenue to support "the process for the review of human drug applications. .

that authority , which expired in 1997 , has been renewed on five subsequent occasions , by pdufa ii ( 1997 ) , pdufa iii ( 2002 ) , pdufa iv ( 2007 ) , pdufa v ( 2012 ) , and pdufa vi ( 2017 ) .

the most recent reauthorization was title i of the food and drug administration reauthorization act ( fdara , p.l .

115-52 ) , which extends the user fee program through september 30 , 2022 .

for fy2017 , 41% of fda's enacted total program level came from user fees ; however , user fee revenue provided 63% of fda's human drugs program budget .

pdufa revenue also contributed to the biologics program and agency - wide headquarters and rent budgets .

congress first passed pdufa to supplement the fda budget outside of direct appropriations from congress .

the added funds were intended to enable the agency to increase its staff so it could finish new drug application reviews sooner , allowing both earlier patient access to new drugs and earlier industry earnings on those drugs .

pdufa i amended the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) to establish the authority and the process for collecting and using industry fees ; it also required fda and industry representatives to agree on the performance goals and procedures that the pdufa revenue would support .

this report describes ( 1 ) the origin of prescription drug user fees , ( 2 ) current law as amended by pdufa vi , ( 3 ) the impact of pdufa on fda application review time and the agency's human drugs program budget , and ( 4 ) pdufa vi reauthorization process .

in the late 1980s , the median time for fda to approve a new drug application ( nda ) was 29 months .

industry , consumer groups , and fda agreed that the time from submission of a drug or biologics application to fda's decision was unacceptably long .

patient advocates argued that a drug in review — and therefore not available for sale — could be the difference between life and death .

manufacturers argued that prolonged review times affected their ability to recoup the costs of research and development .

during pdufa i consideration , fda estimated that each one - month delay in a review's completion cost a manufacturer an average of $10 million .

fda argued that it needed more scientists to review incoming drug applications , as well as backlogged applications , and that it had insufficient appropriations to hire additional scientists to conduct these reviews .

for decades , fda had asked congress for permission to implement user fees .

the pharmaceutical industry generally opposed them , believing the funds might go into the treasury to reduce federal debt rather than help fund drug reviews .

the pharmaceutical industry's opposition to user fees was mitigated , thus clearing a path for the 1992 law , when then fda commissioner david kessler worked out an arrangement that met two industry demands: ( 1 ) performance goals , which would set target completion times for various review processes , and ( 2 ) the promise that these fees would supplement — rather than replace — funding that congress appropriated to fda .

those steps helped persuade industry groups that the fees would reduce review times — and paved the way for congress to authorize a revenue source that fda had sought for over 20 years .

pdufa i — and the subsequent pdufa ii , pdufa iii , pdufa iv , pdufa v , and pdufa vi — authorized the collection of prescription drug user fees and the use of that revenue for specified activities .

the pdufa vi package consists of two parts: ( 1 ) the performance goals and procedures agreement between fda and industry , which this report refers to as the commitment letter or the agreement ( summarized in appendix a ) , and ( 2 ) statutory language that reauthorizes the program ( summarized in appendix b ) .

the timeline for the development of the agreement and the reauthorization of the program is shown in figure 3 .

the pdufa vi reauthorization process began with a public meeting held in july 2015 , followed by a 30-day comment period .

from september 2015 through february 2016 , fda held meetings with industry and patient and consumer advocacy groups ; minutes of the meetings are available on the fda website .

on july 15 , 2016 , fda published a notice in the federal register announcing the availability of the proposed pdufa vi commitment letter , as well as a public meeting to discuss the proposed recommendations for the pdufa vi reauthorization .

on april 25 , 2017 , user fee legislation was introduced in the senate ( s. 934 ) that would have reauthorized pdufa and the three other human medical product user fee programs , among other things .

on may 11 , 2017 , the senate health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) committee ordered the bill to be reported with an amendment in the nature of a substitute .

in the house , a version of the fda reauthorization act ( h.r .

2430 ) was introduced on may 16 , 2017 , and referred to the house energy and commerce subcommittee on health , which approved it with amendments by voice vote on may 18 , 2017 .

the full committee approved the bill on june 7 , 2017 .

the house passed h.r .

2430 on july 12 , 2017 , and the senate passed it on august 3 , 2017 .

h.r .

2430 was signed into law as fdara ( p.l .

115-52 ) on august 18 , 2017 .

title i reauthorizes pdufa , allowing fda to collect fees and use the revenue to support specified activities for the review of prescription brand - name drugs .

fdara includes eight other titles .

a separate crs report describes provisions in those titles , which cover reauthorization of the medical device , generic drug , and biosimilar biological product user fees , as well as provisions concerning pediatric drugs and devices , reauthorizations and improvements related to drugs , inspections and regulatory improvements related to devices , improvements to generic drug access , and a set of miscellaneous provisions .

appendix a .

summary of pdufa vi agreement: performance goals and procedures fy2018-fy2022 appendix b .

provisions in ffdca sections 735 , 736 , and 736b appendix c. abbreviations used in this repor .

