t he north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) entered into force on january 1 , 1994 ( p.l .

103-182 ) , establishing a free trade area as part of a comprehensive economic and free trade agreement among the united states , canada , and mexico .

although some industries may have reduced their u.s. operations , in general , nafta is considered to have benefitted the united states economically as well as strategically in terms of north american relations .

the u.s. food and agricultural sectors , which is the focus of this report , has benefitting especially from nafta .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) and many agricultural industry groups claim that nafta has positively affected u.s. agricultural markets .

nafta continues to be of interest to congress given continued strong trilateral trade and investment ties and the agreement's significance for u.s. trade policy .

president trump has repeatedly stated that he intends to either renegotiate or withdraw from nafta .

in may 2017 , the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) notified congress of the administration's intent to renegotiate nafta .

ustr is scheduled to conduct a public hearing in late june 2017 and also requested public comment on "matters relevant to the modernization" of nafta .

in response to congressional concerns that nafta's renegotiation could be "unsettling" to the u.s. agricultural community , the administration has assured congress that it will "do no harm" to existing u.s. agricultural export markets and will prioritize u.s. agricultural exports in the renegotiation .

it is significant that all three nafta countries participated in the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) agreement from which the united states withdrew in january 2017 , because tpp represented the most recent attempt to design a modern regional free trade agreement ( fta ) .

for more background information on nafta and the current status of the administration's activities , see crs report r42965 , the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , and crs in focus if10047 , north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) .

nafta's primary objectives were "to eliminate barriers to trade in , and facilitate the cross - border movement of goods and services" among the nafta countries .

nafta's market access provisions were structured as three separate bilateral agreements .

the first agreement , the canada - united states trade agreement ( custa ) , took effect on january 1 , 1989 , and was later subsumed into nafta and included certain additional provisions .

the second and third agreements are both under nafta — one between mexico and the united states and another between canada and mexico .

these latter agreements took effect on january 1 , 1994 .

for agriculture , nafta ( including custa ) eliminated tariffs and addressed other types of non - tariff barriers to trade , such as quotas , licenses , and other types of restrictions and standards .

nafta's agricultural provisions are contained within the "agriculture and sanitary and phytosanitary measures" chapter ( chapter 7 ) , but provisions in other chapters also apply .

the text box provides a summary of nafta's provisions that address agricultural trade .

canada and mexico are key u.s. agricultural trading partners .

since nafta was implemented , the value of u.s. agricultural trade with canada and mexico has increased sharply and now accounts for a large overall share of all u.s. agricultural exports and imports .

agricultural products presented here cover commodities as defined by usda for the purposes of calculating u.s. agricultural exports , imports , and the agricultural trade balance .

this definition includes raw and bulk agricultural commodities , nursery products , wine , and cotton fiber products .

this definition excludes fish and seafood , distilled spirits and other beverages , and manufactured tobacco products ( see text box ) .

estimating the economic impact of nafta to the u.s. agriculture industry is not straightforward .

it is difficult to isolate changes in u.s. agricultural trade and markets attributable to nafta's implementation from other factors that may have influenced trade over this period .

such non - nafta influences include changes in agricultural policies , advances in technology ( including the internet ) , and growing integration of the global economy .

u.s. tariffs and trade protections for food and agricultural products were already minimal before nafta was implemented .

trade liberalization and expansion and increased foreign direct investment in the food and agricultural sectors had begun before nafta was implemented .

in addition , available data are often incomplete and of limited use in generating accurate results from economic models .

such estimates may also provide an incomplete accounting of the total economic effects of trade agreements .

among the types of generally acknowledged benefits from trade are greater market access and a reduction in barriers to economic activities ( eg , tariff and other non - tariff trade barriers ) ; lower consumer prices , more product variety , and year - round access for certain products .

higher product sales through exports contribute to economic growth , as do higher incomes in trading partner countries , which contribute to increased demand for higher - value agricultural products .

others point to the benefits of regional trade agreements , including market integration , competitive or complementary economic linkages , and geographical proximity .

in general , nafta is considered to have benefitted u.s. agriculture .

some credit nafta with further facilitating trade by formalizing these changes and providing a more stable trade environment among the nafta partner countries .

the u.s. chamber of commerce states: "nafta has been a bonanza for u.s. farmers and ranchers , helping u.s. agricultural exports to canada and mexico to increase by 350%," despite growth over the period in mexico's agricultural production .

ustr also claims that nafta has benefitted american farmers .

many u.s. food and agricultural industry groups claim that nafta has positively affected their markets .

according to an industry coalition group , "nafta has been a windfall for u.s. farmers , ranchers and food processors. .

since the agreement was implemented , trilateral agricultural trade among the member countries has risen sharply .

additionally , trade with canada and mexico comprise an ever - larger share of u.s. agricultural markets .

many attribute generally lower u.s. consumer prices and improved consumer choices and variety ( eg , imports of off - season produce and greater variety of food products ) to nafta's elimination of tariffs and quota restrictions under the agreement .

others note that as mexico's consumer incomes improve , u.s. agricultural exporters could benefit from increased market demand for some food products .

some claim that nafta has resulted in both benefits and losses , and that positive and negative impacts attributed to the agreement have been overstated or mixed .

economic impacts under nafta depend on what is produced and where it is produced .

this is also true regarding the agreement's effects on employment and wages , as some workers and industries have faced disruptions due to loss of market share from increased competition , while others have gained from the new market opportunities that were created .

yet others claim that nafta has further contributed to consolidation in north america's agriculture , resulting in fewer small farms , particularly in mexico .

in the end , the extent to which nafta has benefitted the u.s. economy is not clear cut , since the gains could be partly attributable to mexico's unilateral liberalization ( which was happening at the same time as nafta ) or to gains attributable to the u.s. - canada fta ( custa , which was already in effect before nafta was negotiated ) .

other factors have influenced regional agricultural trade , including changes in mexico's agricultural policies and workforce , advances in technology ( eg , e - commerce , greenhouse production ) , disruption due to the peso devaluation in the 1990s and the economic downturns in 2001 and 2009 , and competing buyers and sellers of agricultural commodities in countries outside of nafta .

other market developments that may have influenced north american trade since nafta's implementation include alternative product uses ( eg , corn used in ethanol production and corn byproducts , such as dried distiller grains ) and other market substitution effects , changes in crop mix , mechanization , increases in labor efficiencies , and growing integration of the global economy .

many stakeholders in u.s. agricultural sectors have expressed opposition to the trump administration's decision to withdraw from tpp and threats to withdraw from nafta , citing benefits to the food and agricultural industries from trade and potential for disruptions in u.s. export markets given growing uncertainty in u.s. trade policy .

however , some in congress and within u.s. agriculture are cautiously supporting efforts to renegotiate or "modernize" some of nafta's provisions as they pertain to agriculture .

some recommend that many of the agricultural provisions agreed to in the tpp agreement could provide a possible model framework for a nafta renegotiation .

the administration's official notice to congress does not cite specific negotiating objectives for u.s. agriculture .

the trump administration's earlier draft notice sent to congressional leadership did outline certain objectives for u.s. agriculture and sps measures .

ustr's request for public comment on "matters relevant to the modernization" of nafta , however , does address certain agricultural issues , including sps and other technical trade barriers .

among the types of potential gains hoped for by u.s. agricultural exporters from "modernizing" nafta are improving agricultural market access ( eg , liberalization of remaining dutiable agricultural products that were exempted from the agreement and may be subject to trqs and high out - of - quota tariff rates ) .

other potential areas for modernization include amending , updating , or adding to nafta's sps provisions ( eg , "going beyond" existing wto rights and obligations regarding sps measures and requiring additional sps enforcement ) .

additionally , potential gains to u.s. producers could derive from addressing certain outstanding agricultural trade disputes between the united states and its nafta partners and also addressing concerns regarding gis .

a number of these issues were addressed in the tpp agreement and have been raised in the t - tip negotiations .

many industry representatives and some other groups claim that a successful nafta renegotiation would incorporate many of the types of changes related to food and agriculture agreed to in the tpp agreement .

some farm interest groups , however , are pushing for additional changes that go beyond those in the tpp .

for example , the u.s. biotech crops alliance and the biotechnology innovation organization ( bio ) recommend that the u.s. enter a "mutual recognition agreement" with canada and mexico on "the safety determination of biotech crops intended for food , feed and for further processing" and "develop a consistent approach to managing low - level presence of products that have undergone a complete safety assessment and are approved for use" in other countries to further address how to treat agricultural shipments with trace amounts of unauthorized biotech traits .

following the administration's formal notification to congress of its intent to renegotiate nafta in may 2017 , and assuming a 90-day consultation period for congress , nafta negotiations could begin as soon as mid - to - late august .

prior to that , the administration would need to outline and submit its negotiating objectives to congress by mid - to - late july .

ustr is scheduled to conduct a public hearing on june 27 , 2017 , for which it has requested public comment on "matters relevant to the modernization" of nafta .

it is seeking public input on a range of issues , including general and product - specific negotiating objectives , economic costs and benefits to u.s. producers and consumers of removing any remaining tariffs and non - tariff barriers , treatment of specific goods , customs and trade facilitation issues , trade remedy issues , and any unwarranted sps measures and technical barriers to trade , among other issues .

itc's analysis — requested by the administration — to assess the probable economic effects of eliminating u.s. tariffs for "import sensitive agricultural products" is also scheduled to be released around that time .

the administration's forthcoming negotiating objectives , ustr's review of submitted public comments and testimony at its june hearing , and itc's forthcoming analysis could all help inform the renegotiation process .

