after a flood event , people are often uncertain about what types of federal assistance they are eligible for , and if their eligibility for federal disaster assistance is linked in any way to whether or not they have flood insurance .

because much of the other disaster assistance that is available to individuals comes from the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , there may be confusion between possible claims provided through the national flood insurance program ( nfip , which is also managed by fema ) and other disaster assistance programs .

this report provides an overview of the assistance available to individuals and households following a flood and provides links to more comprehensive guidance on both flood insurance and disaster assistance .

the nfip is described in detail in crs report r44593 , introduction to the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) .

the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) is the main program intended to provide federal assistance to homeowners and renters recovering from flood losses .

the nfip was established by the national flood insurance act of 1968 ( nfia , 42 u.s.c .

§4001 et seq. ) .

the general purpose of the nfip is both to offer primary flood insurance to properties with significant flood risk , and to reduce flood risk through the adoption of floodplain management standards .

as of may 2018 , the nfip had over 5 million flood insurance policies providing over $1.28 trillion in coverage .

nationally , as of july 2018 , about 22,322 communities in 56 states and jurisdictions participated in the nfip .

according to fema , the program saves the nation an estimated $1.87 billion annually in flood losses avoided because of the nfip's building and floodplain management regulations .

in addition to nfip claims payments to policyholders , homeowners and renters may also access a number of other federal programs aimed at mitigating the impact on individuals and households .

as described below , congress established certain limits on the availability of federal disaster assistance dependent on whether individuals had flood insurance , as set out by the flood disaster protection act of 1973 ( fdpa , p.l .

93-234 , 87 stat 985 ) .

in addition to requiring property owners with federally backed mortgages to have flood insurance , the fdpa restricts access to federal financial assistance for acquisition or construction purposes for use in any area that has been identified as having special flood hazards ( i.e. , what is known as a special flood hazard area , or sfha ) , and in which the sale of flood insurance has been made available under the nfip , unless covered by flood insurance ( i.e. , the community participates in the nfip ) .

the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( p.l .

93-288 , as amended , stafford act ) also sets restrictions to flood disaster assistance , stating that notwithstanding any other provision of law , no federal disaster relief assistance made available in a flood disaster area may be used to make a payment ( including any loan assistance payment ) to a person for repair , replacement , or flood disaster assistance that was conditional on the person first having obtained flood insurance under applicable federal law and subsequently having failed to obtain and maintain flood insurance as required under applicable federal law on such property .

in addition to nfip and other federal assistance that may be automatically triggered with a disaster declaration , individuals may also access federal assistance that is not automatically triggered by such declarations .

in some instances that are perceived as catastrophic events , congress has provided additional resources to states and local governments through the department of housing and urban development's community development block grant disaster recovery program ( cdbg - dr ) .

the cdbg - dr program is not automatically triggered by a disaster .

instead , congress has occasionally addressed unmet disaster needs by providing supplemental disaster - related appropriations for the cdbg - dr program .

consequently , cdbg - dr is not provided for all major disasters declared under the stafford act , but only provided at the discretion of congress .

congress may consider whether they agree that individual households should be disadvantaged by a decision made by their community , over which an individual is likely to have very little control .

individuals who live in a community which has not joined , withdraws from , or which has been suspended from the nfip , are not allowed to buy or renew nfip flood insurance and are barred from applying for sba loans .

these households may wish to buy nfip flood insurance but are not allowed to do so , because of their community's nfip status ( or nonstatus ) .

table 1 provides summary information on available federal assistance from an nfip insurance policy , fema individuals and households program , and sba disaster loans .

this information is provided dependent on the status of the individual's property in the special flood hazard area , the community's participation in the nfip , and whether that individual has the required insurance coverage .

there is often a perception that flood victims get large amounts of disaster aid and that this may act as a moral hazard which discourages people from purchasing flood insurance and / or adopting risk reduction measures .

in fact , the amount of fema individual assistance after a flood is relatively limited ; many of the headline reports of federal aid refer to public assistance or assistance which is not available to all individuals .

flood insurance may be preferable for governments , since policyholders cover a portion of the costs through premium payments .

flood insurance may also be better for individuals , as uninsured households fare less well than those with insurance .

generally , residents must live in a federally declared disaster area to be eligible to receive disaster assistance or disaster loans ; in contrast , nfip policyholders may claim for damages from any flood , regardless of whether the flood was a declared disaster under federal law .

although the maximum coverage available under the nfip may not be sufficient to cover all flood - related losses , an individual or family will generally be able to get more from nfip insurance than from disaster assistance .

for example , homeowners are able to get up to $350,000 for buildings and contents together and renters are able to get up to $100,000 , compared to a maximum of $34,000 per household from fema disaster assistance .

in addition , most disaster victims do not receive the maximum amount available under fema disaster assistance .

for example , after the south carolina floods in october 2015 , although less than 5% of households in the counties receiving ihp had nfip flood insurance , the average ihp payment was about $3,200 .

in contrast , the average nfip claim for the south carolina floods was $34,934 .

neither flood insurance payments nor individual assistance payments need to be paid back ; however , the amount available through ia will be reduced by the amount of nfip proceeds received for the same damages .

in addition , a household without flood insurance will only be able to get ia under a limited set of circumstances .

an individual or household may be able to borrow up to $240,000 through a combination of sba personal property and real property loans ; however , these loans must be paid back with interest .

in order to receive sba loans , recipients must carry flood insurance for the life of the loan .

the amount of this assistance is subject to duplication of benefits and sequence protocols .

the nexus between flood insurance and disaster assistance reveals conflicting aims: the desire to encourage individuals and households to purchase flood insurance versus the humanitarian objective of providing assistance following a disaster so that people do not suffer unnecessarily .

this is fundamentally a moral hazard question .

a fully individualistic approach to flood risk would advocate that individuals and households should purchase adequate flood insurance to protect themselves against a major flood disaster .

a more egalitarian approach could take the view that individuals do not necessarily have a free choice on whether or not they purchase flood insurance ( for example , residents of a community which does not participate in the nfip ) and that some individuals and households may not be able to afford sufficient coverage .

in this case , the policy question is whether or not the federal government should step in after a disaster even if the victims do not have flood insurance .

congress may allow these conflicting policies to continue and to retain the current difference between the amounts available from flood insurance and disaster assistance , or may consider proposals that would alter the balance between assistance and insurance .

a significant amount of money is available to individuals and households through funding sources which are not available in all disasters , particularly through cdbg - dr. for example , homeowners in louisiana and mississippi could get grants of up to $150,000 after the 2005 hurricane season , as could homeowners in new jersey after hurricane sandy .

rather than being funded through the annual appropriations process , statutory authority for cdbg - dr funding is provided via supplemental appropriations which are awarded by congress only in extraordinary circumstances that have resulted in significant unmet needs for long - term recovery .

because congress has so far opted to use special appropriations to deliver cdbg - dr funds rather than establishing a permanent cdbg disaster recovery program , hud cannot create permanent regulations and guidance of how states should implement cdbg - dr grants .

this may lead to delay and / or confusion in implementation , and may also subject program design decisions to local politics .

unless the individual state required homeowners to purchase flood insurance , the recipients of cdbg - dr grants are exempt from the requirement to purchase flood insurance .

given the unequal use of cdbg - dr , there may be an issue of equity in disaster housing assistance , where some disaster events receive an expanded form of federal assistance to meet housing needs in the form of cdbg , which can create different tiers of disaster housing assistance for declared disasters .

nfip's authorization will expire on november 30 , 2018 .

the availability of nfip insurance has impacts on other programs operated by fema and other agencies such as sba and hud .

separately from , or in conjunction with , nfip reauthorization , the impacts on other programs may be useful to consider .

in particular , congress may consider revising the requirements associated with the flood disaster protection act and flood insurance .

other sources of disaster assistance are described in detail in the following crs reports ; however , this is not a comprehensive list of available disaster assistance following a flood , but rather a sampling of the most commonly used programs .

crs report r44593 , introduction to the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) crs report r41981 , congressional primer on responding to major disasters and emergencies crs report r44619 , fema disaster housing: the individuals and households program — implementation and potential issues for congress crs report r41309 , the sba disaster loan program: overview and possible issues for congress crs report rl31734 , federal disaster assistance response and recovery programs: brief summaries crs report rl33330 , community development block grant funds in disaster relief and recovery crs report r45084 , 2017 disaster supplemental appropriations: overvie .

