i nfrastructure investment has received renewed interest as of late , with both president trump and some members of congress discussing the benefits of such spending .

the condition and performance of infrastructure is thought to affect the economic well - being of countries in a number of ways .

this report provides an overview of the trends surrounding infrastructure investment in the united states and examines the potential impact of additional infrastructure investments on economic output and employment .

although infrastructure spending has garnered increased attention recently , there is no generally agreed - upon definition of infrastructure .

in general , the term refers to longer - lived , capital - intensive systems and facilities .

some restrict the definition to include systems and facilities that have traditionally been provided by the public sector , such as highways and water treatment facilities .

however , others include predominantly privately owned systems and facilities , such as those involved in electricity production and distribution .

the definition of infrastructure can be extended even further to include research and development expenditures , as they add to the stock of technology and information available for use by private individuals .

infrastructure is beneficial for both businesses and households and for the economy broadly .

for businesses , infrastructure can help to lower fixed costs of production , especially transportation costs , which are often a central determinant of where businesses are located .

for households , a wide variety of final goods and services are provided through infrastructure services , such as water , energy , and telecommunications .

infrastructure benefits the economy overall , as it allows more goods and services to be produced with the same level of inputs , fostering long - term economic growth .

federal , state , and local governments share the cost of infrastructure investments , with the majority of direct spending coming from state and local governments .

the federal government contributes to infrastructure investments in the form of direct spending , grants to state and local governments , loan guarantees , and preferential tax treatment .

due to the ambiguous definition of infrastructure , tracking government spending on infrastructure investments can often be difficult .

one of the more comprehensive sources of data on government investment in infrastructure is the bureau of economic analysis ( bea ) , which tracks government spending and investment in various areas .

government spending is divided into consumption expenditures and investments .

consumption expenditures consist of spending by the government to produce and provide goods and services to the public , such as paying census workers to survey households .

by contrast , investment spending consists of government spending on fixed assets , or capital , used to benefit the public for more than one year , such as roads , bridges , computers , and government buildings .

investment is then further divided into three categories: ( 1 ) structures , which include many of the classic examples of infrastructure ( water systems , highways , bridges , etc .

 ) ; ( 2 ) equipment ( computers , military hardware , etc .

 ) ; and ( 3 ) intellectual property ( software , research and development , etc. ) .

this report largely focuses on structures , as this most closely aligns with the types of infrastructure cited by policymakers .

investment is generally recorded in two alternative ways , which can present different perspectives on overall investment .

first , bea reports the annual flow of funds spent by the government on investment projects .

however , because the results of these investments tend to produce value for many years at a time , bea also tracks the total value of all investments that are still productive , which is often referred to as the "total stock of investments. .

bea tracks the total value of all government investments by estimating the stock of productive capital and increasing the capital stock when new funds are invested and decreasing the capital stock over time as projects deteriorate , or depreciate .

the overall capital stock will either increase or decrease over time depending on the size of the flow of investment funds relative to the depreciation of the capital stock .

if the flow of funds each year is larger than the loss of value due to depreciation , then the stock of capital will grow over time ; if the flow of new funds is less than the loss of value due to depreciation , then the stock of capital will decrease over time .

the following sections will examine the annual flow of u.s. government spending into public investments , describe the overall stock of public capital over time , and then compare infrastructure investment in the united states to that in other industrialized economies .

infrastructure is generally understood to be a critical factor in the economic well - being of a country , enabling private businesses and individuals to produce goods and services in a more efficient manner , although there is debate about the optimal amount of infrastructure investment .

the remainder of this report focuses on the ways in which additional infrastructure investments affect economic output and employment .

as the following sections explain , all infrastructure investments are not the same .

the impact of these investments is likely to differ with respect to a few key considerations , including the way in which the investments are financed , the timing of the investments with respect to the business cycle , and the type of infrastructure being created .

the following sections touch on the potential impact of additional infrastructure investment and examine how these factors are likely to amplify or subdue its economic impact .

public infrastructure is a valuable resource to both consumers and businesses alike , improving their ability to produce and consume goods and services more efficiently .

the ability for businesses to produce goods and services more efficiently is a crucial determinant of economic growth , and increased infrastructure investment — if well targeted and depending on the degree of crowding out — likely contributes to increased productivity over time , leading to higher gdp over the long term .

in the near term , public infrastructure investments can also have a varying impact on gdp by stimulating aggregate demand .

the anticipated impact on near - term gdp will generally depend on the financing mechanism , overall economic conditions , and the type of infrastructure .

the largest short - term gains in gdp would likely be achieved if the investments were deficit financed , the funds were spent during a recession , and the investments focused on core infrastructure ( i.e. , roads , bridges , and railways ) .

but because of crowding out , long - term gains ( outside of a recession ) would generally be greater if infrastructure investment were deficit neutral .

in addition , public infrastructure investments may affect employment in the near and medium term .

as the government selects contractors to complete new infrastructure projects , contractors hire additional workers , such as architects and construction workers .

economic research suggests the largest impact on short - and medium - term employment would be achieved by deficit - financed investments that take place during a recession .

in the long term , infrastructure investment is less likely to have a significant impact on employment outcomes .

