the hardest hit fund ( hhf ) , created in 2010 , is one of several temporary programs that were established to help prevent home mortgage foreclosures in the wake of housing and mortgage market turmoil that began around 2007-2008 .

it provided funding to 19 states ( including the district of columbia ) to design locally tailored initiatives to prevent home foreclosures .

while many of the temporary programs that were established to help households facing foreclosure have since ended , the hhf remains active .

participating states have until december 31 , 2020 to use their hhf funds .

the hhf was established administratively by the department of the treasury using authority provided to it under the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( eesa , p.l .

110-343 ) .

eesa was enacted in response to financial market turmoil in the fall of 2008 .

it established the troubled asset relief program ( tarp ) , which authorized the secretary of the treasury to purchase or insure up to $700 billion in troubled assets owned by financial institutions .

eesa also contained language indicating that the purposes of the act included , among other things , protecting home values and preserving homeownership .

eesa provided the treasury secretary with broad authority in how to implement tarp , including wide latitude in deciding what assets might be purchased or guaranteed and what qualified as a financial institution .

using this broad authority , and to comply with the homeownership preservation purposes of eesa , treasury used some tarp funds to create certain programs designed to prevent home foreclosures , including the hhf .

the programs are designed in such a way to qualify as activities authorized by eesa .

treasury set aside a total of $37.5 billion in tarp funds to use for foreclosure prevention initiatives .

of this amount , $9.6 billion was provided to the hhf .

this funding was allocated to selected states through five rounds of funding .

the first four rounds of funding — a total of $7.6 billion — were allocated in 2010 .

treasury's authority to make additional commitments of tarp funds expired on october 3 , 2010 , meaning that it did not have the authority to provide additional tarp funds to the hhf after that date .

however , in december 2015 the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) authorized treasury to make up to an additional $2.0 billion in unused tarp funds available to the hhf .

treasury allocated this additional $2.0 billion to the hhf states in 2016 , bringing the total amount of hhf funding to $9.6 billion .

 table 1 shows the 19 states ( including dc ) that received funds through the hhf and the total amount that was allocated to each state through the five rounds of funding .

the hhf was intended to provide funding to certain states that were deemed to be the "hardest hit" by the turmoil in housing and financial markets that started in 2007-2008 , based on features such as house price declines or high unemployment rates .

funding was allocated through five rounds using different criteria to identify eligible states and allocate funds among the eligible states .

the first four rounds took place in 2010 .

the fifth round took place in 2016 after congress authorized treasury to allocate additional unused tarp funds to the program .

round one: in february 2010 , treasury made a total of $1.5 billion available to five states that had experienced the greatest declines in home prices as of december 2009: california , arizona , florida , nevada , and michigan .

round two: in march 2010 , treasury made a total of $600 million available to five states that had large proportions of their populations living in areas of economic distress , defined as counties with average unemployment rates above 12% in 2009: north carolina , ohio , oregon , rhode island , and south carolina .

 ( the five states that received funding in the first round were not eligible. ) .

round three: in august 2010 , treasury made a total of $2 billion available to 17 states and the district of columbia , all of which had unemployment rates at or above the national average between june 2009 and june 2010 .

nine of the states that received funds through one of the previous rounds ( all but arizona ) also received funding in the third round .

the states that received funding for the first time in the third round were alabama , georgia , illinois , indiana , kentucky , mississippi , new jersey , tennessee , and the district of columbia .

round four: in september 2010 , treasury provided a total of $3.5 billion to the 19 states ( including dc ) that had received funding in earlier rounds .

a total of $7.6 billion was provided to states through the first four rounds .

in early 2016 , after congress authorized treasury to provide an additional $2 billion in tarp funds to the program , treasury allocated this amount to participating states through two phases: round 5 , phase 1: in february 2016 , treasury allocated $1 billion to participating states based on their population and utilization of previous hhf funds .

states had to have used at least 50% of the hhf funding they previously received to be eligible for this funding .

each participating state except alabama received additional funding in this phase .

 ( alabama had not used 50% of its previously allocated hhf funds. ) .

round 5 , phase 2: in april 2016 , treasury allocated $1 billion competitively to participating states .

all but six participating states received additional funds through this phase .

five states did not apply for funding ( alabama , arizona , florida , nevada , and south carolina ) , while one state ( georgia ) applied but did not receive any funding .

hhf funds are provided to state housing finance agencies ( hfas ) to use for designing programs that address foreclosures and are tailored to local conditions .

for example , a state that had experienced steep decreases in house prices might choose to use funds to reduce the principal balances of certain mortgages , while a state experiencing high unemployment might want to use funds to provide temporary mortgage assistance to unemployed homeowners .

the programs designed by states must meet the requirements of eesa and be approved by treasury .

in addition , states that received funding through the third round of the hhf must use that funding specifically for foreclosure prevention programs that target the unemployed .

as of december 2016 , there were over 80 hhf programs in the 19 states ( including dc ) that received hhf funding .

 ( every participating state was using funds for at least two types of programs , and many states were using funds for several different types of programs. ) .

the most common types of state hhf programs have included the following ( details and eligibility criteria vary by state ) : mortgage modification : facilitating modifications of eligible borrowers' mortgage terms .

principal reduction: reducing mortgage principal as part of a sustainable mortgage modification or refinance .

mortgage reinstatement: providing funds to help eligible borrowers who have regained the ability to make regular monthly payments bring a mortgage current .

unemployment assistance: helping eligible unemployed or underemployed borrowers make monthly mortgage payments for a period of time .

transition assistance: providing relocation payments or other assistance to eligible borrowers to facilitate a short sale or deed - in - lieu of foreclosure ( foreclosure alternatives that result in the borrower losing the home but avoiding the foreclosure process ) .

second lien assistance: providing assistance to eligible borrowers to modify or extinguish a second mortgage on the property in conjunction with a modification of a primary mortgage or to facilitate a short sale .

blight elimination: providing funds to demolish or otherwise address vacant and abandoned homes .

removing vacant and abandoned homes may help avoid negative impacts on nearby home values , which in turn could help prevent additional foreclosures .

down payment assistance: providing funds for down payment assistance in an effort to prevent foreclosures by encouraging home buying activity in certain areas .

in addition , states can use funds for other types of foreclosure prevention programs that are approved by treasury .

for example , states have used hhf funds for programs that help households avoid foreclosure by providing assistance to homeowners with reverse mortgages and assistance to pay tax liens .

states can continue to make changes to their hhf programs , subject to treasury's approval .

as of december 2016 , participating states had drawn about $7 billion of the total $9.6 billion hhf allocation from their treasury accounts .

of that amount , they had disbursed a total of about $5.8 billion .

of the participating states , oregon has disbursed the highest share of its hhf funding ( about 80% ) while alabama has disbursed the smallest share ( just over 30% ) .

according to treasury data , over 290,000 homeowners had been assisted through the hhf as of december 2016 .

this number does not include blighted properties that have been removed through some states' blight elimination programs .

treasury does not have the authority to commit additional tarp funds to the hhf .

therefore , there will be no additional funding for the program without congressional action .

however , if participating states do not meet certain spending deadlines , treasury may rescind some of their funds and reallocate them to other participating states .

states that are participating in the hhf were originally required to use their hhf funds by december 31 , 2017 , a deadline set by treasury .

however , when it allocated the fifth round of funding , treasury extended the deadline for using hhf funds to december 31 , 2020 .

more information on the hhf is available on treasury's website .

in particular , treasury's quarterly program performance summaries provide information on how participating states are using their funds and the amount of funding each state has disbursed to date .

treasury's website also includes links to state websites , which provide more information on specific state hhf programs and how eligible homeowners can apply .

the special inspector general for the troubled asset relief program ( sigtarp ) provides oversight of tarp programs , including the hhf , in quarterly reports and audit reports .

