banks play a central role in the financial system by connecting borrowers to savers and allocating capital across the economy .

as a result , banking is vital to the health and growth of the u.s. economy .

in addition , banking is an inherently risky activity involving extending credit and taking on liabilities .

therefore , banking can generate tremendous societal and economic benefits , but banking panics and failures can create devastating losses .

over time , a regulatory system designed to foster the benefits of banking while limiting risks has developed , and both banks and regulation have coevolved as market conditions have changed and different risks have emerged .

for these reasons , congress often considers policies related to the banking industry .

recent years have been a particularly transformative period for banking .

the 2008-2009 financial crisis threatened the total collapse of the financial system and the real economy .

many assert only huge and unprecedented government interventions staved off this collapse .

others argue that government interventions were unnecessary or potentially exacerbated the crisis .

in addition , many argue the crisis revealed that the financial system was excessively risky and the regulatory system had serious weaknesses .

many regulatory changes were made in response to perceived weaknesses in the financial regulatory system , including to bank regulation .

congress enacted the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( p.l .

111-203 ; dodd - frank act ) in 2010 with the intention of strengthening regulation and addressing risks .

in addition , u.s. and international bank regulators agreed to the basel iii accords — an international framework for bank regulation — which called for making certain bank regulations more stringent .

in the ensuing years , some observers have raised concerns that the potential benefits of the regulatory changes ( better - managed risks , increased consumer protection , greater systemic stability , etc. ) .

are outweighed by the potential costs ( eg , reduced credit availability for consumers and businesses , and slower economic growth ) .

meanwhile , market forces and economic conditions continue to affect the banking industry coincident with the implementation of new regulation .

this report provides a broad overview of selected banking - related issues , including prudential regulation , consumer protection , "too big to fail" ( tbtf ) banks , community banking , regulatory agency structures and independence , and recent market and economic trends .

it is not an exhaustive look at all bank policy issues , nor is it a detailed examination of any one issue .

rather , it provides concise background and analyses of certain prominent issues that have been the subject of recent discussion and debate .

in addition , this report provides a list of congressional research service reports that examine specific bills — including the financial choice act ( h.r .

10 ) and the economic growth , regulatory relief , and consumer protection act ( s. 2155 ) .

bank failures can inflict large losses on stakeholders , including taxpayers via government "safety nets" such as deposit insurance and federal reserve lending facilities .

furthermore , some argue that in the presence of deposit insurance , commercial banks may be subject to moral hazard — a willingness to take on excessive risk because of external protection against losses .

in addition , failures can cause systemic stress and sharp contraction in economic activity if they are large or widespread .

to make such failures less likely — and to reduce losses when they do occur — regulators utilize prudential regulation .

these "safety and soundness" regulations are designed to ensure banks are safely profitable and to reduce the risk of failure .

this section provides background on these regulations and analyzes selected issues related to them , including regulatory requirements related to capital ratios , including leverage ratios and risk - weighted capital ratios ; and restrictions on permissible activities , such as the volcker rule ( which restricts proprietary trading ) .

financial products can be complex and potentially difficult for consumers to fully understand .

also , consumers seeking loans or financial services could be vulnerable to deceptive or unfair practices .

to reduce the occurrence of bad outcomes , laws and regulations have been put in place to protect consumers .

this section provides background on consumer protection and analyzes issues related to it , including the degree to which the consumer financial protection bureau's ( cfpb's ) authorities , structure , regulations , and enforcement actions have struck the appropriate balance between protecting consumers and the availability of credit ; and whether certain mortgage lending rules have struck the appropriate balance between protecting consumers and the availability of credit .

some bank holding companies ( bhcs ) have hundreds of billions or trillions of dollars in assets and are deeply interconnected with other financial institutions .

a bank may be so large that the leadership of the bank and market participants may believe that the government would save it if it became distressed .

this belief could arise from the determination that the institution is so important to the country's financial system — and that its failure would be so costly to the economy and society — that the government would feel compelled to avoid that outcome .

an institution of this size and complexity is said to be "too big to fail" ( tbtf ) .

tbtf institutions may have incentives to be excessively risky , gain unfair advantages in the market for funding , and expose taxpayers to losses .

this section provides background on tbtf institutions and analyzes some prominent issues related to them , including enhanced prudential regulation for large banks , including enhanced cap i tal requirements , liquidity requirements , living wills , and stress - testing ; and measures taken to reduce market expectation of government support for failing institutions , such as the orderly liquidation authority ( ola ) .

while some banks hold a very large amount of assets , are complex , and operate on a national or international scale , the vast majority of u.s. banks are relatively small , have simple business models , and operate within a local area .

this section provides background on these smaller , simpler banks — often called community bank s — and analyzes issues related to them , including regulatory relief for community banks , and the long - term decline in the number of community banks .

financial regulatory agencies are invested with the authority to regulate , and most of them are referred to as independent regulatory agencies , allowing them to operate with a relatively high degree of independence from the president and congress .

this raises the issue of how they should be held accountable for the regulations they implement and the actions they take .

this section provides background on the issue of agency independence and issues related to creating an appropriate degree of accountability , including whether the agency is self - funding or funded through appropriations ; whether the agency is led by an individual or a bipartisan commission ; what regulatory analysis requirements the agency faces in the rulemaking process ; and to what extent agency rulemaking is subject to congressional review .

in addition to issues related to regulation , banking is also continually affected by market and economic conditions and trends .

this section analyzes certain issues related to trends that may concern banks , including migration of financial activity from banks into nonbanks or the "shadow banking" system ; increasing capabilities and market presence of financial technology ( "fintech" ) ; increasing interest rates in the future ; and competitive and regulatory issues related to institutions with different charters but similar business models — such as banks , thrifts , and credit unions .

because these issues involve the interactions between several broad market forces , specific legislative alternatives will not be examined in this section .

a comprehensive listing and analysis of all proposed legislation related to bank issues is beyond the scope of this report .

however , such information can be found in other crs products , including the following: crs report r44839 , the financial choice act in the 115th congress: selected policy issues , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

this report examines h.r .

10 introduced in the 115 th congress .

h.r .

10 proposes wide - ranging changes to the financial regulatory system , and it contains provisions related to banking issues , including provisions found in titles i , iii , v , vi , vii , and ix .

many of these provisions are similar to those found in other bills .

crs report r45073 , economic growth , regulatory relief , and consumer protection act ( s. 2155 ) and selected policy issues , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

this report examines s. 2155 , which was reported by the committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs on december 18 , 2017 .

s. 2155 proposes wide - ranging changes to the financial regulatory system , and it contains provisions related to banking issues , including provisions found in titles i , ii , and iv .

many of these provisions are similar to those found in other bills .

crs report r44035 , "regulatory relief" for banking: selected legislation in the 114th congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

this report examines numerous bills related to regulatory relief for banks introduced in the 114 th congress .

crs report r41350 , the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act: background and summary , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

this report examines provisions enacted into law in the dodd - frank act , and it provides background and analysis of these reforms to the financial regulatory system that are in place today .

provisions related to banking are found in title i , ii , iii , vi , x , and xiv .

