congress has expressed interest in federal programs and activities addressing tsunami detection , warning , research , education , and outreach because of the tsunami hazard to the united states , particularly to pacific northwest , northern california , alaska , and hawaii , as well as regions of the caribbean and atlantic coastline .

the japanese tsunami of march 11 , 2011 , illustrated the potential for damage and loss of life posed by a potential tsunami in the pacific .

a fault system off the northwestern united states , called the cascadia subduction zone , is similar to the fault system responsible for the 2011 japanese tsunami disaster .

oregon , washington , northern california , hawaii , and alaska all face some risk if the cascadia fault ruptures .

congress passed the tsunami warning , education , and research act of 2017 as title v of p.l .

115-25 , on april 4 , 2017 ; president trump signed the bill into law as p.l .

115-25 on april 18 , 2017 .

title v of p.l .

115-25 amends p.l .

109-479 , title viii , the tsunami warning and education act , which was enacted on january 12 , 2007 .

the new law does not make fundamental changes to the federal government's tsunami activities , which include tsunami forecasting and warning , mitigation , and research , as well as other tsunami - related activities .

however , it does broaden the purposes of the federal activities , increasing focus on tsunami research , promoting community resilience to tsunami hazards , and refining requirements for standards and guidelines to improve education and outreach activities and tsunami mapping and modeling .

the new law authorizes appropriations of $25.8 million per year for fy2016 through fy2021 .

an ongoing question for the u.s. tsunami program and related activities is whether congress will appropriate funds matching the amounts authorized in p.l .

115-25 to carry out the existing program as well as the new activities and priorities in the law .

another challenge is how congress should evaluate the effectiveness of the program .

a perennial issue for noaa is keeping its constellation of deep - ocean assessment and reporting of tsunami ( dart ) buoys operational , and the new law specifies a goal of keeping at least 80% of the buoy system operational at all times .

more generally , because title v of p.l .

115-25 adds an emphasis on research throughout the program , a future question is how well research results are incorporated into tsunami resilience , education , warning , and other activities .

also , damaging tsunami events are relatively rare for the united states , so it is difficult to assess the overall effect of tsunami program activities on an annual basis .

if a large and damaging tsunami were to strike the united states , an additional challenge for congress would be to sort out how effective the program was at reducing the amount of damage and the number of injuries and fatalities .

in addition , the bill repeals p.l .

109-424 , the tsunami warning and education act , also passed by the 109 th congress .

p.l .

109-424 was signed into law by president george w. bush on december 20 , 2006 , and is nearly identical to p.l .

109-479 .

p.l .

115-25 removes any potential for ambiguity by repealing one of the existing laws .

this report provides a section - by - section comparison of text quoted from p.l .

115-25 and p.l .

109-479 , shown in table 1 , with some brief comments from the congressional research service ( crs ) pointing out selected changes and how those changes affect p.l .

109-479 and the tsunami activities it authorized ( far right column of table 1 ) .

the table is organized so that the same or most similar sections , and parts of sections , are in the same row or rows .

the crs comments generally address the sections or parts of sections in the same row of the table .

