the social security administration ( ssa ) is responsible for administering two federal entitlement programs that provide income support to individuals with severe , long - term disabilities: social security disability insurance ( ssdi ) and supplemental security income ( ssi ) .

ssdi is a work - related social insurance program that provides monthly cash benefits to nonelderly disabled workers and their eligible dependents , provided the workers accrued a sufficient number of earnings credits during their careers in jobs subject to social security taxes .

in contrast , ssi is a need - based public assistance program that provides monthly cash payments to aged , blind , or disabled individuals ( including blind or disabled children ) who have limited assets and little or no social security or other income .

both programs use the same basic definition of disability to determine eligibility ; however , by virtue of design , each program serves a somewhat different population .

in 2017 , ssdi and ssi combined paid an estimated $199 billion in federally administered benefits to 14.5 million qualified disabled individuals and 1.5 million non - disabled dependents of disabled workers .

this report discusses the rules and processes used to determine eligibility for ssdi and ssi .

it also explains how benefit amounts are computed , the types of non - cash benefits available to individuals who meet ssa's disability standards , and how each program is financed .

for a quick overview of ssdi and ssi , see crs in focus if10506 , social security disability insurance ( ssdi ) , and crs in focus if10482 , supplemental security income ( ssi ) .

old - age , survivors , and disability insurance ( oasdi ) , commonly known as social security , is a federal social insurance program established under title ii of the social security act that provides workers and their families with a measure of protection against the loss of income due to the worker's retirement , disability , or death .

workers obtain insurance protection by working for a sufficient number of years in jobs where their earnings are subject to social security taxes and therefore are creditable for program purposes .

social security is financed largely on a pay - as - you - go basis , which means that payroll and self - employment tax contributions from current workers , their employers , and self - employed individuals are used to make monthly benefit payments to today's beneficiaries .

in 2017 , an estimated 173 million people ( or about 94% of all workers ) worked in paid employment or self - employment covered by social security , and the program paid monthly benefits to approximately 62 million beneficiaries ( figure 1 ) .

the ssdi component of the program , which was enacted in 1956 and implemented in 1957 , provides monthly benefits to statutorily disabled workers who are under social security's full retirement age ( fra ) and to their eligible spouses , divorced spouses , minor children , student children , and disabled adult children .

the old - age and survivors insurance ( oasi ) component of social security also provides benefits to eligible disabled dependents of retired workers and to eligible survivors of deceased beneficiaries and deceased insured workers .

although these individuals are not technically disability insurance beneficiaries , they are often included in the term ssdi , because they receive social security benefits due to a qualifying impairment .

in december 2017 , the ssdi component of social security paid benefits to 10.4 million individuals , including 8.7 million disabled workers and 1.7 million of their dependents .

that same month , the oasi component paid benefits to 1.2 million oasi disability beneficiaries .

established under title xvi of the social security act in 1972 and implemented in 1974 , ssi is a means - tested federal assistance program that provides monthly cash payments to the needy individuals and couples who are aged , blind , or disabled .

the program is intended to provide a guaranteed minimum income to adults who have difficulty covering their basic living expenses due to age or disability and who have little or no social security or other income .

it is also designed to supplement the support and maintenance of needy children who have severe disabilities .

ssi is commonly known as a program of "last resort" because claimants must first apply for most other benefits for which they may be eligible ; cash assistance is awarded only to those whose assets and other income ( if any ) are within prescribed limits .

the basic federal ssi payment is the same for all recipients and is reduced by most other income that an individual receives .

some states supplement the federal payment using state funds .

in december 2017 , ssa issued federally administered payments to 8.2 million ssi recipients , including 1.2 million children under 18 years old , 4.8 million adults aged 18-64 , and 2.2 million seniors aged 65 or older .

as shown in figure 2 , the vast majority of ssi recipients enter the program through the disability pathway .

in other words , most individuals become eligible for ssi due to a qualifying impairment other than blindness .

blind or disabled ssi recipients who attain age 65 continue to be classified by ssa as blind or disabled , even though they meet the categorical requirements to be classified as aged .

to avoid confusion , this report focuses primarily on blind or disabled ssi recipients under 65 years old .

 ( hereinafter the term ssdi beneficiary refers to disabled workers , disabled widow[er]s , and disabled adult children of retired , disabled , or deceased insured workers .

in addition , the term ssi disability recipient refers to blind or disabled ssi recipients under 65 years old. ) .

in december 2016 , about 12.8 million adults aged 18-64 received ssdi or ssi due to a qualifying impairment ( figure 3 ) .

of those , more than 1.3 million ( or 10% ) received both types of disability benefits .

about one in seven ssdi beneficiaries aged 18-64 received ssi concurrently .

at the same time , about a quarter of ssi disability recipients aged 18-64 also received ssdi .

for this report , individuals who receive both ssdi and ssi due to a qualifying impairment are referred to as concurrent disability beneficiaries .

assuming they meet the applicable eligibility requirements , concurrent disability beneficiaries receive health coverage under medicare and medicaid .

individuals who qualify for both health care programs are known as dual eligibles .

the average combined benefit for concurrent disability beneficiaries in december 2016 was $783 ( table 7 ) .

of that amount , $538 was from ssdi and $245 was from ssi .

because average benefits for concurrent disability beneficiaries were below the fbr for an individual ( $733 per month in 2016 ) and because ssdi benefits generally offset ssi payments on a dollar - for - dollar basis , combined benefit levels for each type of concurrent ssdi beneficiary were about the same .

thus , disabled workers ( who have higher average ssdi benefit amounts ) received lower average ssi payments , and disabled adult children ( who have lower average ssdi benefit amounts ) received higher ssi payments , resulting in roughly the same combined disability benefit amount across all three beneficiary types .

as shown in figure 4 , the average benefit amount for concurrent disability beneficiaries is higher than that for ssi - only recipients but is lower than that for ssdi - only beneficiaries .

the purpose of ssi for adults is generally twofold: ( 1 ) to provide cash assistance to aged , blind , or disabled individuals who have no income and ( 2 ) to supplement the incomes of those who have low social security benefits .

for ssdi beneficiaries with minimal benefits and other income , ssi increases their overall monthly disability benefit from ssa .

the process begins when a claimant files an initial application for ssdi or ssi using one of four methods: ( 1 ) submitting an application in person at one of ssa's more than 1,200 nationwide field offices ; ( 2 ) contacting a ssa teleservice representative over the phone and relaying the necessary information ; ( 3 ) sending a paper application by mail ; or ( 4 ) filing an electronic application on ssa.gov ( for ssdi and certain concurrent claims only ) .

if the agency requires more information to process the application , it will contact the claimant by phone or arrange for an in - person interview at the local field office .

claimants must inform and submit all evidence to ssa related to their impairment as a condition of their application for benefits .

claims representatives at ssa's field offices screen claimants to make sure they meet the applicable non - medical entitlement factors .

for ssdi , non - medical factors include disability - insured status , the work activity test ( i.e. , sga earnings limit ) , and the claimant's relationship to certain family members .

for ssi , such factors include income , resources , living arrangements , the work activity test ( for non - blind claimants ) , citizenship , residency , and the requirement to apply for all other benefits .

in general , claimants who do not meet the applicable non - medical entitlement factors are found to be ineligible for benefits and do not receive a disability determination .

ssa field office personnel notify claimants whose applications are denied due to non - medical factors .

applications that meet the applicable non - medical entitlement factors are forwarded to the disability determination services ( dds ) office in the area that has jurisdiction for the disability determination ( generally the state in which the claimant resides ) .

ddss , which are fully funded by the federal government , are state agencies tasked with reviewing the medical and vocational evidence and issuing the disability determination for ssa .

although dds workers are state employees , they make the disability determinations based on federal law , regulations , and ssa's policy guidance .

ddss are located in the 50 states , the district of columbia , puerto rico , guam , and the virgin islands , and they employ approximately 15,000 state workers .

the disability determination for both types of benefits is made based on evidence gathered in an individual's case record .

disability examiners — with the help of medical or psychological consultants ( who are licensed physicians , psychiatrists , or psychologists ) — typically use evidence collected from the claimant's own medical sources to evaluate the existence and severity of the claimant's impairment ( s ) .

however , if the medical evidence is unavailable or insufficient to make a determination , disability examiners can schedule a physical or mental examination or test from a medical source to obtain the necessary information .

in such cases , ssa pays for the consultative examination ( ce ) .

the initial review generally does not involve a face - to - face meeting between the claimant and the adjudicator ( i.e. , the claim is decided based solely on the evidence in the claims file ) .

after considering all medical and other evidence , the dds agency issues a disability determination and returns the case to the ssa field office .

if the claim is approved , the ssa field office sends out the initial award notice and begins processing the claim .

if the claim is denied , the dds agency prepares a personalized disability explanation and notifies the claimant of the decision .

individuals who are dissatisfied with ssa's initial determination or decision may request further review under the social security act's administrative and judicial review provisions .

the appeals process affords claimants the opportunity to present additional evidence or arguments to support their case as well as to appoint a representative to act on their behalf , such as an attorney or a qualified non - attorney .

the claimant , his or her appointed representative , representative payee , or other third party on behalf of the claimant can file a request for review .

the request for further review must be made , in writing , within 60 days of the date the claimant received notice of the prior determination or decision ( generally five days after the date on the notice ) , unless ssa determines that the claimant has good cause for failing to file a timely request .

claimants may file their appeal using conventional ssa forms or online via the iappeals system .

ssa's administrative appeals process is generally composed of three levels of review: ( 1 ) reconsideration of the case by a reviewer who did participate in the initial determination ; ( 2 ) a hearing before an administrative law judge ; and ( 3 ) a request for review by the appeals council ( figure 7 ) .

individuals may elect to continue to receive benefit payment during this process under certain conditions .

at each step of the appeals process , the decision - maker bases his or her decisions on provisions in the social security act , ssa's regulations , and other agency guidance .

only after exhausting the administrative appeals process and receiving a final decision from ssa are claimants permitted to file a complaint against the agency in federal court .

the following section describes each step of the appeals process in more detail .

after ssa finds that a claimant is disabled , the agency evaluates his or her impairment ( s ) from time to time to determine if the individual is still medically eligible for payments on the basis of blindness or disability .

this evaluation is known as a continuing disability review ( cdr ) .

the frequency of a cdr depends on the beneficiary's prospective medical improvement .

ssa's regulations specify three basic types of schedules or di a ries .

medical improvement expected ( mie ) .

if medical improvement is expected , then ssa schedules a review at intervals from 6 to 18 months following the most recent decision that the individual is disabled or that disability is continuing .

examples of impairments that fall into this category include traumatic injuries and severe bone fracture .

medical improvement possible ( mip ) .

if medical improvement is possible but cannot be accurately predicted based on current experience and the facts of the case , then ssa schedules a review at least once every three years .

examples of impairments that fall into this category include heart failure and severe diabetes with end organ damage .

medical improvement not expected ( mine ) .

if medical improvement is unlikely due to the severity of an individual's condition , then ssa schedules a review once every five to seven years .

examples of impairments that fall into this category include intellectual disabilities , amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( als ) which is sufficiently severe , and parkinson's disease which is sufficiently severe .

individuals who receive this classification are considered permanently disabled by ssa .

as shown in figure 8 , few ssdi beneficiaries and ssi disability recipients are assigned a mie diary .

ssa conducts two types of medical cdrs on individuals whose diaries mature: full medical cdrs and mailers .

a full medical cdr involves ssa sending the case to the state dds agency for a full medical review .

a mailer is a questionnaire sent to the individual in order to obtain additional information , which ssa uses to determine if a full medical cdr is appropriate .

if the answers to the mailer do not indicate likely improvement , ssa may defer a full medical cdr .

under current law , ssa must find substantial evidence of medical improvement during a cdr to find a ssdi beneficiary or ssi disability recipient no longer disabled and therefore ineligible for benefits .

the legal requirement for determining if disability continues during a cdr is called the medical improvement review standard ( mirs ) .

under a mirs determination for adults , the agency generally considers a ssdi beneficiary or ssi disability recipient no longer disabled if the review finds considerable evidence that ( 1 ) there has been substantial medical improvement in the individual's impairment ( s ) related to his or her ability to work since the last favorable medical decision and ( 2 ) the individual has the ability to engage in sga .

for a child ssi recipient , ssa typically considers the child no longer disabled if the review demonstrates that there has been substantial medical improvement in the recipient's impairment ( s ) since his or her most recent favorable medical decision to the point in which the recipient's condition no longer meets or medically or functionally equals the severity in the listings .

when a ssdi beneficiary or ssi disability recipient is found no longer disabled , he or she may appeal the decision using the process described previously .

ssa reevaluates the eligibility of all child ssi recipients who attain the age of 18 under the adult standard for initial disability claims .

these reevaluations are known as age - 18 disability redeterminations .

because these reviews are a new disability determination under the adult criteria , the mirs does not apply .

under the ssdi program , ssa performs work cdrs to determine if a beneficiary's work activity represents sga and if eligibility for benefits should continue .

ssa typically initiates a work cdr if the agency becomes aware of the beneficiary's return to work .

if a work cdr finds evidence that a beneficiary is engaging in sga and is not participating in an approved ssa work incentive , the agency may find that the beneficiary's disability has ceased .

under the ssi program , ssa conducts periodic redeterminations of a recipient's non - medical eligibility factors — such as income , resources , and living arrangements — to verify that a recipient is still eligible for ssi and receiving the correct payment amount .

there are two types of redeterminations: scheduled and unscheduled .

unscheduled redeterminations are conducted based on a report of a change in a recipient's circumstances that may affect program eligibility or payment amount .

scheduled redeterminations are performed at periodic intervals , depending on the likelihood of payment error: ( 1 ) annually if a change in a recipient's circumstances is likely to occur or ( 2 ) once every six years if a change in circumstances is unlikely to occur .

appendix a. side - by - side of ssdi and ssi appendix b .

certain other benefits available to ssdi beneficiaries and ssi disability recipients individuals who meet the blindness or disability standards of the ssdi or ssi programs may qualify for certain federal or state benefits .

the following section discusses two federal benefits for which ssdi beneficiaries and ssi disability recipients may qualify .

achieving a better life experience ( able ) accounts the stephen beck , jr. , achieving a better life experience act ( able act ; division b of p.l .

113-295 ) authorizes states to establish and maintain tax - advantaged savings plans through which contributions may be made to the investment account of a designated beneficiary to pay for qualified disability expenses .

qualified disability expenses include costs related to education , housing , transportation , employment training and support , assistive technology and personal support services , health and wellness ( including long - term services and supports ) , financial management and administrative services , legal fees , expenses for oversight and monitoring , funeral and burial expenses , and other expenses identified in guidance published by the irs .

to qualify for an able account , an individual must either be ( 1 ) entitled to social security or ssi benefit payments due to blindness or disability and such impairment occurred before the date the individual attained age 26 or ( 2 ) certified by a physician that his or her impairment meets the blindness or disability standards used for children under the ssi program , regardless of the individual's age , and such impairment occurred before the date the individual attained age 26 .

there are three advantages to able accounts .

first , earnings in an able account can grow tax - free annually until they are withdrawn .

second , distributions ( i.e. , withdrawals ) from an able account are tax - free if they are used to pay for qualified disability expenses .

third , assets in and distributions from an able account for qualified disability expenses are disregarded in determining a designated beneficiary's eligibility for and the amount of assistance provided by most federal assistance programs .

under the ssi program , however , only the first $100,000 in an able account is excluded .

the balance of an able account above $100,000 is treated as a resource to the designated beneficiary and is counted against the program's resource limit .

if a designated beneficiary becomes ineligible for ssi due solely to excess able funds , his or her cash payments are suspended ( without a time limit ) until the balance of the able account falls to or below $100,000 .

this suspension does not affect the beneficiary's eligibility for medicaid .

in addition , a distribution from an able account for housing - related expenses is counted against the resource limit unless the distribution is spent in the month of receipt .

able accounts allow ssi disability recipients to save for disability - related expenses without such savings jeopardizing their ssi and medicaid eligibility .

although able accounts have no effect on an individual's entitlement to ssdi , the accounts may allow beneficiaries to save and establish or maintain their eligibility for other federal programs , such as medicaid or snap .

the social security administration ( ssa ) , the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , and the department of agriculture's food and nutrition service ( fns ) have all issued guidance on the treatment of able accounts under ssi , medicaid , and snap , respectively .

total and permanent disability ( tpd ) discharge of certain federal student loans ssdi beneficiaries and ssi disability recipients may have their federal student loans discharged if they meet the requirements of the department of education's ( ed's ) total and permanent disability ( tpd ) discharge program .

the tpd discharge applies to obligations incurred under the following federal student loan programs: william d. ford federal direct loan ( direct loan ) program , the federal family education loan ( ffel ) program , the federal perkins loan program , and the teacher education assistance for college and higher education ( teach ) grant program .

borrowers qualify for the tpd discharge if they are determined to be totally and permanently disabled under any one of the following methods .

va method .

the borrower receives department of veterans affairs ( va ) disability compensation at the 100% rate due to one or more service - connected disabilities that the va determined to be ( 1 ) totally disabling under its rating schedule , or ( 2 ) less than totally disabling under its rating schedule but which prevent the individual from establishing or maintaining substantially gainful employment ( known as an individual unemployability [iu] rating ) .

ssa method .

the borrower is entitled to ssdi or ssi and is scheduled to receive a medical review once every five to seven years ( i.e. , ssa assigns the individual a medical improvement not expected [mine] continuing disability review [cdr] diary ) .

physician 's certification method .

the borrower is certified by a physician that he or she is unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity due to any medically determinable physical or mental impairment that has lasted , or is expected to last , for at least 60 months or is expected to result in death ( i.e. , the individual meets the definition of disability for adults under the social security act , except that the duration of the impairment must be for at least five years instead of one ) .

ssdi beneficiaries and ssi disability recipients with a mine cdr diary may request a benefits planning query ( bpqy ) statement from ssa to demonstrate to ed that their medical review is scheduled once every five to seven years .

in july 2017 , about 40% of all ssdi beneficiaries and ssi disability recipients had a mine cdr diary ( see figure 8 ) .

ssdi beneficiaries and ssi disability recipients with a medical improvement expected ( mie ) or medical improvement possible ( mip ) cdr diary may still qualify for the tpd discharge if they are determined to be totally and permanent disabled under the va method or the physician's certification method .

borrowers awarded a tpd discharge based on a determination of totally and permanently disabled under the ssa method or the physician's certification method are subject to a three - year monitoring period from the date the discharge is initially granted .

during the post - discharge monitoring period , the borrower is required to have annual earnings at or below the department of health and human services' ( hhs's ) poverty guideline for a family of two , regardless of his or her actual family size .

ed will reinstate the loan obligation if the borrower fails to meet any of the tpd discharge program's requirements during the post - discharge monitoring period .

the post - discharge monitoring period does not apply to borrowers awarded a tpd discharge based on a determination of totally and permanently disabled under the va method .

for more information on the tpd discharge program , including the monitoring period , visit http: / / www.disabilitydischarge.com .

computer matching agreements between ed and other federal agencies to improve the tpd discharge process some disability advocates and members of congress have expressed concern that the tpd discharge process is "cumbersome," in that it requires borrowers to independently determine whether they qualify for the discharge and to coordinate the sharing of information between federal agencies to verify that they meet the applicable requirements .

to address such concerns , president barack obama issued a memorandum in march 2015 that directed the secretary of education and the director of the office of management and budget ( omb ) , in consultation with the commissioner of social security , to develop a plan to proactively identity student loan borrowers who receive ssdi and determine if they qualify for the tpd discharge .

later that year , ed released a report that , among other things , advocated for the streamlining of the tpd discharge process by having federal agencies coordinate their efforts to notify borrowers automatically of their potential eligibility for the discharge .

in april 2016 , ed announced that it had conducted a data match with ssa to identify borrowers potentially eligible for the tpd discharge under the ssa method .

the match identified 387,000 ssdi beneficiaries and ssi disability recipients with a combined loan balance of over $7.7 billion .

shortly thereafter , borrowers who were positively identified in the match received a customized letter from ed's tpd servicer , nelnet , explaining their eligibility for the discharge and how to apply for it .

the number of individuals identified in the data match represented about 3% of the total ssdi beneficiary and ssi disability recipient population in july 2016 , and about 7% of the total population with a mine cdr diary that month .

according to the government accountability office ( gao ) , as of july 31 , 2016 , "tpd discharge applications were sent to about 234,000 borrowers based on the data matching and slightly more than 19,000 applications had been submitted and approved. .

in april 2018 , ed announced that it would conduct a similar data match with the va to identify borrowers potentially eligible for the tpd discharge under the va method .

recent changes to the federal income tax treatment of loans discharged under the tpd discharge program under prior law , the amount of student loan debt discharged under the tpd discharge program was included in the borrower's gross income for purposes of federal income tax in the year the discharge became final , which for borrowers approved under the ssa method or physician's certification method is at the close of the three - year monitoring period and for borrowers approved under the va method is the date that ed approves the discharge .

this resulted in some borrowers having markedly high taxable income relative to their income exclusive of the discharged student loan indebtedness for the tax year .

however , during debate on the 2017 tax revision ( p.l .

115-97 ) , the senate incorporated some of the provisions of the stop taxing death and disability act ( s. 405 ) into the legislation , which were ultimately enacted into law .

section 11031 of p.l .

115-97 excludes the amount of the discharged indebtedness under the tpd discharge from the definition of gross income for federal income tax purposes .

these new provisions apply to loans discharged during the period from january 1 , 2018 , through december 31 , 2025 .

student loan debt discharged under the tpd discharge program may still be considered income for state income tax purposes .

