the national health service corps ( nhsc ) is a clinician recruitment and retention program that aims to reduce health workforce shortages in underserved areas .

the nhsc has three components: ( 1 ) a federal scholarships program , ( 2 ) a federal loan repayment program , and ( 3 ) a state - operated loan repayment program .

under each of these programs , health providers receive either scholarships or loan repayments in exchange for a service commitment at an nhsc - approved facility located in a federally designated health professional shortage area ( hpsa , see text box ) .

participants in the state loan repayment programs may also serve in state - designated shortage areas ; federal program participants may not .

nhsc - approved facilities are generally nonprofit or government - operated ( federal , state , local , and tribal ) organizations that provide care to patients without regard for the patient's ability to pay .

the three nhsc programs are managed by the bureau of health workforce ( bhw ) in the health resources and service administration ( hrsa ) , an agency in the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

the nhsc was created by the emergency health personnel act of 1970 to provide an adequate supply of trained health providers in federally designated hpsas .

since the program's inception , congress has reauthorized and revised the program several times , with the most recent reauthorization included in the patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l .

111-148 , aca ) .

the aca permanently reauthorized the nhsc , creating , among other things , a mandatory funding stream for the program and implementing a part - time option , which allows part - time service in exchange for an extended service commitment .

this report provides an overview of the nhsc , including the program's funding , the number and types of providers the program supports , and the locations where they serve .

the nhsc consists of three programs: ( 1 ) a federal scholarships program , ( 2 ) a federal loan repayment program , and ( 3 ) a state - operated loan repayment program .

the federal scholarship program provides scholarships in exchange for a service commitment at the end of a recipient's education , including any training required before licensure .

the two loan repayment programs provide clinicians with loan repayment in exchange for an immediate service commitment .

hrsa administers the federal scholarship and loan repayment programs and provides funds to states .

states match these funds to operate state loan repayment programs .

the largest program is the federal loan repayment program , followed by the state loan repayment program , and then the scholarship program .

the section below describes these three programs .

the discussion focuses on program differences ; however , the programs share a number of common elements .

specifically , all three programs require a minimum service commitment of two years in a hpsa .

all are restricted to u.s. citizens or u.s. nationals , and all provide awards that are exempt from federal income and employment taxes .

in addition , all three programs allow physicians , dentists , physician assistants , nurse midwives , and nurse practitioners to participate , but the loan repayment programs also permit additional provider types to participate .

the three program types are described below ; table 2 presents data on the number of awards made under each of these programs .

the amount of total funds that the nhsc receives determines the number of awards that the program can make .

historically , the nhsc had been exclusively funded as part of hrsa's discretionary appropriation .

however , that is no longer the case , as the program is now funded by the mandatory community health center fund ( chcf ) .

the aca created the chcf and provided mandatory funding for it over a five - year period ( fy2011-fy2015 ) .

the fund was intended to supplement the nhsc budget ; however , from fy2012 to fy2017 , it made up the entirety of the program's funding .

the chcf was initially set to expire at the end of fy2015 ; however , it was extended for two years ( fy2016 and fy2017 ) as part of the medicare access and chip reauthorization act of 2015 ( macra , p.l .

114-10 , chip is the state children's health insurance program ) .

at the start of fy2018 , no mandatory funds had been appropriated for the nhsc ; however , a temporary extension ( p.l .

115-96 ) ultimately provided mandatory funding for the first two quarters of fy2018 , and the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( bba 2018 , p.l .

115-123 ) later provided full - year funding for fy2018 and fy2019 .

amounts provided by the chcf have also been reduced in some years as part of the mandatory spending sequester ( pursuant to the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 , as amended ) .

although the program had not received discretionary appropriations from fy2012 through fy2017 , it received $105 million in fy2018 in p.l .

115-141 , with funds directed toward supporting health care providers who provide opioid and other substance use disorder treatment in hpsas .

table 1 presents funding provided for the program between fy2011 and fy2019 — though amounts for fy2019 are subject to change .

the table also shows the percentage of funding that comes from discretionary and mandatory sources .

for fy2019 , the table shows mandatory amounts already appropriated for the program , but readers should note that the fy2019 president's budget requested providing discretionary , rather than mandatory , funding for the program in that year .

nhsc program size is measured in three ways: ( 1 ) funding , discussed above ; ( 2 ) recruitment , which is the number of awards in different categories ; and ( 3 ) field strength , which is the number of nhsc clinicians currently fulfilling their service commitments .

recruitment in a given year is generally smaller than the program's field strength because the latter includes loan repayors who are currently fulfilling their service commitments , including those who are fulfilling a second year of their service commitment , and individuals who received scholarships or s2s agreements in earlier years who have completed their required training and are currently fulfilling their service commitments .

the section below discusses recruitment and field strength .

the nhsc is made up of an increasingly diverse set of health professionals .

the composition of the nhsc has changed over time .

in fy2009 , physicians accounted for nearly 35% of providers and were the largest group of providers in the nhsc .

in contrast , in fy2016 , they made up 21% , and behavioral / mental health providers are now largest provider types .

physicians and nurse practitioners are the next largest groups of providers .

in fy2017 , the most recent year for which complete data are available , the following three professional groups made up 73% of the nhsc: mental and behavioral health providers ( 30% ) , nurse practitioners , including nurse midwives ( 23% ) , and allopathic and osteopathic physicians ( 20% ) .

figure 2 shows the nhsc's workforce by provider type in fy2017 , the most recent year for which complete data are available .

nhsc providers may serve at a number of facility types that generally focus on providing outpatient primary care to patients regardless of their ability to pay .

in addition , some nhsc provider sites generally focus on primary care , such as community mental health centers , which are more targeted to behavioral health care .

as mentioned , these facilities must be located in hpsas .

nhsc eligible sites include community mental health centers , correctional facilities , critical access hospitals , facilities funded by the indian health service ( including those operated by indian tribes , tribal organizations , and urban indian organizations ) , federal health centers ( i.e. , federally qualified health centers [fqhcs] ) , fqhc look - alikes , free clinics , rural health clinics , and school - based health centers .

nhsc providers can be placed at facilities operated by not - for - profit organizations and by government entities ( including state , local , tribal , and federally operated facilities ) .

in addition , hrsa requires that nhsc sites are part of a system of care ( eg , have after - hours arrangements for patient care ) ; have a documented record of sound fiscal management ; have a history of using nhsc providers appropriately and efficiently ; accept beneficiaries from medicare , medicaid , and chip ; have a sliding scale discount schedule ; and have general community support for assigning nhsc providers to the facility .

more than half of all nhsc providers serve at federally qualified health centers ( fqhcs ) , which provide outpatient — generally primary and behavioral — health care to disadvantaged populations regardless of their ability to pay ( see figure 3 ) .

nhsc providers also increasingly provide care at facilities funded by the indian health service , including federal , tribal , and urban indian health facilities .

as of august 2017 , 492 ( 5.4% ) providers were fulfilling their service commitment at ihs - funded facilities , an increase from the 421 providers who were placed at ihs facilities as of december 2015 .

as mentioned , nhsc providers generally fulfill their service commitment in outpatient settings .

however , some may serve at ihs - funded hospitals , and in recent years , some have fulfilled part of their service commitment ( up to 24 hours per week ) at critical access hospitals ( cahs ) , which are small hospitals located in rural areas .

as of august 2017 , 45 nhsc providers were serving at cahs .

hrsa requires that these providers split their time between inpatient services at the cah ( up to 24 hours per week ) and outpatient services at cah affiliated - outpatient clinics ( not less than 16 hours per week ) .

nhsc providers are located at hpsas throughout the united states and its territories ( see figure 4 ) .

according to 2016 data , 23% of all nhsc providers served in rural areas .

legislative efforts have also been undertaken to expand the types of sites eligible for nhsc providers , specifically targeting facilities that could provide treatment for individuals with opioid addiction .

for example , in the 115 th congress , s. 1453 would make substance use disorder treatment facilities eligible provider sites .

these facilities provide both outpatient and inpatient services , including medication - assisted treatment .

proposals to expand eligible sites may face similar challenges to proposals to expand provider types — namely that the number of sites eligible for nhsc providers exceeds the program's field strength , so adding new site types may increase the number of sites and positions that seek nhsc providers but are unable to obtain one .

the nhsc collects limited data on whether nhsc providers remain in hpsas after fulfilling their service commitments .

available data indicate that less than half ( 43% ) remain at their service site , and nearly 80% practice in a hpsa one year after their service commitment has ended .

an fy2012 study found that more than half remain in a hpsa 10 years after completing their service .

these data are similar to what hrsa found in an fy2000 evaluation of the program .

