the federal government holds a large and diverse real property portfolio that includes more than 2.8 billion square feet of building space , 496,000 structures , and 42 million acres of land .

these assets have been acquired over a period of decades to help agencies fulfill their diverse missions .

agencies own and lease buildings , for example , that provide space for offices , health clinics , warehouses , and laboratories .

as agencies' missions change over time , so , too , do their real property needs , thereby rendering some assets less useful or unneeded altogether .

health care provided by the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , for example , has shifted in recent decades from predominately hospital - based inpatient care to a greater reliance on clinics and outpatient care , with a resulting change in space needs .

similarly , the department of defense ( dod ) reduced its force since the cold war ended and has engaged in several rounds of base realignments and installation closures .

as a consequence of shifting space needs , federal agencies hold thousands of properties — particularly buildings — that they no longer need .

in fy2016 , federal agencies owned 3,120 buildings that were vacant ( unutilized ) , and another 7,859 that were partially empty ( underutilized ) .

agencies are required to dispose of unneeded space and have a range of options for disposal , including transfer to another federal agency , demolition , sale , and conveyance to a state or local government or qualified nonprofit .

federal agencies have indicated , however , that their disposal efforts are often hampered by legal and budgetary disincentives , and competing stakeholder interests .

the inability of agencies to dispose of unneeded space in a timely manner is one of the primary reasons the government accountability office ( gao ) has included real property management on its high - risk list since 2003 .

real property disposition historically has been a relatively decentralized process .

numerous federal agencies have the authority to dispose of some or all of the properties they hold .

some agencies have very broad authority to dispose of properties by any method , while others only have the authority to dispose of certain types of properties , or to only use certain disposal methods .

under this decentralized structure , agencies have identified unneeded assets and disposed of them in piecemeal fashion , often limited by the budgetary resources available for disposition activities .

the federal assets sale and transfer act of 2016 ( fasta , p.l .

114-287 ) , by contrast , requires a more centralized process , whereby disposal decisions will be based on the recommendations of a newly created board rather than individual agencies .

moreover , the board may recommend the disposal of hundreds or even thousands of properties at one time .

numerous provisions of fasta have the potential to mitigate weaknesses in the real property disposal process and enhance oversight .

there are also potential drawbacks to certain provisions , and some real property weaknesses are only tangentially addressed .

fasta primarily addresses the disposal of unneeded properties , but its objectives include reducing the government's reliance on leased space .

information comparing the cost of leasing to the cost of building or buying space might enhance oversight of long - term operating leases .

as discussed earlier in this report , one of the primary reasons gao has listed federal real property management as a high - risk area since 2003 is that the government increasingly acquires space through leases rather than by constructing or purchasing buildings .

the prospectus approval process provides congress with an opportunity to exercise oversight of gsa's lease decisions .

prior to seeking appropriations , gsa is required to obtain congressional authorization for constructing , purchasing , leasing , or renovating real property when the estimated cost of the project exceeds a given threshold .

to that end , gsa submits a prospectus to two committees — the senate committee on environment and public works and the house committee on transportation and infrastructure — for each proposal that exceeds the threshold .

the prospectus provides detailed information about the project , including its location and estimated cost .

by law , a project that exceeds the threshold may not receive appropriations unless both committees pass resolutions approving of the prospectus .

given the size of its portfolio , and its role as the procurer of space for numerous other agencies , congressional oversight of gsa's prospectus - level lease proposals has broad implications .

the usefulness of the prospectus approval process as an oversight tool , however , may be limited by the fact that gsa is not required to present data that directly compare the cost of leasing with the cost of owning space .

this means that congress may be unable to determine whether it is being asked to approve the most cost - effective option for meeting an agency's real property needs .

one option for potentially improving oversight of gsa leases would be to mandate that gsa include comparative cost data in its prospectuses .

this would not be a completely new step for gsa to take: in the 1980s and throughout the early part of the 1990s , gsa's lease prospectuses included a comparison of the costs of leasing space to constructing or buying it .

gsa discontinued reporting comparative cost data in the mid - 1990s , it said , because funding for construction and purchase alternatives was so limited that they were not considered realistic alternatives .

