the blue - slip process for u.s. circuit and district court nominations refers to a practice by the senate judiciary committee ( the committee ) for use in the confirmation of federal judges and other positions .

specifically , when a president nominates an individual to a u.s. circuit or district court judgeship , the chairman of the committee sends a blue - colored form to the senators representing the home state of the nominee .

a home state senator , if he or she has no objection to a nominee , returns the blue slip with a positive response .

if , however , a senator has some objection to the nominee and wants to prevent confirmation , he or she might decide not to return the blue slip or return it with a negative response .

recently , there have been some years in which a negative ( or unreturned ) blue slip precluded judiciary committee action on a nomination and , consequently , the nomination was not considered by the full senate .

this policy , for example , characterizes how blue slips were used during the entirety of the obama presidency and much of the george w. bush presidency — during years of unified party control , as well as during years of divided party control .

there have also been recent years , however , during which the committee's blue slip policy prevented , at times , a single senator from having an absolute veto over the fate of judicial nominees from his or her state .

these modifications generally prevented a president's nominees from being routinely blocked by senators not belonging to the president's party .

it has nonetheless been relatively rare , at least since 1981 , for the full senate to confirm judicial nominees who did not have the support of both of their home state senators .

the blue slip process is not codified in the judiciary committee's rules , and is instead a policy set by the chairman of the committee .

at times , the blue slip policy of a chair "may be different in practice than what is stated [by the chair] .

thus , determining a particular policy at any given time can be complicated because of the way blue slips are implemented. .

along these lines , this report relies on senators' statements and public news accounts as to the blue slip policy that was in place during a particular year or presidency .

additionally , because data regarding whether home state senators returned negative or positive blue slips ( or withheld a blue slip ) is not often made public , the information and analysis provided in this report is limited to that information which is publicly available regarding blue slips returned or withheld by senators .

based on available information , a president's nominees who receive at least one negative blue slip have been a relatively small percentage of those he nominates to the federal bench .

recently , during the 115 th congress , several senators have commented on whether or how the blue slip policy should be changed from the most recent policy that was in place during the 114 th congress and other recent congresses .

some of the issues discussed by senators include whether the judiciary committee should move forward on a judicial nomination if it receives at least one negative blue slip from a nominee's home state senator ; what constitutes adequate consultation between the president and home state senators during the pre - nomination phase of selecting a judicial nominee ; and whether u.s. circuit court nominations should be subject to blue slips in the same manner as district court nominations .

the purpose of this report is to provide historical information and analysis as to how blue slips have been used in the past for judicial nominations , with a focus on the various blue slip policies used during recent presidencies .

this report also discusses potential changes that might occur in the senate and in the confirmation process for judicial nominees if there is a lesser role for home state senators in approving some , or all , of a president's judicial nominees from their respective states .

this report does not take a position on whether the blue slip policy should be modified from the current policy of requiring two positive blue slips for a nomination or make recommendations about the issues discussed herein .

the precise date on which the judiciary committee first used the blue slip procedure is not known .

prior crs research conducted at the national archives suggests that the blue slip procedure began sometime in the mid - to late 1910s during the chairmanship of senator charles a. culberson of texas .

the first known appearance of the blue slip is from the 65 th congress ( 1917-18 ) .

at the time , senator culberson was chairman of the judiciary committee , a role he served in from the 63 rd through the 66 th congress ( i.e. , from 1913 through 1919 ) .

the documentary evidence from this time period suggests that senator culberson may have created the blue slip .

from the 65 th congress onward nearly every judicial nominee's file includes a blue slip .

prior to this period , the files of judicial nominees reveal no evidence of blue slips .

judiciary committee materials at the national archives do not provide a specific explanation for the creation of the blue slip .

the historical and political context , however , in which the blue slip was first used might help illuminate the rationale for its early use .

for instance , although the white house and senate were both controlled by the democrats in 1917 , there was nonetheless periodic tension between the two branches .

consequently , inter - branch relations may have been a factor in the blue slip's creation .

the first known example of a senator using a blue slip to oppose a judicial nomination was in 1917 during the 65 th congress .

president woodrow wilson had nominated u.v .

whipple to a judgeship for the southern district of georgia .

senator thomas w. hardwick returned a negative blue slip , stating "i object to this appointment — the same is personally offensive and objectionable to me , and i cannot consent to the confirmation of the nominee. .

at that time , a negative blue slip did not necessarily prevent committee action on a nomination .

as such , whipple's nomination was reported , albeit adversely , to the full senate .

the nomination was rejected by the senate without a recorded vote on april 23 , 1917 .

from 1917 to 1955 the blue slip was used "to merely request the opinion of senators , regardless of political party , about judicial nominations in their home - states.... no chair of the judiciary committee allowed even one negative blue slip to automatically veto a nomination. .

in contrast , from 1956 through 1978 — under the chairmanship of senator james o. eastland — a nominee was required to receive two positive blue slips from his home state senators before the nomination was to be considered by the committee .

during this period , which encompassed both unified and divided party control of the presidency and the senate , if a home state senator had some objection to the nominee and wanted to stop committee action , he or she could decide not to return the blue slip or return it with a negative response .

under such circumstances the withholding of a blue slip or a single negative response would halt all further action on a nomination .

since 1979 , the blue slip policy used the judiciary committee has varied .

the remainder of the report focuses on the period since 1979 , with an emphasis on discussing the policies used during recent presidencies .

there have been recent years when the blue slip policy used by the senate judiciary committee stopped consideration of any nomination for which a home state senator did not return a positive blue slip .

when this is the committee's policy , a home state senator's opposition to a judicial nomination through use of a negative or withheld blue slip prevents it from being reported out of committee ( in effect , preventing the nomination from being approved by the full senate ) , unless the senator can be persuaded to drop his or her opposition to the nomination .

there have also been recent years during which the policy of the judiciary committee has been to allow , in some instances , committee consideration of a judicial nomination that received a negative blue slip , or no blue slip , from one or both of the nominee's home state senators ( as long as the president has consulted with a nominee's home state senators ) .

this type of policy has been used to prevent home state senators from having a "veto" over the fate of a nominee from his or her state .

consequently , when such a policy has been in effect , a senator's negative blue slip , or failure to return a positive slip , did not always foreclose the possibility of the committee reporting the nomination to the senate — as occurred on five occasions during the 108 th congress .

it likely did , however , at least , draw the committee's attention to the concerns of the home state senator and to the question of what degree of courtesy the members of the committee owe that senator's concerns .

while the specific blue slip policy used by the judiciary committee has varied over the years , a consistent principle throughout has been the importance of consultation between a president and the senate in the judicial selection process .

during this process , one of the key considerations of many senators , including committee chairmen and senators in the minority party , is that they have the opportunity to consult with a president regarding potential nominees for u.s. circuit and district court vacancies associated with their states .

past chairmen of the judiciary committee , regardless of political party , have emphasized the need for consultation and inter - branch cooperation between a president and home state senators in considering potential u.s. circuit and district court nominees .

in 1989 , senator biden stated that "i have long emphasized the need for consultation , which , in my view , is part of the 'advice' component of the senate's advice and consent responsibility under the constitution .

i believe that the nomination process will function more effectively if consultation is taken seriously. .

senator hatch , in 2001 , stated that "the senate expects genuine good faith consultation by the administration with home state senators before a judicial nomination is made , and the administration's failure to consult in genuine good faith with both home state senators is grounds for a senator's return of a negative blue slip. .

and , in 2009 , senator leahy noted that requiring "the support of home state senators is a traditional mechanism to encourage the white house to engage in meaningful consultation with the senate. .

the lack of consultation between a president and home state senators has , at times , resulted in nominees not being considered by the judiciary committee .

the importance of consultation has also been emphasized by other senators , more generally .

for example , in 2009 , 41 republican senators submitted a letter to president obama , emphasizing that , the process of federal appointments is a shared constitutional responsibility .

we respect your responsibility to nominate suitable candidates for the federal bench .

and as a former colleague , we know you appreciate the senate's unique constitutional responsibility to provide or withhold its advice and consent on nominations .

the principle of senatorial consultation ( or senatorial courtesy ) is rooted in this special responsibility , and its application dates to the administration of george washington .

democrats and republicans have acknowledged the importance of maintaining this principle , which allows individual senators to provide valuable insights into their constituents' qualifications for federal service .

additionally , during the presidency of george w. bush , the nine democratic senators on the judiciary committee submitted a letter to the administration emphasizing the need for consultation between the white house and senators belonging to the minority .

the letter stated that , as you know , there has been a long history of consultation between the white house and the senate on potential nominations .

the senate's recent practice fully recognized that the interests of senators in judicial nominations are not limited to those in the same political party as the president .

with an evenly divided senate , we think it is of utmost importance that the administration coordinate closely with democrats in the senate , especially those from the home state of potential nominees and those on the judiciary committee .

there has not been a past blue slip policy used by the judiciary committee that explicitly ( or formally ) distinguished between u.s. circuit and district court nominations .

as discussed above , senators have traditionally had less of a role in recommending circuit court nominations — but this is a distinct question from whether a past blue slip policy formally treated circuit court nominations differently from district court nominations .

at least one past chairman of the judiciary committee , however , has suggested that a negative blue slip from a home state senator might not be as consequential for circuit court nominations .

senator hatch stated , in 2003 , that "i'll give great weight to negative blue slips , but you can't have one senator holding up , for instance , circuit nominees. .

several senators have stated that perhaps the committee's blue slip policy should distinguish between circuit court and district court nominations .

circuit court nominations , they argue , are distinct from district court nominations in that the former are for regional appellate courts with jurisdiction over more than one state .

another argument in favor of distinguishing between the two types of judgeships is that senators have traditionally exercised less influence over who a president selects for a circuit court vacancy than for a district court vacancy — and that a blue slip policy ought to recognize this difference .

other senators have suggested , however , that the committee's blue slip policy should not distinguish between circuit and district court nominations .

one argument against treating the two types of nominations differently is that it might cede too much institutional power to a president , regardless of his party affiliation .

the selection process might also become more heavily influenced by interest groups at the expense of a particular state's legal community .

relatedly , treating the nominations differently might infringe upon the use of existing bipartisan processes already established in some states for identifying potential circuit court nominees .

during the 114 th and other recent congresses , the blue slip policy used by the judiciary committee enabled a home state senator to block committee consideration of u.s. circuit and district court nominations that he or she considered objectionable .

the blue slip policy , however , has changed over time and may change at some point during the current presidency , or during a future one , in ways that reduce the role of home state senators in the blue slip process for u.s. circuit and district court nominations .

a blue slip policy that lessens or eliminates the ability of home state senators to block , at least occasionally , judicial nominees they oppose might have consequences for the senate as an institution , as well as consequences for the judicial confirmation process itself .

these consequences could exist beyond the presidency and congress during which any change in the blue slip process occurs .

some of the potential consequences may be viewed by some observers as adverse , while other potential consequences may be viewed by some observers as beneficial — the discussion below considers each in turn .

restricting or eliminating the role of home state senators in the blue slip process used by the judiciary committee could diminish the likelihood that consultation would occur between a president and home state senators during the pre - nomination stage of selecting a nominee for a vacancy .

as one scholar has observed , "without a blue slip policy , a president may very well have little incentive to consult with the senate and its members would be cut out of the pre - nomination process. .

the reinterpretation of senate rule xxii ( discussed further below ) , combined with any future change in the judiciary committee's blue slip policy , could further lessen the likelihood of a president consulting in a meaningful way with home state senators , particularly those not belonging to the president's political party .

additionally , if there is little incentive to consult with home state senators , a president — of either party — may also be more likely to submit nominees who are considered by one side or the other as ideologically extreme , lacking in professional qualifications , or not widely supported by the legal community in his or her home state .

traditionally , if a committee chair allowed committee action to proceed on a nomination that did not have the support of one or both home state senators — and the nomination was reported by the committee to the full senate — there was the option available to those senators ( or others ) to request a hold to block , at least temporarily , the nomination from being considered .

home state senators could also require cloture to be invoked on the nomination , by a three - fifths supermajority of senators voting , in order for an "up - or - down" roll call vote to occur on the nomination .

given , however , the reinterpretation of senate rule xxii in 2013 ( and the continued applicability of that reinterpretation during the 115 th congress ) , the vote threshold by which cloture is invoked on u.s. circuit and district court nominations is now a simple majority of those senators voting on a cloture motion ( rather than a three - fifths supermajority of those senators voting ) .

consequently , home state senators , of either party , might have fewer institutional tools at their disposal in stopping judicial nominations that they consider objectionable when such nominations are reported by the judiciary committee .

as a result , this could lead to a greater number of judicial nominees receiving life - time appointments without the support of one or both home state senators .

given that relatively few nominees have been confirmed without the support of one or both of their home state senators , this would represent a historically notable change in the confirmation process for u.s. circuit and district court nominees .

a blue slip policy that diminishes or eliminates the role of home state senators , particularly those not belonging to the president's political party , might increase — especially during periods of unified party control — the frequency by which a president's nominees are approved in the senate by party - line or near party - line votes .

while partisanship has sometimes had a role in how senators vote on a president's judicial nominees , the roll call votes taken to appoint individuals to federal judgeships could become reflexively more partisan — even for those nominees considered non - controversial — if home state senators and their colleagues in the minority use the vote on a nomination to express their dissatisfaction with the process by which a nominee was selected ( rather than as an assessment of the nominee's qualifications to be a judge , as has historically been most commonly the case ) .

it is also possible that the confirmation process could become lengthier if a senator withholds unanimous consent from senate consideration of a u.s. circuit or district court nomination and , consequently , the nomination is subject to the cloture process .

there are other potential consequences to changing the blue slip process that might be considered beneficial or desirable , particularly from the perspective of a president ( regardless of his party ) and his supporters in the senate — these potential consequences are discussed below .

if the role of home state senators is restricted or eliminated by a change to the blue slip policy , the pre - nomination selection process , as well as committee action on circuit or district court nominations , might become more efficient or occur more quickly .

in the past , a blue slip policy that provided a home state senator with the prerogative to block a nominee he or she considered objectionable , at least initially , might have lengthened the time from nomination to final action for some of a president's judicial nominees .

this may have occurred even for nominees who were considered non - controversial and who were ultimately approved by the senate .

additionally , from the perspective of a president , regardless of his political party , his supporters in the senate , and the nominees themselves , it might be desirable that the nomination is more quickly reported to the full senate for consideration .

it might be the case that a blue slip policy that lessens or eliminates the role of home state senators leads to a greater number of a president's judicial nominees being confirmed by the senate .

a single senator , for example , might no longer be able to block senate consideration of a nominee based on personal or political reasons .

additionally , for any nominee who has the support of one home state senator , but not the other , a nominee might nonetheless be confirmed by the senate .

a president , as well as some senators , might view a blue slip policy that gives a home state senator the prerogative to block objectionable nominees as infringing on the president's constitutional power to select judges ( or as an unacceptable tool used by senators to extract unreasonable concessions from a president ) .

consequently , a policy that lessens or eliminates the role of home state senators and leads to an increase in the number of a president's judicial nominees confirmed by the senate , might be viewed by some observers as consistent with a president's constitutional prerogatives .

limiting the role of home state senators in the blue slip process might decrease the number of long - lasting judicial vacancies .

if a committee's blue slip policy provides a home state senator with the ability to block a president's judicial nominees from his or her state , a disagreement between the president and one or both home state senators can create a political and institutional stalemate that potentially lasts for years ( including beyond a single presidency ) .

by contrast , if a home state senator does not have the ability to block a nomination by either returning a negative blue slip or withholding a blue slip , it might be less likely that such stalemates arise in the first place — and , as a result , such long - lasting vacancies might become less common .

