the u.s. electric grid consists of over 700,000 miles of transmission lines and over 55,000 substations linking over 7,000 power plants to around 150 million customers .

likewise , the u.s. energy pipeline network is composed of over 2.9 million miles of pipeline transporting natural gas , oil , and hazardous liquids ; the natural gas transmission pipelines feed approximately 1,400 local distribution systems serving over 67 million customers .

these vast networks comprise the critical backbone of u.s. energy supply , supporting the vast majority of u.s. economic activity and playing a vital role in national defense .

consequently , the secure operation of both the power grid and pipelines are national priorities .

while physical threats to the u.s. power grid and pipelines have long worried policymakers , cyber threats to the computer systems that operate this critical infrastructure are an increasing concern .

especially over the past decade , cyber threats against energy infrastructure have grown in frequency and severity .

while most of these threats have been against the electric subsector , pipeline systems have also faced growing risk to their information communications technology .

both the departments of energy and homeland security have been directed to assess impacts of a cyberattack against the energy sector .

furthermore , with ever greater physical interdependency between electricity generators and the natural gas pipelines which supply their fuel , many in congress recognize that grid and pipeline cybersecurity are intertwined .

the department of energy ( doe ) is the lead agency for the protection of electric power , oil , and natural gas infrastructure — cooperating with the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , the lead agency for pipelines .

doe's energy sector cybersecurity activities are led primarily by its office of electricity delivery and energy reliability ( oe ) .

in 2015 , the fixing america's surface transportation act ( the fast act ) provided the secretary of energy with additional authority to order measures to protect or restore the reliability of the power grid during a grid security emergency , including "a malicious act using electronic communication. .

the 115 th congress is considering additional legislation to fund and expand doe's cybersecurity programs , including appropriations in the defense , military construction , veterans affairs , legislative branch , and energy and water development national security appropriations act , 2018 ( h.r .

3219 ) and the energy and water development and related agencies appropriations act , 2018 ( s. 1609 ) .

the energy and natural resources act of 2017 ( s. 1460 ) and the enhancing state energy security planning and emergency preparedness act of 2017 ( h.r .

3050 ) would authorize additional doe funding for cybersecurity research and assistance to states , respectively .

this report examines the energy sector cybersecurity program administered by doe's office of electricity delivery and energy reliability as it applies to the electric power and pipelines subsectors .

the report summarizes risks to the computer - based control systems used in these subsectors , threats to those systems , and recent cyberattacks .

the report reviews the legislative authorities and policy guidance that have directed oe's cybersecurity program and its activities , including its relationship to the national laboratories and other federal agencies with cybersecurity roles .

the report concludes with a discussion of key policy issues for congress .

federal security officials and industry analysts have long identified the grid and pipelines in the united states as potential targets for intentional disruption , although the nature and degree of cyber risk has been steadily evolving .

for example , a 2011 dhs pipeline threat assessment concluded that "terrorist groups have discussed attacks on unspecified [supervisory control and data acquisition] systems , but it is uncertain whether al - qa'ida or any other group has the capability to conduct a successful cyberattack on these systems. .

however , in 2016 , the president of the association of oil pipe lines testified before a congressional committee that cybersecurity threats to pipelines were increasing and that "there is a great concern about … being prepared for cyber attacks" in the pipeline industry .

in january 2017 , the doe similarly concluded that "cybersecurity is a particular concern for national and homeland security.… malicious cyber activity against the electricity system and its suppliers is growing in sophistication. .

while the threat of terrorist groups seeking to employ cyber tools against critical infrastructure persists , terrorist organizations have not yet demonstrated a capability to attack u.s. critical infrastructure in this manner .

generally , the electricity grid and energy pipelines are under the same types of cybersecurity risks as other industries , such as financial services or transportation .

however , different adversaries may choose to employ similar cyber tools to focus on different targets at different moments in time based on their unique motivations .

cybersecurity risks thus reflect both general threats to the energy sector as a whole and specific threats to industrial control systems as the focus of attack .

doe has authority and responsibilities for the cybersecurity of energy delivery systems from both presidential action memoranda and law .

a chronologic perspective provides some insight on how energy security policy has evolved .

as noted above , the doe's energy delivery cybersecurity activities are led by its office of electricity delivery and energy reliability ( oe ) within the office of the under secretary for science and energy .

a 2008 oe report stated that "oe's mission is to advance technology — in partnership with industry , government , academia , and the public — to meet america's need for a reliable , efficient , and resilient electric power grid. .

according to the agency's website , a current "top priority" for oe is: to make the nation's electric power grid and oil and natural gas infrastructure resilient to cyber threats.… the vision of oe's cybersecurity program is that , by 2020 , resilient energy delivery systems are designed , installed , operated , and maintained to survive a cyber incident while sustaining critical functions .

this vision and the oe programs supporting it are intended to align closely with the 2011 roadmap to achieve energy delivery systems cybersecurity with an apparent focus on electric power , as discussed below .

on july 27 , 2017 , the house passed the defense , military construction , veterans affairs , legislative branch , and energy and water development national security appropriations act , 2018 ( h.r .

3219 ) , providing appropriations for doe for the fiscal year ending september 30 , 2018 .

the bill would appropriate $218,500,000 for oe , available until expended , except for $27,500,000 to be available until september 30 , 2019 for program direction ( title iii ) .

the corresponding senate bill , the energy and water development and related agencies appropriations act , 2018 ( s. 1609 ) , reported by the committee on appropriations on july 20 , 2017 , would appropriate $213,141,000 for oe , available until expended , except for $27,000,000 to be available until september 30 , 2019 for program direction ( title iii ) .

cybersecurity of energy infrastructure is addressed in title ii of s. 1460 , the energy and natural resources act of 2017 .

although titled "enhanced grid security," section 2002 of the bill also addresses security for other energy infrastructure .

it would establish a program for energy sector cybersecurity rd&d to be carried out by doe , in consultation with other agencies , states , and the energy sector , for advanced applications to identify and mitigate cyber vulnerabilities .

a key focus would be on the interdependencies of critical infrastructure sectors .

the bill would authorize appropriations of $65 million for each fiscal year from fy2018 through fy2026 for the program .

the cybersecurity of devices and third - party control systems in the supply chain would also be a central focus of the proposed rd&d efforts .

the bill would authorize appropriations of $65 million for each fiscal year from fy2018 through fy2026 for the program .

additionally , s. 1460 would require doe to provide operational support for a cyber - resilience program , to enhance and periodically test the emergency response capabilities of doe and the electricity sector information sharing and analysis center and their ability to monitor the status of the energy sector .

the bill would authorize appropriations of $10 million for each fiscal year from fy2018 through fy2026 for this program .

doe would also develop modeling and risk assessment tools for a cyber - resilience program to secure energy networks , including electric , natural gas , and oil exploration , transmission , and delivery .

the bill would authorize appropriations of $10 million for each fiscal year from fy2018 through fy2026 for the development of tools to advance energy sector security risk management and resiliency from human threats and natural hazards ( including electromagnetic pulse and geomagnetic disturbances ) programs .

under the provisions in s. 1460 , the proposed programs would need to leverage existing programs and be consistent with goals of the 2011 roadmap to achieve energy delivery systems cybersecurity for developing a resilient energy sector infrastructure by 2020 .

on july 18 , 2017 , the house passed the enhancing state energy security planning and emergency preparedness act of 2017 ( h.r .

3050 ) , which would authorize doe to provide states $90 million in financial assistance annually through fy2022 to assess cybersecurity threats to energy infrastructure , among other possible uses of funding .

the act would offer governors information and technical assistance in the development , implementation , or revision of a state energy security plan .

supporting such plans , especially with respect to cybersecurity , could fall under oe's purview .

several key issues related to oe's energy delivery cybersecurity program have been included in legislative proposals or have otherwise been the subject of congressional oversight and debate .

these issues are summarized below .

the trump administration's fy2018 budget request for oe appropriations was $123 million , approximately 41% less than the agency's estimated direct obligations of $208 million in fy2017 .

within oe , the budget request would fund cybersecurity for energy delivery systems at $42 million compared to an estimated $62 million in fy2017 , a reduction of approximately 32% .

given recent assertions by federal agencies ( including doe ) and the private sector about an increase in energy sector cybersecurity risks , some analysts have expressed concern about this proposed reduction in oe's cybersecurity budget .

as noted above , the house and senate appropriations bills would fund oe at $218.5 million and $213.1 million , respectively , both an increase from fy2017 funding .

if oe's appropriation is enacted above its current level , the agency presumably could continue its current cybersecurity program on its current trajectory — and potentially fund some additional cybersecurity activities if they emerge as agency priorities .

additional authorizations under s. 1460 and h.r .

3050 , if enacted and funded , would significantly expand resources for doe's energy delivery cybersecurity initiatives beyond historical levels .

given the ever - changing cybersecurity environment in the energy sector , congress may continue to examine oe's cybersecurity resources to ensure that they are adequate and being deployed appropriately to address the most important energy delivery risks .

as discussed earlier , the fast act includes a variety of provisions concerning the general security of energy systems .

these provisions include considerations for cyber as well as physical attacks and electromagnetic pulse attacks .

the provisions include requirements for the secretary of energy to examine the strategic transformer reserve , coordinate energy sector security as the ssa , and prepare for energy supply disruptions .

congress may consider how effectively doe is implementing the law , and whether additional authorities or changes to the law may be needed .

the fast act does not require the doe inspector general ( ig ) , the comptroller general , or another agency to review the implementation of doe's authorities and its progress in carrying out the direction of congress .

however , congress may still oversee doe's efforts by holding hearings , requiring new reports from the ig or comptroller general , or requesting specific reports or information from the agency itself .

with doe - provided or independently provided information , congress may have a more - informed basis for considering whether to adjust the provisions of the fast act or clarify , expand , or contract the authorizations it contains .

the operational interdependency of the electric power and natural gas sectors , especially with respect to reliability and cybersecurity , has been a growing concern among many federal agencies , members of congress , and industry groups .

the second installment of doe's quadrennial energy review ( qer ) , published in january 2017 , states that the electricity sector's increasing reliance on natural gas raises serious concerns regarding the need to secure natural gas pipelines against emerging cybersecurity threats .

thus , the adequacy of cybersecurity protections for natural gas pipelines directly impacts the reliability and security of the electric system .

among its recommendations , the qer calls for assessment of natural gas and electricity infrastructure interdependencies to cybersecurity protection .

likewise , some members of congress have expressed concern about the increased interdependency of electric power and natural gas in the security context .

the president of nerc reportedly also has expressed concern about the possibility of multiple natural gas facilities being intentionally disrupted , and the associated effects on the electric system .

executive order 13636 ( §9 ) directs dhs , in consultation with the ssas ( eg , doe ) and other relevant agencies , to examine and identify critical infrastructure at risk of causing a catastrophic impact due to a cybersecurity incident .

it is not clear , however , whether the required risk analysis would only account for direct impacts to an infrastructure experiencing a cyberattack , or would include impacts to infrastructure with which it is interdependent .

while a single electric or natural gas facility may not meet the criteria to be considered critical and vulnerable to a catastrophic cyber disruption , it is possible that the combination of direct and indirect impacts could elevate the potential risks associated with that facility .

how oe's cybersecurity programs and expertise in energy delivery systems could best be used to inform such analysis may be of interest to congress .

in addition to doe , other federal agencies , notably ferc and dhs ( particularly tsa ) , state regulators , and energy companies have roles and responsibilities for the cybersecurity of the energy sector .

however , federal coordination for sector cybersecurity appears fragmented among these entities depending on the nature of a given scenario .

for instance , dhs is the lead for overall critical infrastructure protection and national cybersecurity incident coordination ; it also has statutory authority to regulate pipeline security .

however , doe is the ssa for the energy sector , part of which is regulated by ferc and state agencies .

additionally , it is the private sector which adopts trade practices for ics technology and contracts with ics vendors for cybersecurity products and services .

the effect of the dispersed cybersecurity responsibility at the federal level has been the subject of congressional interest , but has not been studied to understand the effect on all energy cybersecurity stakeholders .

congress may examine how oe's cybersecurity activities fit in , and coordinate with , the other various roles in energy cybersecurity for electricity , oil and natural gas pipelines , and other related energy infrastructure .

in particular , congress may examine how oe's rd&d programs and other work with the national labs in electric power sector cybersecurity supports federal and private sector efforts in pipeline cybersecurity .

