the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) operates several programs that supplement the incomes of farmers and ranchers in times of low farm prices and helps them to manage risks associated with natural disasters and with variability in crop and pasture yields and commodity prices .

these programs — referred to as the "farm safety net" — include three components: federal crop insurance , farm revenue support programs , and agricultural disaster assistance .

over the years substantial federal resources have been spent in support of the farm safety net .

much of this spending has gone to a small group of field crops .

within this group of field crops , there has been significant variation in both absolute and relative levels of historical farm support .

the 2014 farm bill ( agricultural act of 2014 , p.l .

113-79 ) changed the structure of several safety - net programs ; however , important differences in commodity - specific funding persist .

in their june 2017 baseline projections of usda program outlays through 2027 , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) projects disparities in payments and relative support levels across program crops .

cbo's june projections are described in a lay - friendly study released by f armdoc d aily on july 14 , 2017 .

in the farmdocdaily study , when combined farm safety - net payments ( excluding federal crop insurance premium subsidies ) are expressed on a per - acre basis , peanuts receive the highest support rate with an average of $288 per acre .

rice receives the second - highest per - acre rate at $135 per acre .

the average annual payment rate for all other program crops is below $30 per acre .

the cbo projections are looking forward in years yet to come .

in contrast , this report uses actual historical data to construct a series of charts and tables that provide information on the distribution of commodity - specific outlays under the farm safety - net programs of the 2014 farm bill during its first three years of operation ( 2014 through 2016 ) .

this information is intended to provide statistical context for evaluating the distribution of current farm program payments .

this report does not assess the merit or fairness of this distribution , nor does it evaluate the social welfare outcome of federal farm payments .

the first section of this report briefly describes the u.s. agricultural sector relative to usda farm programs .

the second section discusses why an understanding of commodity - specific support has merit .

the third section summarizes the specific federal programs involved in the farm safety net — which crops are eligible for payments and whether payments are coupled with , or decoupled from , actual production .

the fourth section of this report uses a series of charts to compare commodity - specific outlays that have occurred during the first three years of the 2014 farm bill using several different measures .

the final section compares the relative levels of market price protection provided by marketing assistance loan rates and price loss coverage ( plc ) reference prices — all of which are fixed in statute — among program crops and relative to recent market conditions .

although significant differences in support across program crops are revealed , this report does not assess the merit or fairness of such differences .

several supplementary data tables are included at the end of the report and referenced throughout the text .

u.s. agricultural production value has averaged $385.1 billion during the first three years ( 2014 through 2016 ) of the 2014 farm bill ( table 1 ) .

field crops eligible for usda revenue support programs ( discussed later in this report ) have accounted for $115.7 billion , or 30% of the total .

when combined with milk production — milk is eligible for potential federal payments under the margin protection program ( mpp ) — the average value of program commodity production is $155.5 billion and represents 40.3% of u.s. agricultural production .

the remaining nearly 60% of u.s. agricultural production is not eligible for usda revenue support programs but is potentially eligible for either disaster assistance or crop insurance .

while federal agricultural policy may have specific national goals — such as ensuring abundant agricultural output and safeguarding america's agricultural resources — when the supporting program outlays vary significantly across eligible crops , there is potential for unintended policy consequences .

in particular , when farm program payments are linked to specific crops , they can influence relative market incentives and resource allocations .

the stronger the payment - to - crop linkage , the greater the potential for producers to alter their crop choices based on the relative likelihood of program payments .

also , significant differences in support levels across program crops may have strong regional or geographic implications , because not all agricultural activities may be undertaken successfully in all agro - climatic settings , as these vary widely across the united states .

finally , the size of annual u.s. farm program outlays increases the potential severity of any unintended consequences .

usda's three farm safety - net components are funded through two principal entities within the usda: the ccc and the fcic .

only farm safety - net outlays that can be linked to specific crops are included in the charts and data tables of this report , with the exception of figure 1 , which examines all farm safety - net outlays — commodity - and non - commodity - specific — since 1996 .

the commodity - specific data exclude ccc outlays on conservation , trade , renewable energy , rural development , farm credit , and other general farm programs .

also excluded are ccc disaster assistance outlays that focus on livestock , tree crops , and orchards rather than farm program commodities .

similarly , fcic outlays for the annual administration and delivery costs of private insurers and the costs associated with sharing the underwriting risk with private insurers are not included .

the commodity - specific programs funded by the ccc and fcic are briefly described in the following two sections .

the outlays across programs and by commodities are summarized in table 4 , table 5 , and table 6 and discussed later in this report in " comparison of farm safety - net program outlays . .

from 1996 through 2017 , total outlays for farm safety - net programs ( including non - commodity - specific spending ) were on average $16 billion per year including $8.6 billion for commodity programs , $2.5 billion for disaster assistance , and $4.9 billion for crop insurance ( figure 1 ) .

after removing the non - commodity - specific outlays , the remaining commodity - specific outlays for that same period averaged $12.3 billion per year , including $8.6 billion for revenue support programs and $3.8 billion for crop insurance premium subsidies ( figure 2 ) .

usda commodity programs operate counter - cyclically to commodity prices: payments increase when commodity prices fall below support levels and decline when prices rise .

in contrast , federal crop insurance outlays are pro - cyclical to commodity prices: liability , premiums , and federal support outlays increase or decrease with commodity prices .

as a result of their opposing cyclical behavior , ccc and fcic outlays tend to counter - balance each other .

between 2006 through 2013 , ccc - funded program outlays declined while fcic support for crop insurance expanded .

this shift was primarily the result of market conditions and the associated rise in commodity prices that occurred during that same period ( figure 3 ) rather than a change in policy .

since 2014 , farm prices have again turned downward and ccc outlays have increased relative to fcic outlays .

the development of the farm safety net — and the establishment of commodity price protection levels inherent in target prices — is the result of a process that involves the voice of concerned citizens and consumers , lobbying activities by stakeholder groups , political pressures , and inputs from the research community and other experts .

with respect to stakeholders , the various industry , trade , and producer groups that represent the major program crops have seen their cost structures increase substantially since 2006 as higher commodity prices and competing uses have bid up the price of important inputs such as land , fertilizer , and seed .

they have also seen increased competition resulting from trade agreements and the integration of china , india , and brazil into the global agricultural markets .

several extreme weather events , such as the widespread u.s. drought of 2012 , have also occurred .

these many factors imply that the large capital investments needed to operate a farm are subject to substantial underlying risk .

as a result , many commodity interest groups argue for an expanded safety net with a revenue support target that does not shift dramatically following any single market event .

ultimately , many farm groups point to cops as the relevant reference point for setting target prices .

in contrast , economists john groenewegen and kenneth clayton argued in 1982 that "the level of price support should be established below trend market prices. .

one can think of the trend market price as reflecting the long - term equilibrium market price .

the logic of providing a "safety net" may be used to set support prices at some level below the long - term equilibrium price .

currently , the law specifies fixed support levels under plc and mal without consideration for market price trends .

paraphrasing from groenewegen and clayton , trend market prices as a reference point should not cause the support program to attract additional resources into the sector but would provide a cash flow to farmers when market prices deviate substantially and temporarily below trend levels .

possibly in recognition of this logic , the last time that usda proposed a farm bill to congress in january 2007 , it suggested that mal rates be set at 85% of the five - year olympic average market price for covered crops , with maximum loan rates as established in the house - passed version of the 2002 farm bill ( h.r .

2419 , 110 th congress ) .

the wto dispute settlement ruling against u.s. cotton programs in 2005 further suggested that by giving price support levels a market context , as suggested by the formulation of a moving average , they would be more likely to be found in compliance with wto rules .

how do current support prices vary across major program crops in comparison to market price trends ? .

this is evaluated by three different measures .

first , support prices ( mal loan rates and plc reference prices ) are compared with average farm prices under the 2014 farm bill .

then , the level of "price protection" provided under the mal and plc programs is measured as the percent of monthly farm price observations below the mal loan rates and plc reference prices established under the 2014 farm bill for each program crop .

an extended nine - year period from january 2008 through may 2017 — intended to reflect long - term market conditions — is used to evaluate this second measure .

finally , monthly market price data are used to evaluate the policy parameters needed to obtain equal levels of price protection across program crops since january 2008 .

mal loan rates and plc reference prices are expressed as a percentage of monthly average farm prices ( mafps ) under the 2014 farm bill ( 2014 through 2016 ) ( see also table 5 ) .

a comparison , by commodity , of mafps with mal loan rates provides a general sense of the level of relative price protection across program crops ( figure 16 ) for the crop years 2014 through 2016 .

upland cotton and rice prices are evaluated against monthly averages of their respective awps .

the mal program does not use monthly prices as a basis for payments but rather weekly awps for cotton and rice and daily posted county prices for the other program crops .

using a monthly national average price data smooths out daily ( or weekly ) and regional variation from the market price data and provides only a general approximation for how often a commodity has been eligible for mal benefits .

however , mafp and awp data is readily available and facilitates ease of comparison for this exercise .

the mal loan rates for program crops range between 29% and 99% of the mafps or awps .

upland cotton , peanuts , and oats appear to have loan rates that are higher compared with their awps or mafps during the 2014-2016 period , whereas loan rates for barley , chickpeas , mustard seed , and rapeseed are lower as a percentage of monthly prices .

similarly , a comparison , by commodity , of mafps with plc reference prices provides a general sense of the level of relative price support across program crops ( figure 17 ) .

the plc program uses 12-month season average farm prices ( safps ) to calculate the level of payments ( if any ) , rather than monthly prices .

as a result , a comparison of the monthly market price with the plc reference prices captures more variation than would occur with an annual average .

thus , it provides an indicator of the level of counter - cyclical income support provided across program crops — not of potential payments across crops .

the reference price for peanuts represents 131% of mafps .

canola ranks second behind peanuts at 123% .

about half of the program crops — including soybeans , barley , and all pulse crops — have plc reference prices that are less than their average farm prices .

the frequency with which monthly awps or mafps fall below the loan rate suggests how often a particular commodity is eligible for mal benefits .

when the marketing loan rate is above the market's equilibrium price , it acts as a floor or support price .

similarly , the frequency that mafps fall below the plc reference price represents a measure of the price protection provided by the plc program .

to evaluate program price protection under the mal and plc programs , an extended data period — january 2008 through may 2017 — is used to provide a larger , more representative sample of the underlying market conditions and to avoid the price effects that might occur during any single year .

the current set of mal loan rates were initially established under the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) and have not been adjusted to reflect the rise in market prices that occurred from 2006 through 2013 ( figure 3 ) .

as a result , market prices have been consistently above mal loan rates for most program crops since january 2008 .

only upland cotton had prices ( awps ) that fell below its loan rate — in 8% of the observations — during the period ( figure 18 and table 2 ) .

the data period ( january 2008 to may 2017 ) includes the three years of 2011-2013 , when farm prices sustained record or near - record highs for most program crops .

because this three - year period of sustained high prices immediately preceded the 2014 farm bill , it likely played a role in the establishment of relatively high plc reference prices when compared to the counter - cyclical payment ( ccp ) program target prices from the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) .

the percentage of mafps falling below the plc reference price during the reference period ( january 2008 to may 2017 ) varies from 0% for soybeans to 78% for peanuts ( figure 18 and table 2 ) .

in other words , no plc payments would have been made over the data period on soybean base acres , whereas monthly peanut farm prices were below their reference price of $26.75 per cwt .

 ( 78% of the data period ) .

in addition , 58% of canola prices were below their plc reference price .

for the remaining program crops , mafps were below their respective plc reference prices for 34% to 42% of the observations .

one potential approach to establishing parity of relative price protection across program crops would be to adjust each crop's respective mal loan rate or plc reference price until an equal portion of monthly farm price observations is below the adjusted level .

this analysis builds on the concept of a "market - based" safety net that uses market price trends as the key factor in setting support levels .

the choice of any particular threshold for mal and plc price protection is purely arbitrary .

however , by comparing the rates at which each commodity's monthly market price falls below relevant farm program parameters , a rough approximation is revealed about how current program parameters vary from more parity levels of price protection .

this approach ignores all of the other potential policy reasons for setting each commodity's mal and plc support levels and focuses strictly on the price protection component of each program .

three price protection rates are examined for mal loan rates — 20% , 25% , and 30% .

in other words , the current mal loan rates for each program crop are adjusted such that 20% , 25% , and 30% of the monthly farm price observations for data period ( january 2008 to may 2017 ) fall below the respective loan rate for each crop .

the resulting parity parameters and the percent adjustments needed to achieve parity are presented in table 2 for each of the three price protection rates .

as mentioned earlier in the discussion surrounding figure 16 , market prices have moved significantly above mal loan rates since 2006 such that current mal loan rates are offering only minimal price protection .

further , to achieve price protection at any of the three levels examined ( 20% , 25% , or 30% ) , mal loan rates would have to be raised for all program crops .

results for the 20% price - protection level are displayed in figure 19 .

to achieve price protection parity , the barley loan rate would have to be raised by 133% , soybeans by 91% , corn by 83% , and sunflowers by 78% .

cotton and peanut loan rates would require the smallest increases at 7% and 13% , respectively , suggesting that cotton and peanuts already have substantial price protection relative to other program crops .

the statutory plc reference prices are adjusted such that 35% , 40% , and 45% of the monthly farm price observations are less than the plc reference price during the same data period ( january 2008 to may 2017 ) .

the resulting parity parameters and the percent adjustments needed to achieve parity are presented in table 3 for each of the three price protection rates .

results for the 40% price - protection level are displayed in ( figure 20 ) .

to achieve the hypothetical 40% price - protection level , plc reference prices for peanuts , canola , and sorghum would have to be lowered: peanuts by 19% from $26.75 to $21.55 per cwt. , canola by 14% from $20.15 to $17.40 per cwt. , sorghum by 3% , and rice by 1% .

in contrast , plc reference prices for the other major program crops would have to be raised to achieve a 40% price - protection parity rate: soybeans by 19% , oats by 17% , wheat and barley by 5% , and corn and sunflowers by 3% .

this report compares rates of federal support across program crops using several different analytical approaches .

while there are numerous other valid methods for comparing program support levels , the analytical approaches used here provide reasonable bases for making initial comparisons .

there may be little or no practical or theoretical justification for equalizing support rates , total payments , or payments per harvested acre .

in fact , some critics say the subsidies themselves are not justified .

however , to the extent that farm support is a key part of congressional debate , support levels among crops are likely to be a consideration .

large disparities in the relative levels of protection among program commodities can influence resource allocations and cropping decisions , potentially resulting in unintended market consequences that may have regional implications .

to the extent that the january 2008 through may 2017 time period reflects long - term market conditions , then the parity price - protection method of comparison evaluated in this report suggests that peanuts ( and cottonseed when included as a hypothetical program crop ) receive significantly higher price protection levels under both the mal and plc reference price programs as compared to the other program crops under the 2014 farm bill .

canola , sorghum , and rice also have greater support levels relative to the remaining program crops by these measures .

in contrast , soybeans and pulse crops receive relatively lower price protection .

the choices of loan rate ( 20% , 25% , and 30% ) and reference price ( 35% , 40% , and 45% ) protection levels used in this analysis are arbitrary .

however , the relative outcomes remain consistent under other levels of protection .

note that results based on market conditions that prevailed in the past are not necessarily indicative of future outcomes .

changing market circumstances in the years ahead could lead to materially different relationships across support payments for program crops .

