since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 ( 9 / 11 ) , domestic terrorists — people who commit crimes within the homeland and draw inspiration from u.s. - based extremist ideologies and movements — have not received as much attention from federal law enforcement as their violent jihadist counterparts .

this was not necessarily always the case .

the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) reported in 1999 that "[d]uring the past 30 years , the vast majority — but not all — of the deadly terrorist attacks occurring in the united states have been perpetrated by domestic extremists. .

the u.s. government reacted to 9 / 11 by greatly enhancing its counterterrorism efforts .

this report discusses how domestic terrorists broadly fit into the counterterrorism landscape , a terrain that since 9 / 11 has been largely shaped in response to terrorists inspired by foreign ideologies .

this report focuses especially on how domestic terrorism is conceptualized by the federal government and issues involved in assessing this threat's significance .

today ( perhaps in part because of the government's focus on international terrorist ideologies ) , it is difficult to evaluate the scope of domestic terrorist activity .

for example , federal agencies employ varying terminology and definitions to describe it .

possibly contributing to domestic terrorism's secondary status as a threat at the federal level , a large number of those labeled as domestic terrorists do not necessarily use traditional terrorist tactics such as bombings or airplane hijackings .

additionally , many domestic terrorists do not intend to physically harm people but rather rely on alternative tactics such as theft , trespassing , destruction of property , and burdening u.s. courts with retaliatory legal filings .

while plots and attacks by foreign - inspired homegrown violent jihadists have earned more media attention , domestic terrorists have been busy as well .

it is worth noting that in terms of casualties on u.s. soil , an act of domestic terrorism is second only to the events of 9 / 11 .

timothy mcveigh's bombing of the alfred p. murrah federal building in oklahoma city on april 19 , 1995 , claimed 168 lives and injured more than 500 others .

some estimates suggest that domestic terrorists are responsible for carrying out dozens of incidents since 9 / 11 .

much like their jihadist counterparts , domestic terrorists are often internet savvy and use the medium as a resource for their operations .

terrorists are typically driven by particular ideologies .

in this respect , domestic terrorists are a widely divergent lot , drawing from a broad array of philosophies and worldviews .

these individuals can be motivated to commit crimes in the name of ideas such as animal rights , white supremacy , and abortion , for example .

however , the expression of these worldviews ( minus the commission of crimes ) involves constitutionally protected activity .

aware of the lines between constitutionally protected speech and criminality , domestic terrorists often rope themselves off from ideological ( above - ground ) elements that openly and often legally espouse similar beliefs .

in essence , the practitioners who commit violent acts are distinct from the propagandists who theorize and craft worldviews that could be interpreted to support these acts .

thus , in decentralized fashion , terrorist lone actors ( lone wolves ) or isolated small groups ( cells ) generally operate autonomously and in secret , all the while drawing ideological sustenance — not direction — from propagandists operating in the free market of ideas .

domestic terrorists may not be the top federal counterterrorism priority , but they feature prominently among the concerns of some law enforcement officers .

for example , in 2011 , los angeles deputy police chief michael p. downing included "black separatists , white supremacist / sovereign citizen extremists , and animal rights terrorists" among his chief counterterrorism concerns .

a 2014 national survey of state and local law enforcement officers found that sovereign citizens were "the top concern" among terrorist threats .

the violence related to protests in charlottesville , va , on august 12 , 2017 , also has raised the issue of domestic terrorism , particularly related to public discussions regarding a widely reported incident involving james alex fields , who according to witnesses drove his car into a group of people protesting a rally featuring white supremacists in charlottesville on august 12 .

fields allegedly killed one person and injured 19 others in the incident .

the department of justice ( doj ) has opened a civil rights investigation into the incident , presumably pursuing possible hate crime charges .

additionally , attorney general jeff sessions has publicly stated that terrorism investigators are involved in investigating the incident , ostensibly exploring the possibility of characterizing it as an act of domestic terrorism rather than a hate crime .

this report provides background regarding domestic terrorists — detailing what constitutes the domestic terrorism threat as suggested by publicly available u.s. government sources .

it illustrates some of the key factors involved in assessing this threat .

this report does not discuss in detail either violent jihadist - inspired terrorism or the federal government's role in counterterrorism investigations .

two basic questions are key to understanding domestic terrorism .

first , what exactly constitutes "domestic terrorism ? .

answering this question is more complicated than it may appear .

some consider all terrorist plots occurring within the homeland as acts of domestic terrorism .

according to this perspective , a bombing plot involving u.s. citizens motivated by a foreign terrorist group such as al qaeda or the islamic state constitutes domestic terrorism .

while this conceptualization may be true at some level , a practical definition of domestic terrorism distilled from federal sources is much narrower .

it suggests that domestic terrorists are americans who commit ideologically driven crimes in the united states but lack foreign direction or influence — whether tactical or philosophical .

this conceptualization excludes homegrown individuals directed or motivated by groups such as al qaeda or the islamic state .

second , what particular groups are considered domestic terrorist organizations ? .

the u.s. government does not provide a precise , comprehensive , and public answer to this question .

rather , in broad terms , doj has identified a number of general threats that embody this issue .

the ideological concepts that underpin such threats may inspire criminal activity , such as hate crimes , that do not rise to the level of terrorism .

this further complicates defining "domestic terrorism. .

domestic terrorist attacks have come nowhere near the devastation of 9 / 11 .

however , it is worth noting that ( as mentioned above ) timothy mcveigh's bombing of the alfred p. murrah federal building in oklahoma city on april 19 , 1995 , claimed 168 lives and injured more than 500 others .

it ranks as the second - deadliest terrorist attack on u.s. soil , behind only the devastation wrought by al qaeda on 9 / 11 .

domestic terrorists feature prominently among the concerns of some law enforcement officers .

for example , los angeles deputy police chief michael p. downing recently described violent islamists such as al qaeda , hezbollah , and hamas as los angeles's main terrorist threats "along with three other terrorist categories: black separatists , white supremacist / sovereign citizen extremists , and animal rights terrorists. .

a 2014 national survey of state and local law enforcement officers found that among terrorist threats , sovereign citizens were "the top concern. .

in one 2008 study , state police agencies "overwhelmingly reported" dangerous domestic extremist groups present in their jurisdictions .

of course , as one expert reminds us , most followers of extremist viewpoints pose no threat: "most of them are not going to do anything but bore their relatives and friends with ridiculous papers and treatises. .

four broad themes speak to the threat posed by domestic terrorists .

first , domestic terrorists likely have been responsible for numerous incidents since 9 / 11 .

second , a large number of those labeled as domestic terrorists do not necessarily use major terrorist tactics such as bombings or airplane hijackings .

third , domestic terrorists — much like their violent jihadist analogues — are often internet savvy and use the medium as a resource for their operations .

fourth , domestic terrorism can be seen as a somewhat decentralized threat often involving lone wolves and movements operating under the model of leaderless resistance .

as this report suggests , at least three factors may make it hard for policymakers to form a baseline evaluation of the domestic terrorism threat from publicly available information .

first , federal agencies employ varying terminology to describe the threat .

second , the federal government lacks a public and official method for either designating specific domestic groups as terrorists or formally and openly describing particular extremist movements as threats .

finally , there is no clear sense of how many domestic terrorism plots and attacks the government has investigated in recent years .

the federal government has used broad conceptualizations to describe domestic terrorism .

doj discusses the issue in terms of a handful of general "threats" such as animal rights extremists , ecoterrorists , anarchists , and anti - government extremists — not specific groups .

additionally , terms such as "terrorism" and "extremism" appear to be used interchangeably .

presumably , using the term "extremist" allows lawyers , policymakers , and investigators the flexibility to discuss terrorist - like activity without actually labeling it as "terrorism" and then having to prosecute it as such .

however , this may lead to inconsistencies in the development and application of the law in the domestic terrorism arena .

for example , policymakers may ponder why a specific terrorism statute covers ideologically motivated attacks against businesses that involve animals , while there are no other domestic terrorism statutes as narrow in their purview covering a particular type of target and crime .

the federal government lacks a process for publicly designating domestic terrorist organizations .

in other words , there is no official open - source roster of domestic groups that the fbi or other federal agencies target as terrorist organizations .

the lack of such a designation may spring partly from first amendment concerns .

such a list might discourage speech and expression related to the ideologies underpinning the activities of named groups .

regardless , this stands in stark contrast to the world of international counterterrorism , where the united states maintains a well - established — legally and procedurally proscribed — regimen regarding the identification of foreign terrorist organizations ( ftos ) .

official fto designation benefits counterterrorism efforts in a number of ways .

most importantly , it facilitates the prosecution of those who provide material support to listed foreign terrorist groups .

arguably , because there is no domestic terrorism equivalent of fto designation , it is more difficult to press material support charges against domestic terrorists .

in 2010 , one scholar was unable to identify any material support cases involving "a domestic terrorist group or its supporters. .

according to the department of state , fto designation has other effects .

it 1 .

supports [u.s.] efforts to curb terrorism financing and to encourage other nations to do the same .

2 .

stigmatizes and isolates designated terrorist organizations internationally .

3 .

deters donations or contributions to and economic transactions with named organizations .

4 .

heightens public awareness and knowledge of terrorist organizations .

5 .

signals to other governments our concern about named organizations .

this description suggests that the absence of a designation regimen for domestic terrorist groups makes it harder for the federal government to discredit such groups and simultaneously strengthen public understanding of the domestic terrorist threat .

likewise , the lack of a list might make it more difficult for the federal government to communicate exactly what the threat is to its own agencies , let alone local or state entities .

while there is no official designation process for domestic terrorist organizations , as it stands , doj and the fbi have publicly named and discussed domestic terrorism threats — such as animal rights extremism or anarchist extremism — without illuminating exactly how they arrive at these categories .

federal lawmakers may opt to consider the feasibility of officially formalizing this process and / or opening it up to greater oversight .

an attempt to render this process less bureaucratically opaque might simultaneously ( 1 ) enhance federal efforts to combat domestic terrorism and ( 2 ) help protect civil rights and civil liberties .

for example , such a list may potentially offer agencies outside of doj — including relevant players at the state and local level — formal opportunities to provide input into ranking domestic terrorism threats while enshrining mechanisms by which individuals who believe in the philosophies undergirding a designated threat could petition to have that threat "de - listed. .

on the other hand , making this process more open may take away the fbi's flexibility to rapidly adapt its domestic terrorism priorities , especially if threats quickly mutate .

a publicly available official accounting of domestic terrorist plots and incidents may help policymakers understand the scope of the threat in lieu of a regimen designed to name domestic terrorism organizations .

however , the federal government does not produce such a document .

the national counterterrorism center's ( nctc ) worldwide incidents tracking system ( wits ) had provided an official record of terrorism incidents around the globe , including the united states .

this was a publicly accessible database active from 2004 to early 2012 .

it included basic information regarding terrorist incidents .

prior to the advent of wits , the fbi used to publish regular reports on terrorist activity in the united states .

the lack of a publicly available federal accounting of domestic terrorism plots and attacks makes it especially difficult to determine the scope of this diverse threat , which , for example , can be investigated and prosecuted at the state , local , or federal level .

also , the lines between domestic terrorism and other forms of criminality such as tax fraud or hate crimes can be blurry .

a fuller accounting of domestic terrorism plots and attacks may reveal the instances in which fbi investigated individuals as domestic terrorists but doj did not prosecute them as such .

this could offer policymakers a clearer sense of the domestic terrorism threat .

a better sense of domestic terrorism's scope publicly proffered by the federal government may assist policymakers .

it may be of policymaking value for executive branch agencies to release annual statistics on domestic terrorism prosecutions , naming individuals and movements involved .

congress may also consider requesting an even more detailed annual public report that counts and describes the domestic terrorist plots dismantled ; the number of attacks investigated ; and the federal , state , and local agencies involved .

the lack of such an accounting makes it difficult for policymakers to exercise oversight by comparing the levels of domestic terrorist activity against items such as homegrown violent jihadist activity and other threats to the homeland .

a regular public accounting could also help policymakers assess the effectiveness of the government's response to the domestic terrorist threat .

it may also assist policymakers who wish to compare one domestic terrorist threat against another .

it can help inform the allocation of resources to specific federal counterterrorism efforts , such as those designed to keep people from radicalizing and becoming violent extremists in the first place .

finally , without a clear , publicly available understanding of the domestic terrorist threat , it may be difficult to measure how much federal funding is allocated to this issue .

