some members of congress have expressed interest in the judicial award of remedies for patent infringement for more than a decade .

several bills introduced in previous sessions of congress proposed refor ms to damages and injunctions principles in patent law .

these bills were not enacted , however , and the changes made by the leahy - smith america invents act ( aia ) , p.l .

112-29 , were more limited .

still , concerns over the availability of remedies for patent infringement remain , as evidenced by the introduction of legislation in the 115 th congress addressing the award of injunctions .

current law calls for the award of monetary damages against adjudicated infringers at an amount adequate to compensate for the infringement , but in no event less than a reasonable royalty .

it also allows courts to increase the amount of damages up to three times that amount .

courts are also authorized to grant injunctions in "accordance with the principles of equity. .

in addition , attorney fees may be awarded in "exceptional cases. .

persistent concerns have arisen over whether judicial remedies for patent infringement are predictable and appropriate in view of the patent owner's inventive contribution .

for example , determinations of the appropriate level of damages and whether an injunction should be awarded become more complex when the patented invention forms just one feature of a complex , multi - component device , such as a cellular telephone .

in addition , many commercialized products implicate hundreds or thousands of patents , in addition to those asserted in a particular litigation , and are owned by numerous unrelated enterprises .

accounting for "royalty stacking" may prove to be a difficult matter in particular cases .

other observers assert that the more routine award of attorney fees to the prevailing party would discourage what they view as abusive assertions of patent rights .

this report reviews the current state of the law of patent remedies and surveys reform proposals that have come before congress .

it begins with a brief review of the basic workings of the patent system .

the report then considers the award of compensatory damages for patent infringement , attorney fees , and enhanced damages .

it then considers the special damages rules for design patents and reviews the law of injunctions .

individuals and firms must prepare and submit applications to the u.s. patent and trademark office ( uspto ) if they wish to obtain patent protection .

uspto officials , known as examiners , then assess whether the application merits the award of a patent .

under the patent act of 1952 , a patent application must include a specification that so completely describes the invention that skilled artisans are able to practice it without undue experimentation .

the patent act also requires that applicants draft at least one claim that particularly points out and distinctly claims the subject matter that they regard as their invention .

while reviewing a submitted application , the examiner will determine whether the claimed invention fulfills certain substantive standards set by the patent statute .

two of the most important patentability criteria are novelty and nonobviousness .

to be judged novel , the claimed invention must not be fully anticipated by a prior patent , publication , or other knowledge within the public domain .

the sum of these earlier materials , which document state - of - the - art knowledge , is termed the "prior art. .

to meet the standard of nonobviousness , an invention must not have been readily within the ordinary skills of a competent artisan based upon the teachings of the prior art .

if the uspto allows the application to issue as a granted patent , the owner or owners of the patent obtain the right to exclude others from making , using , selling , offering to sell , or importing into the united states the claimed invention .

the term of the patent is ordinarily set at twenty years from the date the patent application was filed .

patent title therefore provides inventors with limited periods of exclusivity in which they may practice their inventions , or license others to do so .

the grant of a patent permits inventors to receive a return on the expenditure of resources leading to the discovery , often by charging a higher price than would prevail in a competitive market .

a patent proprietor bears responsibility for monitoring its competitors to determine whether they are using the patented invention .

patent owners who wish to compel others to observe their intellectual property rights must usually commence litigation in the federal courts .

although issued patents enjoy a presumption of validity , accused infringers may assert that a patent is invalid or unenforceable on a number of grounds .

the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit ( federal circuit ) possesses national jurisdiction over most patent appeals .

the u.s. supreme court retains discretionary authority to review cases decided by the federal circuit .

a court may subject adjudicated patent infringers to several remedies that are awarded to the victorious patent proprietor .

these remedies include injunctions , monetary damages , and attorney fees .

the patent act also allows for damages to be increased up to three times for cases of willful infringement .

in contrast to copyrights and trademarks , criminal sanctions do not apply to patent infringement .

section 284 of the patent act currently provides that the court "may increase the damages up to three times the amount found or assessed. .

in its 2016 decision in halo electronics , inc. v. pulse electronics , inc. , the supreme court clarified that awards of enhanced damages are "designed as a 'punitive' or 'vindictive' sanction for egregious infringement behavior. .

such a circumstance is commonly termed "willful infringement. .

in halo v .

pulse , the supreme court emphasized that the award of enhanced damages lies within the discretion of the district judges in view of all of the circumstances .

although not subject to a "rigid formula," the award of enhanced damages may depend on such factors as whether the infringer intentionally copied the patent proprietor's product ; whether the infringer acted in accordance with the standards of commerce for its industry ; whether the infringer made a good faith effort to avoid infringing ; whether there is a reasonable basis to believe that the infringers had a reasonable defense to infringement ; and whether defendants tried to conceal their infringement .

the supreme court also clarified that the evidentiary threshold for an award of enhanced damages is the "preponderance of the evidence" and that the federal circuit should review awards of enhanced damages under the "abuse of discretion" standard .

commentators have widely viewed the halo v. pulse ruling as making awards of enhanced damages easier to obtain .

although bills directly addressing the topic of enhanced damages have not been placed before congress in many years , these earlier proposals were more restrictive than the standards adopted in halo v. pulse .

indeed , in support of its ruling in halo v. pulse , the supreme court noted that congress had considered bills calling for a higher standard of proof for willful infringement but had not enacted them .

for example , in the 111 th congress , the patent reform act of 2009 ( h.r .

1260 ) would have authorized a court to find willful infringement only where the patent proprietor proved by clear and convincing evidence that ( 1 ) the infringer received specific written notice from the patentee and continued to infringe after a reasonable opportunity to investigate ; ( 2 ) the infringer intentionally copied from the patentee with knowledge of the patent ; or ( 3 ) the infringer continued to infringe after an adverse court ruling .

in addition , under h.r .

1260 , willful infringement could be found where the infringer possessed an informed , good faith belief that its conduct was not infringing .

the leahy - smith america invents act ( aia ) , p.l .

112-29 , incorporated a single provision relating to the law of willful infringement .

section 17 of the aia incorporated 35 u.s.c .

§298 into the patent act .

that provision provides: the failure of an infringer to obtain the advice of counsel with respect to any allegedly infringed patent , or the failure of the infringer to present such advice to the court or jury , may not be used to prove that the accused infringer willfully infringed the patent or that the infringer intended to induce infringement of the patent .

this provision was intended "to protect attorney - client privilege and to reduce pressure on accused infringers to obtain opinions of counsel for litigation purposes. .

the aia did not otherwise address the topic of willful infringement .

patent law's willful infringement doctrine has proven controversial .

some observers believe that this doctrine ensures that patent rights will be respected in the marketplace .

critics of the policy believe that the possibility of trebled damages discourages individuals from reviewing issued patents and challenging patents of dubious validity .

consequently some have argued that the patent system should shift to a "no - fault" regime of strictly compensatory damages , without regard to the state of mind of the adjudicated infringer .

in addition to granting so - called "utility patents" directed towards machines , manufactures , compositions of matter and processes , the patent act of 1952 also allows for "design patents. .

an inventor may obtain a design patent by filing an application with the uspto directed towards a "new , original and ornamental design for an article of manufacture. .

most design patent applications consist primarily of drawings that depict the shape or surface decoration of a particular product .

they may concern any number of products , including automobile parts , containers , electronics products , home appliances , jewelry , textile designs , and toys .

to obtain protection , the design must not have been obvious to a designer of ordinary skill of that type of product .

in addition , a design must be "primarily ornamental" to be awarded design patent protection .

if the design is instead dictated by the performance of the article , then it is judged to be functional and ineligible for design patent protection .

issued design patents confer the right to exclude others from the "unauthorized manufacture , use , or sale of the article embodying the patented design or any colorable imitation thereof. .

the scope of protection of a design patent is provided by drawings within the design patent instrument .

to establish infringement , the design patent proprietor must prove that "in the eye of an ordinary observer , giving such attention as a purchaser usually gives," the patented and accused designs "are substantially the same , if the resemblance is such as to deceive such an observer , inducing him to purchase one supposing it is the other. .

the term of a design patent is 15 years from the date the uspto issues the patent .

design patents are subject to a distinct statutory provision with respect to damages than other sorts of patents .

35 u.s.c .

§289 provides that a person who manufactures or sells "any article or manufacture to which a [patented] design or colorable imitation has been applied shall be liable to the extent of his total profit , but not less than $250. .

section 289 goes on to state that "[n]othing in this section shall prevent , lessen , or impeach any other remedy which an owner of an infringed patent has under the provisions of this title , but he shall not twice recover the profit made from the infringement. .

the effect of 35 u.s.c .

§289 is to provide a design patent holder with two damages options .

like other sorts of patent proprietors , a design patent holder may obtain its own lost profits or reasonable royalties from the adjudicated infringer .

alternatively , the design patent holder may obtain the profits of the adjudicated infringer due to the infringement , so long as no double recovery occurs .

the 2016 supreme court decision in samsung electronics co. v. apple inc. is widely perceived as interpreting this provision in a narrow fashion .

in that case , apple owned several design patents pertaining to its iphone , including a patent claiming a black rectangular front face with rounded corners ; another patent claiming a rectangular front face with rounded corners and a raised rim ; and a third patent claiming a grid of 16 colorful icons on a black screen .

the lower courts held that samsung had infringed the patents and was liable for the entire profit it made selling its infringing smartphones .

the supreme court reversed and remanded the case for a new determination of damages .

the court began its analysis by concluding that arriving at a damages calculation under §289 involves two steps: ( 1 ) "identify the 'article of manufacture' to which the infringed design has been applied," and ( 2 ) "calculate the infringer's total profit made on that article of manufacture. .

the court then determined the scope of the phrase "article of manufacture" with respect to a multi - component product like an iphone .

rejecting the view that the "article of manufacture" must always mean the end product sold to the consumer , the court ultimately held that the term "article of manufacture," as used in §289 , could encompasses both ( 1 ) a product sold to a consumer and ( 2 ) a component of that product , whether that component is sold separately or not .

the supreme court therefore required that the lower courts identify the relevant article of manufacture that samsung infringed and adjust the damages total accordingly .

reactions to the ruling in samsung v .

apple have varied .

some commentators believe that the lower courts had allowed apple to recover damages that were disproportionate to samsung's infringement .

they observe that smartphones incorporate many features that were unrelated to the design patents asserted by apple .

others assert the view that designs often sell the products with which they are associated .

as a result , assessing the total profits due to the infringement is appropriate .

they believe that the supreme court's ruling adversely affects the value of design patents and obligates the lower courts to reach difficult decisions when accused infringers assert that the patented "design for an article of manufacture" is in fact less than the entirety of the product they are selling .

considerable discussion of the appropriateness of patent infringement remedies occurred in connection with the reform legislation that resulted in the america invents act .

as ultimately enacted , however , the aia addressed only the law of willful infringement .

since the enactment of the aia , the supreme court and the federal circuit have issued a number of additional opinions addressing this topic .

stakeholders have nonetheless expressed concerns about the fairness , predictability , and accuracy of remedies for patent infringement ; although some observers believe that the level of judicial compensation to patent proprietors is appropriate .

given the significance of remedies in rewarding invention , promoting competition , encouraging patent acquisition and enforcement , and contributing to an efficient innovation environment , congressional interest in this topic appears unlikely to diminish in coming years .

