pursuant to the clayton act and the federal trade commission act ( ftc act ) , congress charged the department of justice ( doj ) and the federal trade commission ( ftc ) with reviewing whether proposed mergers comport with federal antitrust laws and preventing anticompetitive mergers .

this report discusses statutes governing federal pre - merger review , along with doj and ftc guidelines for assessing whether a proposed merger complies with statutory requirements .

this report also discusses the doj's and ftc's processes for challenging a merger prior to its consummation .

while other federal laws , including the sherman act , seek to deter anticompetitive harms caused by monopolization and agreements to restrain trade , two federal statutes , the clayton and the ftc acts , relate particularly to proposed mergers .

section 7 of the clayton act applies to mergers "in any line of commerce" when their effect "may be substantially to lessen competition , or to tend to create a monopoly" unless the merger is statutorily exempt .

section 5 of the ftc act prohibits unfair methods of competition and includes any activity that violates section 7 of the clayton act .

the ftc generally applies standards similar to doj's when assessing transactions under section 7 of the clayton act pursuant to section 5 of the ftc act .

by prohibiting mergers that negatively affect competition , the clayton and ftc acts aim to preserv e rather than enhance competition and to protect overall market competition rather than individual competitors .

accordingly , mergers may injure market competitors but not violate antitrust laws .

moreover , because section 7 of the clayton act and section 5 of the ftc act aim to prevent anticompetitive harms from occurring , they look to the likelihood of future harm .

to violate these statutes , therefore , the transaction must be likely , rather than certain , to have an anticompetitive effect .

the hart - scott - rodino antitrust improvements act ( hsr act ) requires businesses exceeding certain sizes to report proposed mergers and other transactions valued above specified thresholds to the doj and ftc so that the agencies may examine whether those transactions comply with federal antitrust laws .

businesses may only complete the proposed merger once the statutory waiting period has expired ( typically 30 days after filing the report , but 15 days in the case of a cash tender offer , or such other time if the agency shortens or extends the waiting period ) .

if the agency determines that the merger would be likely to lessen competition substantially , the agency may either negotiate with the transacting parties to address its concerns or act to block the merger .

as part of the notice filed under the hsr act , the transacting parties must provide certain non - public information to the agencies , including ( 1 ) information about themselves , including their balance sheets ; ( 2 ) information related to the proposed transaction's planning and execution ; and ( 3 ) information regarding the product , service , and geographic markets in which they operate .

information submitted during the process is exempt from the freedom of information act and the agency cannot make it public except in the course of an administrative or judicial proceeding .

upon reviewing the pre - merger notification , the doj or ftc seeks clearance from the other agency to investigate the transaction .

when both agencies request clearance , the agency with the most expertise in reviewing transactions in the relevant markets generally conducts the investigation subject to jurisdictional limitations .

the agency selected to investigate the proposed merger reviews information provided by the transacting parties and other market participants .

prior to the expiration of the 30-day waiting period , the reviewing agency decides whether ( 1 ) to issue a second request for more information or ( 2 ) to allow the transaction to complete , either by terminating the waiting period early or by letting the waiting period expire without taking further action .

if the parties voluntarily withdraw their filing and subsequently refile , the required waiting period restarts .

if , during the initial waiting period , the reviewing agency needs additional information to assess whether the prospective merger complies with antitrust laws , the agency may require the transacting parties to provide further information and documents ( commonly referred to as the "second request" ) .

the reviewing agency may also gather evidence from entities that are not transacting parties .

for example , the agency may interview , either informally or under oath , customers and other market participants or seek information from industry observers and academics .

once the parties have substantially complied with the second request , the reviewing agency has 30 days ( or 10 days , in the case of a cash tender offer ) to review the information and decide how to proceed .

if parties fail to comply substantially with the second request , the reviewing agency may request a federal district court to order compliance and to extend the waiting period during the time it takes to reach substantial compliance .

if the waiting period expires , the parties may complete the transaction .

depending upon the merger's complexity , a significant amount of time might pass between the reviewing agency's issuance of a second request and a final decision .

a summary of the clearance process is depicted in figure 1 .

the ftc and doj employ shared guidelines to assess whether a proposed merger is permissible under the ftc and clayton acts .

these standards apply to various types of transactions , including mergers between competing entities or potentially competing entities in a relevant market ( horizontal mergers ) and mergers between non - competing entities that operate within related industries ( vertical mergers ) .

because horizontal and vertical mergers raise somewhat different competitive concerns , they are discussed separately below .

upon completing its review of a proposed merger , the reviewing agency decides whether ( 1 ) to permit the merger to consummate ; ( 2 ) to take any action to block the merger ; or ( 3 ) to negotiate with the transacting parties to place conditions on the merger's completion that alleviate the agency's anticompetitive concerns .

the agencies permit most proposed transactions to complete without conditions .

if the reviewing agency seeks to block a merger , the agency may bring an action against the transaction in a judicial and / or administrative proceeding ( depending upon whether the doj or the ftc is the reviewing agency ) .

in these circumstances , the transacting parties may abandon the deal or contest the government's case before a federal or administrative law judge .

federal antitrust law prohibits mergers and acquisitions that may substantially lessen competition .

as the primary federal agencies charged with enforcing federal antitrust laws , the doj and ftc follow a congressionally mandated process that requires parties exceeding certain sizes to notify the agencies of sizable transactions so that one of the agencies may determine whether the planned transaction would violate antitrust laws .

highly fact - specific , the doj and ftc apply section 7of the clayton act and section 5 of the ftc act , respectively , by assessing the proposed transaction's likely impact on competition within relevant markets identified by the agencies .

after examining any evidence , the agencies may permit the transaction to proceed , negotiate with the parties to reach an agreement that alleviates antitrust concerns , or block the transaction .

