every year , disasters such as wildfires , floods , earthquakes , hurricanes , tornadoes , volcanoes , and winter storms affect american communities .

in the aftermath of a major disaster , a potential threat to safety and obstacle to recovery is the presence of significant amounts of disaster debris .

depending on the type of disaster , debris may include waste soils and sediments ; trees , limbs , and shrubs ; man - made structures ( eg , collapsed homes , buildings , or bridges ) ; and personal property .

residents' ability to return to the area and live in a safe and healthy environment may depend on how quickly and effectively a community manages its debris .

to avoid overburdening existing landfill space , many communities attempt to divert as much debris as possible from area landfills through recycling , burning , composting , or another method of volume reduction .

the logistics of such diversion can prove complicated without proper pre - disaster planning .

improperly managing debris can have detrimental long - term repercussions .

during or after a disaster , some debris will likely become mixed with hazardous constituents .

for example , under flooding conditions , household hazardous waste or sewage may contaminate otherwise benign personal property or building materials , such as drywall or carpeting .

improper disposal of contaminated debris may lead to future environmental , health , or safety problems , such as groundwater contamination .

this report provides an overview of federal and state waste management requirements relevant to debris removal , as well as the challenges that can make it difficult for communities to manage debris quickly and safely .

to support those communities , a number of federal agencies may provide certain types of debris removal assistance .

this report provides an overview of federal and state agency roles in disaster debris removal .

a number of federal agencies are authorized to support communities with disaster debris removal .

this report focuses on support provided by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , the u.s. army corps of engineers ( the corps ) , and the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) .

each agency that provides debris removal support may do so under a number of different conditions or statutory authorities .

a discussion of those various conditions or authorities is beyond the scope of this report .

without proper pre - disaster planning , managing potentially huge volumes of mixed debris can be complicated for an already overwhelmed community .

according to fema , communities with a proper plan in place are better prepared to restore public services and ensure the public health and safety in the aftermath of a disaster and are better positioned to receive the full level of assistance available to them from fema .

fema encourages state , territorial , tribal , and local governments to establish a debris management plan ( dmp ) , written procedures and guidance that the governments will use to manage debris in an expeditious , efficient , and environmentally sound manner .

fema provides technical assistance to communities to develop dmps and will approve plans that meet its required criteria .

among other elements , a fema - approved dmp must identify the types of incidents likely to occur in the region and the types of debris that would likely be handled after those incidents .

it must also identify the existing state or federal laws that would apply to the handling and disposal of the types of debris likely handled .

on january 29 , 2013 , president obama signed into law the sandy recovery improvement act of 2013 ( p.l .

113-2 ) .

the law amends the stafford act to add section 428 , which authorizes "alternative procedures" for fema's public assistance program through a pilot program .

more specifically , the law directed fema to adopt alternative procedures that would further the goals of: reducing costs to the federal government of providing assistance , increasing flexibility in administering assistance , expediting the process of providing assistance , and providing financial incentives and disincentives for the timely and cost - effective completion of projects .

section 428 allows fema to take a number of actions to meet those goals with respect to debris removal activities .

for example , fema is authorized to fund debris management planning and to provide incentives to state , tribal , or local governments to prepare a dmp for fema approval .

the incentive for having a fema - approved dmp is a one - time , 2% increase in funding above the approved federal cost share for debris removal activities .

currently , fema is implementing debris - related alternative procedures in accordance with pilot programs authorized through june 27 , 2018 .

the following information may be useful to understand requirements and federal agency roles in various aspects of disaster debris removal: fema , april 2017 public assistance program and policy guide , https: / / www.fema.gov / media - library / assets / documents / 111781 .

see particularly the discussion of issues and requirements related to debris removal on pages 43-61 and "appendix d: debris management plan job aid. .

fema , public assistance: debris management guide , fema - 325 , july 2007 , https: / / www.fema.gov / media - library / assets / documents / 25649 .

fema , "debris removal and demolition fact sheet," https: / / www.fema.gov / media - library / assets / documents / 90745 .

fema , "alternative procedures" , https: / / www.fema.gov / alternative - procedures .

army corps of engineers , "debris management," http: / / www.usace.army.mil / missions / emergency - operations / national - response - framework / debris - management / .

fema , "fema and u.s. army corps debris mission," video discussing the corps' mission assignment to manage debris removal from hurricane sandy .

posted nov. 22 , 2012 , https: / / www.fema.gov / media - library / assets / videos / 81313 .

epa , planning for disaster debris , march 2008 , https: / / www.epa.gov / homeland - security - waste / guidance - about - planning - natural - disaster - debris .

crs report r43990 , fema's public assistance grant program: background and considerations for congress , by jared t. brown and daniel j. richardson .

crs report r41981 , congressional primer on responding to major disasters and emergencies , by jared t. brown .

