congress has established regulatory exclusivities to encourage different activities within the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries .

regulatory exclusivities consist of a period of time during which the food and drug administration ( fda ) protects an approved drug from competition in the marketplace .

in combination , the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act , p.l .

75-717 ( as amended ) , and public health service act , p. l. 78-410 ( as amended ) , require the fda to enforce 16 different regulatory exclusivities: twelve - year biologics exclusivity , ten - year transitional exclusivity , seven - year orphan drug exclusivity , five - year new chemical entity exclusivity , five - year enantiomer exclusivity , five - year qualifying infectious ( qi ) disease product exclusivity , five - year qi act antibiotic exclusivity , four - year biologics exclusivity , three - year qi act antibiotic exclusivity , three - year clinical investigation exclusivity for an original nda , three - year clinical investigation exclusivity for a supplemental nda , two - year transitional exclusivity , one - year interchangeable biologics exclusivity , six - month pediatric exclusivity , 180-day generic exclusivity , and 180-day competitive generic therapy exclusivity .

this report introduces the various regulatory exclusivities and then describes pertinent legislation in the 115 th congress addressing them .

the u.s. government regulates the marketing of pharmaceuticals in the interest of public health .

the developer of a new drug — known as its "sponsor" — must demonstrate that the product is safe and effective before it can be distributed to the public .

this showing requires a sponsor to conduct both preclinical and clinical investigations of drugs that have not been previously tested .

in deciding whether to issue marketing approval or not , the fda evaluates the test data that the sponsor submits in a so - called new drug application ( nda ) .

the fda maintains the test data incorporated into an nda in confidence .

in addition , because the required test data is usually quite costly to generate , sponsors of new pharmaceuticals ordinarily do not disclose them to the public .

otherwise the sponsor's competitors could file their own ndas using that test data , and thereby avoid the expenses of developing the information themselves .

until 1984 , federal law contained no separate provisions addressing lower - cost generic versions of brand - name drugs that the fda had previously approved for marketing .

the result was that a would - be generic drug manufacturer had to file its own nda in order to market its drug .

some generic manufacturers could rely on published scientific literature demonstrating the safety and efficacy of the drug .

because these sorts of studies were not available for all drugs , however , not all generic firms could file these so - called "paper ndas. .

further , at times the fda would request additional studies to address safety and efficacy questions that arose from experience with the drug following its initial approval .

the result was that some generic manufacturers were forced to prove independently that their pharmaceuticals were safe and effective , even though their products were chemically identical to those of previously approved drugs .

some commentators believed that the approval of a generic drug was a needlessly costly , redundant , and time - consuming process under this system .

these observers noted that although patents on important drugs had expired , manufacturers were not moving to introduce generic equivalents for these products due to the level of resource expenditure required to obtain fda marketing approval .

as the introduction of generic drugs often causes prices to decrease , the interest of consumers was arguably not being served through these observed costs and delays .

in response to these concerns , congress enacted the drug price competition and patent term restoration act of 1984 , more commonly known as the hatch - waxman act .

this legislation created a new type of application for marketing approval of a generic drug .

this application , termed an "abbreviated new drug application" ( anda ) , may be filed at the fda .

an anda may be filed if the active ingredient of the generic drug is the bioequivalent of the approved drug .

an anda allows a generic drug manufacturer to rely upon the safety and efficacy data of the original manufacturer .

the availability of the anda mechanism often allows a generic manufacturer to avoid the costs and delays associated with filing a full - fledged nda .

andas also allow a generic manufacturer , in many cases , to place its fda - approved bioequivalent drug on the market as soon as any relevant patents expire .

the hatch - waxman act also modified the fda's earlier "paper nda" practice by establishing a "section 505 ( b ) ( 2 ) " application .

a section 505 ( b ) ( 2 ) application is , in a sense , a hybrid application that falls somewhere between an anda and a full nda .

more technically , a section 505 ( b ) ( 2 ) application is one for which one or more of the investigations relied upon by the applicant for approval "were not conducted by or for the applicant and for which the applicant has not obtained a right of reference or use from the person by or for whom the investigations were conducted.... " a section 505 ( b ) ( 2 ) application differs from an anda in that it includes full reports of investigations of the safety and efficacy of the proposed product .

however , a section 505 ( b ) ( 2 ) nda is distinct from an nda in that the section 505 ( b ) ( 2 ) application relies upon data that the applicant did not develop itself .

the hatch - waxman act placed certain limits upon the ability of generic competitors to sell their own versions of brand - name drugs .

these limitations — termed regulatory exclusivities — consist of a period of time during which a competitor's ability to obtain fda permission to sell a generic version of a previously approved brand - name drug is restricted .

the federal food and drug laws establish several different sorts of regulatory exclusivities relating to new chemical entities , new clinical studies , orphan drugs , pediatric studies , generic drugs , antibiotics , qualified infectious disease products , enantiomers , and biologics .

this report will describe each of these regulatory exclusivities below .

legislation introduced in the 115 th congress would modify the current system of regulatory exclusivities .

none of this legislation has been enacted as of the publication of this report .

congress has increasingly turned to regulatory exclusivities in order to encourage the development and distribution of new drugs .

in comparison with the broadly oriented patent system , which pertains to virtually every innovative industry in the united states , regulatory exclusivities allow congress to direct attention to more focused issues .

this shift holds a number of implications for innovation and public health policy .

in particular , the growing number of regulatory exclusivities has caused the fda to move beyond its traditional focus upon food and drug safety , and instead become an agency that must administer numerous intellectual property rights .

they have also created a more complex landscape of proprietary rights in the area of pharmaceuticals and biologics .

the ultimate assessment of regulatory exclusivities depends upon whether they have encouraged the discovery and public availability of new medicines .

orphan and pediatric drug exclusivity have been widely lauded as successful programs , although some observers have expressed concern over their operation .

more recently established exclusivities , such as those pertaining to enantiomers and qualified infectious disease products , have arguably not attracted the same level of interest from industry .

continued congressional monitoring may help ensure that regulatory exclusivities provide appropriate incentives for innovation in the crucial area of public health .

