the department of health and human services ( hhs ) has designated 8 of its 11 operating divisions ( agencies ) as components of the u.s. public health service ( phs ) .

the phs agencies are ( 1 ) the agency for healthcare research and quality ( ahrq ) , ( 2 ) the agency for toxic substances and disease registry ( atsdr ) , ( 3 ) the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , ( 4 ) the food and drug administration ( fda ) , ( 5 ) the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) , ( 6 ) the indian health service ( ihs ) , ( 7 ) the national institutes of health ( nih ) , and ( 8 ) the substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) .

the phs agencies all provide and support essential public health services ; however , their specific missions vary .

with the exception of fda , the agencies have limited regulatory responsibilities .

two of them — nih and ahrq — are primarily research agencies .

nih conducts and supports basic , clinical , and translational medical research .

ahrq conducts and supports research on the quality and effectiveness of health care services and systems .

three of the agencies — ihs , hrsa , and samhsa — provide health care services or help support systems that deliver such services .

ihs supports a health care delivery system for american indians and alaska natives .

health services are provided directly by the ihs , as well as through tribally contracted and operated health programs , and through services purchased from private providers .

hrsa funds programs and systems to improve access to health care among low - income populations , pregnant women and children , persons living with human immunodeficiency virus / acquired immunodeficiency syndrome ( hiv / aids ) , rural and frontier populations , and others who are medically underserved .

samhsa funds community - based mental health and substance abuse prevention and treatment services .

cdc is a public health agency that develops and supports community - based and population - wide programs and systems to promote quality of life and prevent the leading causes of disease , injury , disability , and death .

atsdr , which is headed by the cdc director and included in the cdc section of this report , is tasked with identifying potential public health effects from exposure to hazardous substances .

finally , fda is primarily a regulatory agency , whose mission is to ensure the safety of foods , dietary supplements , and cosmetics , and the safety and effectiveness of drugs , vaccines , medical devices , and other health products .

in addition , fda has authority to regulate the manufacture , marketing , and distribution of tobacco products in order to protect public health .

the programs and activities of five of the phs agencies — ahrq , cdc , hrsa , nih , and samhsa — are mostly authorized under the public health service act ( phsa ) .

while some of fda's regulatory activities are also authorized under the phsa , the agency and its programs derive most of their statutory authority from the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) .

hrsa's maternal and child health programs are authorized by the social security act ( ssa ) , and many of the ihs programs and services are authorized by the indian health care improvement act .

atsdr was created by the comprehensive environmental response , compensation and liability act of 1980 ( cercla , the "superfund" law ) .

the primary source of funding for each phs agency is the discretionary budget authority it receives through the annual appropriations process .

ahrq , cdc , hrsa , nih , and samhsa are funded by the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies ( lhhs ) appropriations act .

funding for atsdr and ihs is provided by the department of the interior , environment , and related agencies ( interior / environment ) appropriations act .

fda gets its funding through the agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies ( agriculture ) appropriations act .

although the bulk of phs agency funding is provided through annual discretionary appropriations , agencies also receive mandatory funding , user fees , and third - party collections .

as discussed below , these additional sources of funding are a substantial component of the budgets of several phs agencies .

congress has taken a number of recent steps through both the annual appropriations process and the enactment of deficit - reduction legislation to reduce the growth in federal spending .

these actions , briefly discussed below , have had an impact on the level of discretionary funding for several phs agencies since fy2010 .

among the five phs agencies funded through the lhhs appropriations act , ahrq has seen a reduction in discretionary funding over the past seven years .

however , that reduction for the most part was offset by the agency's receipt of mandatory funding .

discretionary funding for the other four agencies — cdc , hrsa , nih , and samhsa — has fluctuated in recent years , dipping in fy2013 as a result of the sequestration of discretionary appropriations that fiscal year ( see below ) .

both cdc and hrsa have received increasing amounts of mandatory funding since fy2010 , which has raised each agency's overall funding level .

fda and ihs , which receive their discretionary funding through the agriculture and interior / environment appropriations acts , respectively , have seen their appropriations increase since fy2010 .

in addition , both agencies have witnessed a steady increase in funding from other sources — user fees at fda , and third - party collections at ihs .

the remainder of this report consists of seven sections , one for each phs agency , beginning with ahrq .

each section includes an overview of the agency's statutory authority and principal activities , and a brief summary of recent trends in the agency's funding .

this material is accompanied by a detailed funding table showing the agency's fy2016 and fy2017 funding , as well as the requested amounts in the fy2018 budget .

the funding amounts for fy2016 and the fy2018 request are based on the fy2018 budget documents , whereas the amounts for fy2017 are taken from the lhhs appropriations table in the joint explanatory statement to accompany the fy2017 lhhs appropriations act .

note that the fy2017 amounts may in some instances differ from the agency's final operating levels due to transfers , reprogramming , or other adjustments .

the funding tables show the post - sequestration amounts for the accounts that were subject to sequestration , unless indicated otherwise .

the funding tables are formatted in a similar , though not identical , manner .

the formatting generally matches the way in which each agency's funding is presented in the congressional budget documents .

each table shows the funding for all the agency's budget accounts and , typically , for selected programs and activities within those accounts .

these amounts are summed to give the agency's total , or program level , funding .

at the bottom of the table any user fees , set - aside funds , aca funds , and other nondiscretionary amounts are subtracted from the program level to give the agency's discretionary budget authority ( i.e. , annual discretionary appropriations ) .

the tables for ahrq , cdc , hrsa , and samhsa include non - add entries — italicized and in parentheses — to indicate the contribution of funding to specific accounts from sources other than the agency's discretionary appropriations .

almost all of the cdc accounts , for example , are funded with discretionary appropriations plus amounts from other sources ( see table 5 ) .

the use of a dash in the funding tables generally means "not applicable. .

either the activity or program was not authorized or there was no mandatory funding provided for that fiscal year .

in contrast , a zero usually indicates that congressional appropriators had chosen not to appropriate any discretionary funds that year .

it is important to keep in mind that the phs agency funding tables that appear in budget documents and appropriations committee reports , as well as the tables in this report , show only the amount of evaluation set - aside funds received .

they do not reflect the amount of funding assessed on agency accounts .

as a result , the funding tables for the phs agencies subject to an assessment can give a somewhat distorted view of their available budgetary resources by not subtracting the assessment amounts .

this effect has been particularly significant in the case of the three agencies — cdc , hrsa , and nih — that are subject to a significant assessment under the evaluation set - aside authority ( see table 1 ) .

samhsa is the lead federal agency for increasing access to behavioral health services .

samhsa supports community - based mental health and substance abuse treatment and prevention services through formula grants to the states and u.s. territories and through competitive grant programs to states , territories , tribal organizations , local communities , and private entities .

samhsa also engages in a range of other activities , such as technical assistance , data collection , and workforce development .

samhsa and most of its programs and activities are authorized under phsa title v , which organizes samhsa in four centers: center for substance abuse treatment ( csat ) center for substance abuse prevention ( csap ) center for mental health services ( cmhs ) center for behavioral health statistics and quality ( cbhsq ) each of csat , csap , and cmhs has general statutory authority , called programs of regional and national significance ( prns ) , under which it administers numerous grants and other programs .

phsa title v also authorizes a number of specific grant programs , referred to as categorical grants .

samhsa's two largest grant programs are separately authorized under phsa title xix , part b .

the community mental health services block grant falls within cmhs .

the full amount of the substance abuse prevention and treatment block grant falls within csat , although no less than 20% of each state's block grant must be used for prevention .

samhsa's budget is organized in four categories , three of which correspond to csat , csap , and cmhs .

the fourth category , "health surveillance and program support," does not correspond directly to cbhsq ; it supports data collection , analytic support , public awareness campaigns , behavioral health workforce initiatives , and the national registry of evidence - based programs and practices ( among other programs and activities ) .

in the 114 th congress , the helping families in mental health crisis reform act of 2016 ( division b of p.l .

114-255 ) made numerous changes to samhsa's statutory authorities — reauthorizing , modifying , or codifying existing programs and activities ; authorizing new programs and activities ; and repealing authorities for programs and activities that had not been funded .

also in the 114 th congress , the comprehensive addiction and recovery act of 2016 ( cara , p.l .

114-198 ) included authorizations of appropriations for samhsa - administered grant programs , and section 1003 of the 21 st century cures act ( division a of p.l .

114-255 ) authorized appropriations for grants to support state responses to opioid abuse .

samhsa's program - level funding increased by 13% from fy2016 ( $3.8 billion ) to fy2017 ( $4.3 billion ) .

samhsa's largest center , csat , received a 24% increase , attributable mostly to the $500 million appropriated for the newly authorized grants to support state responses to opioid abuse .

smaller increases — in terms of both dollar amounts and percentages — went to cmhs ( 1% ) and csap ( 6% ) .

program - level funding decreased by 28% for health surveillance and program support .

relative to fy2017 as enacted , samhsa's fy2018 request would decrease program - level funding by 9% ( to $3.9 billion ) and discretionary budget authority by 8% ( to $3.8 billion ) ; see table 10 .

funding for csat would stay within 1% of its fy2017-enacted amount .

funding for cmhs would decrease by 23% , including a 26% decrease in the mental health block grant and a 31% decrease in mental health prns .

funding for csap would decrease by 33% .

funding would decrease by 11% for health surveillance and program support .

appendix a .

supplemental appropriations several one - time appropriations for hhs , and phs agencies in particular , are discussed below .

ebola and zika response in late 2014 , congress provided almost $2.8 billion in supplemental fy2015 appropriations to hhs agencies for response to the ebola outbreak .

in september 2016 , congress provided $933 million in supplemental fy2016 appropriations to hhs agencies for response to the zika virus outbreak .

both appropriations were designated as emergency spending and made available for a mix of domestic and international response activities .

the hhs secretary and / or agency directors were granted specific transfer authorities in each act .

also in each act , additional funds were provided to other departments and agencies for aspects of the international response to each outbreak .

in may 2017 , congress provided $10 million to fda to "prevent , prepare for , and respond to emerging health threats , including the ebola and zika viruses , domestically and internationally and to develop necessary medical countermeasures and vaccines , including the review , regulation , and post market surveillance of vaccines and therapies , and for related administrative activities ... to remain available until expended. .

table a - 1 summarizes the amounts and purposes of hhs funds as appropriated for the ebola and zika outbreaks , and emerging health threats .

as the zika outbreak was unfolding , some unobligated funds for the ebola response were reprogrammed to the zika response mission .

details of those transfers are discussed elsewhere .

lead poisoning prevention in december 2016 , in a continuing resolution ( p.l .

114-254 ) , congress provided $55 million in fy2017 appropriations to hhs for the response to lead exposures in water , in addition to the annual appropriations for these activities that were continued by the law .

table a - 2 summarizes the amounts and purposes of these funds .

appendix b .

community health center fund affordable care act ( aca ) section 10503 established a community health center fund ( chcf ) to provide supplemental funding for community and other health centers and the national health service corps ( nhsc ) .

the law provided annual appropriations to the chcf totaling $11 billion over the five - year period fy2011 through fy2015 .

of that total , $9.5 billion was for health center operations , and the remaining $1.5 billion was for the nhsc .

the medicare access and chip reauthorization act of 2015 ( macra ) appropriated two more years of funding for the chcf .

for both fy2016 and fy2017 , macra provided $3.6 billion for health center operations and $310 million for the nhsc .

the president's fy2018 budget proposes extending chcf funding for two more years .

chcf funding has partially supplanted discretionary funding for the health center program and entirely replaced discretionary funding for the nhsc ( see table 7 ) .

table b - 1 shows the amounts appropriated to the chcf for each fiscal year , as well as the post - sequestration levels for fy2013-fy2015 and fy2017 .

as discussed earlier in this report , the fy2016 chcf funding was not subject to sequestration .

chcf funds are awarded to the various types of health centers that are supported by the federal health center program .

those include community health centers and migrant health centers , as well as facilities that serve the homeless and residents of public housing .

sequestration of chcf funding for community health centers and migrant health centers is capped at 2% , whereas chcf funding for the other types of facilities ( i.e. , health centers for the homeless and for public housing residents ) and for the nhsc is fully sequestrable at the applicable rate for nonexempt nondefense mandatory spending ( see table 2 ) .

appendix c. prevention and public health fund ( pphf ) affordable care act ( aca ) section 4002 established the prevention and public health fund ( pphf ) , to be administered by the hhs secretary , and provided it with a permanent annual appropriation .

under the aca as originally enacted , pphf's annual appropriation would increase from $500 million for fy2010 to $2 billion for fy2015 and each subsequent fiscal year .

congress has amended the provision two times , rescinding a portion of pphf funds as an offset for the costs of other activities .

the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-96 ) reduced pphf appropriations for fy2013 through fy2021 .

the 21 st century cures act ( p.l .

114-255 ) reduced pphf appropriations for fy2018 through fy2024 .

further information , including amounts currently authorized and appropriated for each fiscal year , is provided in crs report r44796 , the aca prevention and public health fund: in brief .

the pphf authority directs the hhs secretary to transfer amounts from the pphf to hhs agencies for prevention , wellness , and public health activities .

the funds are available to the secretary at the beginning of each fiscal year .

the administration's annual budget sets out the intended distribution and use of pphf funds for that fiscal year .

the secretary determined the distribution of pphf funds for fy2010 through fy2013 .

for fy2014 through fy2017 , provisions in appropriations acts explicitly directed the distribution of pphf funds , prohibiting the secretary from making further transfers .

as discussed earlier in this report , the pphf appropriation is fully sequestrable at the applicable percentage rate for nonexempt nondefense mandatory spending ( see table 3 ) .

sequestration is applied to the entire appropriation before funds are designated for or transferred to the agencies .

the distribution of pphf funds to hhs agencies for fy2010 through fy2017 , and proposed in the fy2018 budget , is presented in table c - 1 .

further details regarding pphf distributions to cdc and samhsa are provided in the respective agency budget tables in the body of this report .

for fy2013 , the secretary transferred almost half of available pphf funds to cms for aca implementation , as shown in table c - 1 .

this transfer reduced the pphf funds that had been initially allocated to cdc and other phs agencies .

along with the sequestration of discretionary funding in fy2013 , the loss of pphf funds that year had a significant effect on cdc's budget .

in determining the transfer of pphf funds for fy2010 through fy2013 , the secretary funded a mix of preexisting programs and activities , and programs and activities newly authorized under the aca .

in directing the distribution pphf funds for fy2014 through fy2017 , annual appropriations acts ( and accompanying report language ) generally directed funds to preexisting programs and activities .

in some cases the pphf contribution for fy2016 made up more than 50% of a program's total funding .

examples include cdc immunization grants to states ( 54% ) and tobacco prevention activities ( 60% ) .

the cdc preventive health and health services block grant and the lead poisoning prevention program received 100% of their fy2016 funding from the pphf .

appendix d. patient - centered outcomes research trust fund affordable care act ( aca ) section 6301 ( e ) established the patient - centered outcomes research trust fund ( pcortf ) to support comparative clinical effectiveness research at both hhs and the patient - centered outcomes research institute ( pcori ) .

the law provided annual funding to the pcortf over the period fy2010-fy2019 from the following three sources: ( 1 ) annual appropriations , ( 2 ) fees on health insurance and self - insured plans , and ( 3 ) transfers from the medicare part a and part b trust funds .

specifically , the aca appropriated the following amounts to the pcortf: ( 1 ) $10 million for fy2010 ; ( 2 ) $50 million for fy2011 ; and ( 3 ) $150 million for each of fy2012 through fy2019 .

in addition , for each of fy2013 through fy2019 , the aca appropriated an amount equivalent to the net revenues from a new fee that the law imposes on health insurance policies and self - insured plans .

for policy / plan years ending during fy2013 , the fee equals $1 multiplied by the number of covered lives .

for policy / plan years ending during each subsequent fiscal year through fy2019 , the fee equals $2 multiplied by the number of covered lives .

finally , transfers to pcortf from the medicare part a and part b trust funds are calculated by multiplying the average number of individuals entitled to benefits under medicare part a , or enrolled in medicare part b , by $1 ( for fy2013 ) or by $2 ( for each of fy2014 through fy2019 ) .

for each of fy2011 through fy2019 , the aca requires 80% of the pcortf funds to be made available to pcori , and the remaining 20% of funds to be transferred to the hhs secretary for carrying out phsa section 937 .

of the total amount transferred to hhs , 80% is to be distributed to ahrq .

in the fy2018 budget request , the president proposes to incorporate ahrq under nih by creating a new institute , the national institute for research on safety and quality ( nirsq ) ; therefore , for fy2018 , the funds that would have otherwise gone to ahrq are shown as going to nirsq .

table d - 1 shows the allocation of pcortf funds through fy2018 .

appendix e. fda user fee authorization .

