c arbon capture and sequestration ( or storage ) — known as ccs — is a process that involves capturing man - made carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) at its source and storing it to avoid its release to the atmosphere .

 ( ccs is sometimes referred to as ccus — carbon capture , utilization , and storage. ) .

ccs could reduce the amount of co 2 emitted to the atmosphere from the burning of fossil fuels at power plants and other large industrial facilities .

an integrated ccs system would include three main steps: ( 1 ) capturing and separating co 2 from other gases ; ( 2 ) purifying , compressing , and transporting the captured co 2 to the sequestration site ; and ( 3 ) injecting the co 2 in underground geological reservoirs ( the process is explained more fully below in " ccs primer " ) .

in recent years , utilization as part of ccus increasingly has been viewed as a potentially important component of the process .

utilization refers to the beneficial use of co 2 as a means of mitigating co 2 emissions and converting it to chemicals , cements , plastics , and other products .

 ( this report uses the term ccs except in cases where utilization is specifically discussed. ) .

the u.s. department of energy ( doe ) has long supported research and development ( r&d ) on ccs within its fossil energy research and development portfolio ( fer&d ) .

since fy2010 , congress has provided more than $5 billion in total appropriations for ccs activities within doe fer&d ( not including the one - time appropriation of $3.4 billion provided for ccs in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 , p.l .

111-5 ) .

in its fy2018 and fy2019 budget requests , the trump administration proposed to reduce fer&d funding compared to previous years .

the trump administration's proposal differs from the policy trends of the previous two administrations , which supported r&d on ccs and emphasized the development of large - scale demonstration projects — nearly first - of - their - kind ventures using technologies developed at a pilot or smaller scale that have been ramped up to commercial scale — to evaluate how ccs might be deployed commercially .

congress did not accept the administration's fy2018 request for doe fer&d and instead increased funding by nearly $59 million ( 9% ) compared to fy2017 .

in 2018 congress also enacted legislation ( title ii , section 4119 of p.l .

115-123 ) that would increase the tax credit for capturing and sequestering or utilizing co 2 , leading many observers to predict increased ccs activity as a result .

this report includes a primer on the ccs ( and carbon utilization ) process and discusses the current state of ccs in the united states , as well as the doe program for ccs r&d and ccs - related legislation in the 115 th congress .

an integrated ccs system would include three main steps: ( 1 ) capturing and separating co 2 from other gases ; ( 2 ) purifying , compressing , and transporting the captured co 2 to the sequestration site ; and ( 3 ) injecting the co 2 in subsurface geological reservoirs .

the most technologically challenging and costly step in the process is the capture step , which is capital - intensive to build and requires a considerable amount of energy to operate ( the amount of energy a power plant uses to capture and compress co 2 is that much less electricity the plant can deliver to its customers ; this is sometimes referred to as the energy penalty or the parasitic load ) .

figure 1 shows the ccs process schematically from source to storage .

the transport and injection / storage steps of the ccs process are not technologically challenging per se , as compared to the capture step .

carbon dioxide pipelines are in use for eor in regions of the united states today , and large quantities of fluids have been injected into the deep subsurface for a variety of purposes for decades , such as disposal of wastewater from oil and gas operations or of municipal wastewater .

however , the transport and capture steps still face challenges , including economic and regulatory issues , rights - of - way , and questions regarding the permanence of co 2 sequestration in deep geological reservoirs , as well as ownership and liability for the stored co 2 , among others .

globally , two fossil - fueled power plants currently generate electricity and capture co 2 in large quantities: the boundary dam plant in canada and the petra nova plant in texas .

both plants retrofitted post - combustion capture technology to units of existing plants .

 ( the different types of carbon capture technologies are discussed above in " ccs primer ." ) .

doe has funded r&d of aspects of the three main steps leading to an integrated ccs system since 1997 .

since fy2010 , congress has provided more than $5 billion total in annual appropriations for ccs activities at doe .

the recovery act provided an additional $3.4 billion to that total .

ccs - focused r&d has come to dominate the coal program area within doe fer&d since 2010 .

however , the trump administration's fy2019 budget request proposes to shift to other priorities , decreasing the overall fer&d budget by nearly $225 million compared to what congress enacted for fy2018 .

the fy2019 budget request cites early - stage research as its focus: "this budget request focuses doe resources toward early - stage r&d and reflects an increased reliance on the private sector to fund later - stage research. .

the trump administration's approach would be a reversal of obama administration and george w. bush administration doe policies , which supported large carbon - capture demonstration projects and large injection and sequestration demonstration projects .

the administration previously proposed cuts to fer&d in its fy2018 budget request ; however , congress increased funding by nearly $59 million ( 9% ) compared to fy2017 .

for fy2019 , house - passed appropriations legislation would increase overall funding for doe fer&d by over $58 million compared to the fy2018 amount , and $283 million above the administration budget request .

the senate - passed version of the appropriations bill would fund doe fer&d at about the same level as the fy2018 amount , $727 million , also substantially greater than the administration's request for $502 million .

table 2 shows the funding for doe ccs programs under fer&d from fy2010 through fy2018 and includes the president's fy2019 budget request .

table 2 groups mostly ccs - related programs under the coal ccs and power systems category and the remainder of fossil energy spending under other fossil energy r&d .

this grouping follows how congress has funded these programs .

congress did not accept the administration's proposed restructuring of the fer&d portfolio in fy2018 .

a number of bills introduced in the 115 th congress would potentially affect ccs in the united states .

several bills or provisions of bills address internal revenue code , section 45q , providing tax credits for co 2 capture and sequestration or use as a tertiary injectant for eor or natural gas production ( s. 1535 , s. 1663 , s. 2256 , h.r .

1892 , h.r .

2010 , h.r .

3761 , h.r .

4857 , ( see appendix ) .

h.r .

1892 , the bipartisan budget act of 2018 , was enacted into law as p.l .

115-123 .

the provisions of p.l .

115-123 that amended section 45q and their implications are discussed in more detail in the text box below .

other bills also would amend the internal revenue code in ways affecting ccs .

for example , s. 843 and h.r .

2011 would amend section 142 of the internal revenue code to allow qualified co 2 capture facilities that capture 65% or more of their co 2 emissions to be eligible for tax - exempt private activity bonds .

the bills assert that allowing tax - exempt financing for the purchase of capital equipment that is used to capture carbon dioxide will reduce the costs of developing carbon dioxide capture projects , accelerate their deployment , and , in conjunction with carbon dioxide utilization and long - term storage , help the united states meet critical environmental , economic , and national security goals .

several bills would address federal efforts to enhance ccs or emphasize different aspects of the process across three different federal agency and departmental jurisdictions: epa , doe , and the department of agriculture .

s. 2602 , for example , would authorize activities under epa jurisdiction to support direct air capture and utilization of co 2 , and would include carbon capture infrastructure projects as eligible under the fast act , as part of the bill's intent to expedite the permitting process for ccs .

the legislation would add ccs infrastructure projects explicitly as eligible covered projects , meaning any infrastructure construction activity requiring authorization or environmental review by a federal agency .

s. 2803 and h.r .

5745 would amend the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) to authorize doe to further its ccs research , development , and deployment ( rd&d ) activities , and place a greater emphasis on co 2 utilization .

s. 2803 would also authorize a project aimed to achieve net - negative co 2 emissions — projects utilizing biomass and fossil fuels to produce electricity , fuels , or chemicals — with a net removal of co 2 from the atmosphere .

s. 2997 would authorize the secretary of agriculture to pursue biomass - related ccs r&d projects , and would authorize the use of loans or loan guarantees for biomass - related co 2 capture and utilization activities .

h.r .

2296 would focus on doe ccs - related activities and require the department to evaluate its rd&d projects and make recommendations whether each project should continue to receive funding based on progress toward its ccs goals .

h.r .

4096 would establish a $5 million prize for ccs - related technology development and commercialization , pursuant to section 24 of the stevenson - wydler technology innovation act of 1980 ( 15 u.s.c .

3719 ) .

h.r .

5745 would authorize or encourage rd&d activities across the spectrum of ccs , including carbon capture , carbon sequestration , carbon utilization , and carbon removal ( including direct air capture ) , and would authorize a $15 million prize competition to develop direct air capture technology .

the bill also would establish a task force to assess the potential for a national system of co 2 pipelines .

currently the petra nova plant in texas is the sole u.s. commercial large - scale fossil - fueled power plant with ccs , capturing over 1 million tons of co 2 annually .

the boundary dam power plant in canada is the only other commercial fossil - fueled electricity generating plant in the world operating with ccs and capturing a nearly equivalent volume of co 2 .

both plants offset a portion of the cost of ccs by selling co 2 for the purpose of enhanced oil recovery .

some ccs proponents have hailed the expanded tax credit provision enacted as part of p.l .

115-123 , increasing the value of tax credits under section 45q of the internal revenue code , as a potential "game changer" for incentivizing more development of large - scale ccs deployment like petra nova and boundary dam .

some ccs proponents advocate for other incentives , such as tax - exempt private activity bonds , and enabling eligibility of master limited partnerships for ccs infrastructure projects , which could also increase the financial attractiveness of large - scale capital - intensive ccs endeavors .

according to ccs proponents , private activity bonds would allow ccs project developers access to tax - exempt debt , thus lowering their capital costs .

master limited partnerships would allow a corporate structure to combine the tax benefits of a partnership with a corporation's ability to raise capital , reducing the cost of equity and providing access to capital on more favorable terms , according to proponents .

members of congress have introduced legislation that would authorize these financial incentives , as well as a suite of other bills aimed at advancing ccs by making ccs infrastructure projects eligible under the fast act ( 42 u.s.c .

4370m ( 6 ) ) , supporting increased research and development for conventional ccs and for carbon utilization technologies and direct air capture of co 2 .

several bills would authorize technology prizes for advances in ccs r&d , including for utilization technologies and direct air capture .

p.l .

115-123 was enacted on february 9 , 2018 , and it likely will take time to evaluate the impact on u.s. ccs activities .

other factors , such as the price of oil , which could affect demand for eor and thus co 2 , and the price of natural gas — which could affect the substitution of natural gas for coal in electricity production — will also shape the extent and rapidity of ccs adoption as well .

enactment of other legislation introduced in the 115 th congress ( appendix ) that would provide additional incentives for ccs could also influence future ccs activities .

ultimately the success of legislative approaches advocated by bill sponsors , and more broadly by ccs proponents , will be measured by how those approaches reduce costs for ccs , through financial incentives , technology development , and commercially viable co 2 - based products , so that the suite of ccs technologies would be more broadly deployed .

absent a policy mandate for reducing co 2 emissions , or rewarding co 2 capture and storage or utilization ( apart from the 45q tax incentives enacted in p.l .

115-123 ) , there is broad agreement that costs for ccs would need to decrease before the technologies are commercially deployed across the nation .

the issue of greater ccs deployment is fundamental to the underlying reason ccs is deemed important by a range of proponents: to reduce co 2 emissions ( or reduce the concentration of co 2 in the atmosphere ) and help mitigate against human - induced climate change .

the conventional concept of ccs whereby co 2 emissions from large stationary sources in the united states , such as fossil fuel electricity generating plants , refineries , cement plants , and others was recognized early on as a potential pathway to reducing a large amount greenhouse gas emissions from a relatively small number of point sources .

the u.s. fossil fuel electricity generation sector alone emitted 1.8 billion tons of co 2 in 2016 , or 34% of total u.s. co 2 emissions ( 5.31 billion tons ) that year .

the emerging technologies for utilizing co 2 for a variety of uses and products ( carbon utilization , see figure 5 ) has energized some ccs advocates because of the commercial potential and prospects for the sequestration of co 2 in long - lasting products such as cements and plastics .

a challenge for utilization advocates is whether the market for carbon utilization products and uses is sufficiently large so that the amount of co 2 captured or removed from the atmosphere has some measurable effect on human - induced climate change .

direct air capture ( dac ) also has energized some ccs advocates as it offers the promise of net - negative carbon removal if the co 2 removed by dac is permanently stored or sequestered .

the challenge for dac is fairly straightforward — how to reduce the cost per ton of co 2 removed .

