on may 18 , 2017 , the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) formally notified congress of the trump administration's intent to renegotiate the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) .

as during the original nafta negotiations in the early 1990s among the united states , canada , and mexico , textile and apparel trade is once again likely to attract considerable congressional attention and debate .

nafta , which took effect nearly a quarter - century ago , lowered or removed many barriers to goods trade within north america .

prior to nafta , 65% of u.s. apparel imports from mexico entered duty - free , and the remaining 35% faced an average tariff rate of 17.9% .

mexico's average tariff on u.s. textile and apparel products was 16% , with duties as high as 20% on some products .

over the 10-year period after nafta entered into force , all tariffs on textile and apparel produced and traded within north america were fully eliminated , spurring more integrated textile and apparel production in the region .

many specific provisions affecting textile and apparel trade appear in nafta's annex 300-b .

the trump administration has stated that its objectives for renegotiation of nafta include maintaining duty - free access to the mexican and canadian markets for u.s. textile and apparel products and improving competitive opportunities for u.s. textiles and apparel , while taking into account u.s. import sensitivities .

the administration has also proposed changes in other areas of the agreement , such as customs enforcement and rules for determining a good's origin , which may be significant for the textile and apparel industries .

u.s. textile producers and the domestic retail and apparel sectors have asked that the trump administration strive to "do no harm" in the renegotiation and avoid any disruption to trade and investment linkages encouraged by nafta .

formal talks with canada and mexico began in august 2017 .

if a new nafta deal is reached , it would be subject to ratification by the legislatures of all three countries .

another possibility is that president trump may decide to withdraw from nafta , which the united states can do with six months' notice to the other parties .

the textile industry is one of the oldest manufacturing industries in the united states .

since nafta took effect more than two decades ago , there have been substantial changes in the u.s. textile industry — perhaps most notably , it has become highly automated and capital - intensive .

in addition , textile businesses have arranged their north american production around the agreement's terms .

nafta has been criticized for causing a loss of production and employment in u.s. manufacturing .

the effects of nafta with respect to textiles and apparel , however , are not straightforward , and the drop in domestic textile and apparel production and jobs cannot be blamed solely on the agreement .

making it difficult to isolate the impact of nafta are the many other factors that have contributed to the shrinking size of the domestic textile and apparel sectors over the past quarter - century , among them automation , industry consolidation , currency fluctuations , and economic growth .

as the nafta renegotiations progress , there are at least three possible outcomes: ( 1 ) no change to the textile and apparel provisions in nafta ; ( 2 ) adjustments to nafta , such as changes to rules of origin ; or ( 3 ) full u.s. withdrawal from nafta .

over the long run , global textile and apparel supply chains would adjust to a modified nafta or to its elimination , but it is unclear how long that may take .

under a withdrawal scenario , some analysts believe u.s. textile manufacturers could see a reduction in net income by as much as 1 percentage point if the result is less demand for u.s. - made yarns and fabrics within the nafta region .

according to one textile and apparel industry expert , ending nafta would likely result in u.s. apparel brands and retailers importing more garments from other suppliers , such as china and vietnam .

moreover , u.s. textile manufacturers could lose export sales to mexico , the united states' single largest export market .

it is possible that asian textile and apparel suppliers would benefit the most from nafta's dismantlement by taking market share from mexico .

whatever the outcome of the nafta renegotiation , in the medium and long run , the profitability of the north american textile and apparel industry will likely depend less on nafta preferences such as yarn forward and more on the capacity of producers in the region to innovate to remain globally competitive .

another matter worth considering is that although the united states withdrew from the proposed tpp in january 2017 , the 11 remaining tpp countries are continuing to pursue a tpp - type trade deal .

if negotiations among the tpp - 11 move forward , this could affect the supply chains established under nafta , although the implications are unknown because no specific proposals for a possible tpp - 11 agreement have been tabled to date .

if the tpp - 11 countries strike a trade deal , one possible effect is that the amount of textiles and apparel sourced from the newly established tpp region would increase .

canada and mexico are both parties to the tpp talks , and a tpp - 11 agreement could result in them importing more textile and apparel products from other tpp countries , including vietnam .

this could ultimately be a disadvantage for u.s. - based producers .

how the inclusion of canada and mexico in a fresh tpp arrangement would affect their participation in nafta is unknown .

it may take a couple of years to know exactly what changes the nafta renegotiation will bring , and how they will affect the existing textile and apparel regional supply chain .

president trump currently has trade promotion authority until july 1 , 2018 , allowing him to negotiate trade agreements that congress must approve or reject without amendment .

this authority expires on july 1 , 2018 , but current law allows it to be extended through july 1 , 2021 .

appendix a .

textile industry overview appendix b .

top 10 states in textile employment appendix c. selected apparel and textile duties appendix d. selected textile and apparel industry comments on nafta negotiating objectives links to several statements by industry representatives for u.s. fiber and textile manufacturers , u.s. fashion brands , and u.s. apparel retailers are listed here .

these statements reflect a consensus from all stages of the textile and apparel supply chain that nafta should continue because it helps maintain both sectors' overall competitiveness .

without nafta , according to these statements , current textile and apparel production and jobs could be shifted to other regions of the world , especially low - cost markets in asia .

the comments also suggest a few general recommendations for other policy issues of interest , including matters related to improving intellectual property rights to combat counterfeit goods , preventing restrictions on e - commerce and digital trade , improving regulatory cooperation , and updating nafta's labor provisions .

