congress continues debate on several issues regarding coal production on federal lands , including how to balance coal production against other resource values .

federal coal leases accounted for 40-42% of total u.s. coal production in recent years .

other concerns include how to assess the value of the coal resource , what is the fair market value ( eg , minimum bids ) for the coal , and what should be the government's royalty .

in response to these congressional concerns , a 2013 government accountability office ( gao ) analysis found inconsistencies in how the bureau of land management ( blm ) evaluated and documented federal coal leases .

in addition , a 2013 department of the interior ( doi ) inspector general report found blm may have violated provisions in the mineral leasing act ( mla ) by accepting below - cost bids for federal coal leases .

subsequently , the secretary of the interior announced the initiation of a new rule for the valuation of coal .

a proposed rule was published on january 6 , 2015 , and finalized in july 2016 .

the blm administers coal leasing on all federal lands .

all blm coal leasing is done competitively except in cases where a party holds a "prospecting permit" issued prior to the federal coal leasing amendments act of 1976 or where contiguous acres are added to existing leases .

the process for coal leasing on federal lands is similar to the process for oil and gas leasing .

it is governed by section 2 of the mineral leasing act , as amended .

federal coal leasing is based on the blm's resource management plan and the forest service land use plans .

there are two processes by which federal lands may be leased for coal production .

the first is "regional coal leasing," in which blm selects tracts for leasing as needed to meet regional requirements as outlined by "regional coal teams" composed of blm officials and interested state and local parties .

the second is leasing by application whereby mining companies submit an application to lease certain tracts .

nearly all new coal leasing is done by application .

under section 437 of the energy policy act of 2005 , congress directed the george w. bush administration to conduct an inventory and assessment of federal coal resources and restrictions on their development .

the study was to identify lands available for coal development and restrictions on the lands and to identify environmentally compliant and super - compliant resources ( based on sulfur dioxide emissions per million british thermal units [btus] ) .

the study evaluated the powder river basin ( prb ) federal land and coal resources .

according to the study , the prb contained 550 bst , or 58% of the federal resources assessed , and prb represents 88% of coal produced on federal lands .

the total federal land ownership surveyed was 5.4 million acres ( including split estate lands whereby the surface owner and mineral rights owner are two separate parties ) .

there are three major categories of land classification in the study: 1. leasing available under standard lease terms or with no surface occupancy ; 2. leasing permitted with restrictions ( possible leasing ) ; and 3. leasing prohibited .

leasing is prohibited on 591,000 acres in the prb , which is estimated to contain 5.9% of potential federal coal .

leasing is "possible" on 4.3 million acres ( subject to blm's determination ) containing an estimated 84.3% of federal coal resources ( see figure 8 ) .

leasing is available under standard lease terms on 82,000 acres and available with no surface occupancy on 431,000 acres , containing 5% and 4.3% of federal coal resources , respectively .

on january 16 , 2016 , president obama announced a moratorium on federal coal leasing .

the purpose of the moratorium was to examine the federal coal leasing program and to determine whether it needs to be "modernized. .

the secretary of the interior directed blm ( under secretarial order 3338 ) to prepare a programmatic environmental impact statement ( peis ) of the coal leasing program to serve as the basis for a comprehensive review .

there has been both support and opposition in congress to the moratorium .

on january 11 , 2017 , the obama administration published its scoping report as a prelude to the comprehensive draft and final peis .

blm presented three leasing modernization options centered on four main categories ( in alignment with the secretarial order ) : fair return to the public , climate change and resource protection , the federal leasing system , and community assistance .

in addition to the three possible options , the blm discusses no action and no leasing alternatives .

the trump administration , however , issued an executive order on march 28 , 2017 , that amends or withdraws secretarial order 3338 and lifts "any and all" moratoria on federal coal leasing .

critics of the previous administration's moratorium on new coal leases stated that there will be major impacts on coal communities and coal markets .

several environmental groups and the northern cheyenne indian tribe filed a lawsuit in a montana - based federal court to keep the coal leasing moratorium in place and allow for the completion of the environmental review .

concerns raised by various interest groups include the question of whether the public has been getting "fair market value" for the sale of coal leases .

there has been little or no competition at most coal lease sales ; thus , bonus bids were often at minimum levels .

some argued that the minimum bid levels of $100 per acre and the royalty rate levels ( i.e. , 8% on the value of production for underground mines and 12.5% for surface mines ) are too low .

there have been concerns over lease modifications that could allow coal mining operators to lease adjacent tracts for development without competition .

according to the blm , many of these tracts would otherwise go undeveloped .

the doi ( under the office of natural resources revenue , or onrr ) published a final rule regarding federal coal valuation .

the final coal valuation rule ( published july 2016 ) reaffirmed the current rule that the value of coal for royalty purposes is near or at the lease ( the source of production ) and that the gross proceeds from an arms - length transaction best reflect fair market value .

onrr had proposed no changes to the valuation of arms - length sales .

for non - arms - length coal transactions , onrr had proposed to eliminate current benchmarks because current benchmarks for coal valuation from non - arms - length sales are difficult to apply .

current benchmarks include comparable arms - length sales , prices reported for that coal to a public utility commission , prices for that coal reported to eia spot market prices , or a netback method .

instead , onrr would value coal on the gross proceeds received from the first arms - length sale minus allowable deductions .

in a separate trump administration coal - related announcement ( unrelated to the march 28 executive order ) , the coal valuation rules implementation ( scheduled for january 2017 ) was postponed by onrr on february 22 , 2017 , as onrr reconsidered several parts of the rule .

then , on april 3 , 2017 , the doi announced a proposal to repeal the coal valuation rule and provided an advanced notice of proposed rulemaking on the preexisting rule and the new rule seeking comment regarding whether the rules should be revised , retained , or repromulgated "in whole or in part. .

the department of the interior repealed the valuation rule on august 7 , 2017 , effective on september 6 , 2017 .

appendix a .

background primer on coal coal consists of the fossilized remains of ancient plant life that have been transformed through metamorphosis into carbon - rich mineral deposits .

it occurs as seams in sedimentary rock strata as old as 300 million years , though the most abundant deposits in the united states were deposited during the geologic carboniferous period between 210 and 250 million years ago .

coal mineral classification considers type , rank , and grade .

the plant life that coal originated from determines its type , and the degree of metamorphosis determines its rank , grade , and the amount of inorganic mineral matter present .

qualities such as moisture , carbon , sulfur , and ash content contribute to a coal's heating value as a fuel ( measured in btus ) .

the content of sulfur is significant because of the sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) emissions that occur during coal combustion .

under the clean air act , there are federal limits on the amount of so 2 , among other pollutants , allowed from coal - fired power plants .

western coal ( which has low sulfur and low energy content ) , primarily produced in the prb of wyoming , is used generally for power generation , while eastern coal has been used domestically for power generation and exported for coking and metallurgical purposes .

moisture adds weight to the coal , increasing shipping costs while decreasing its heating value .

minerals deposited with the plants that formed coal create ash when coal burns .

figure a - 1 below illustrates the various coal classifications .

coal mining methods there are two primary mining techniques used in the united states: underground mining and surface mining .

about 69% of u.s. coal comes from surface mines , while the remaining 31% comes from deep underground mines .

underground mining there are two primary underground mining techniques: room and pillar ( including conventional and continuous mining ) and longwall .

room and pillar and continuous mining is practiced as follows: in flat - lying coal beds , conventional room and pillar techniques rely on cutting , drilling , blasting , loading , hauling , and roof bolting — a labor - intensive process .

long steel bolts properly spaced and driven into the roof are required .

in continuous mining , the cutting , drilling , blasting , and loading are performed by a mechanical excavator known as a continuous miner .

the continuous miner cuts and loads the coal .

together , room and pillar and continuous techniques account for 50% ( conventional , room and pillar 2% ; continuous 48% ) of underground mining .

the most efficient technique in underground mining is the longwall method , which employs a large machine with a rotating drum that moves back and forth across a wide coal seam .

once coal is removed by a longwall miner or other method , it is then moved out of the mine with conveyor belts or shuttle cars .

about 50% of underground coal is produced using the longwall technique .

surface mining surface mining , also called "open - pit" or strip mining , entails blasting rock above the coal with explosives .

this overburden ( rock and soil ) above the coal deposit is then removed with huge electric shovels and draglines to reveal the coal seam .

the coal seam in a surface mine is worked in long cuts by uncovering and removing coal , then backfilling and reclaiming land in sequence .

in other words , while coal extraction is taking place , as required by federal law , the reclamation work occurs in an adjacent area previously mined .

mountaintop removal mining is a form of strip mining .

mountaintop removal mining generally removes a coal seam from one side of a mountain to the other .

this is typically done in "steep - terrain" surface mining .

some of the overburden or "excess spoil" from the top of the mountain can be placed in a valley fill .

the placement of the excess spoil in valleys adjacent to mining areas remains controversial .

appendix b .

selected company profiles peabody energy peabody energy , based in st louis , mo , and established in 1883 , is the world's largest private - sector coal company .

peabody has dominated u.s. coal production over the past two decades .

the company grew from 11.5% of industry production in 1994 to 19.6% of production in 2015 .

peabody has a majority interest in 23 coal mining operations and 6,700 employees in the united states and australia .

its most productive mines are in the prb in wyoming , which include the north antelope rochelle , caballo , and rawhide mines ( which account for 65% of its production in the prb ) .

peabody also operates mines in arizona and new mexico .

in australia , peabody operates three mine sites in new south wales and six mining operations in queensland .

peabody claims 6.3 billion tons of coal reserves ( most of which is thermal grade ) .

peabody had $4.7 billion in revenue in 2016 .

peabody has experienced issues with its debt levels since its 2011 expansion into australia ( the acquisition of two mines ) .

peabody debt - financed its acquisition of australian coal company macarthur coal for $5.1 billion in 2011 .

in 2015 , peabody had long - term debt of $6.3 billion and operational losses of $1.5 billion .

its stock price fell from $79.35 per share in april 2015 to $2.07 per share as of april 12 , 2016 .

peabody filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy in april 2016 , stating that overproduction of natural gas led to low gas prices , making coal less competitive .

the reorganization plan would eliminate over $5 billion in debt ( with $2 billion in debt remaining ) and cover future mine cleanups using third - party surety bonds estimated at $1.26 billion .

arch coal inc. arch coal was formed in 1997 , with headquarters in st. louis , mo .

the company came about from a merger of ashland coal inc. , and arch mineral corp. arch mineral began in 1969 .

ashland coal was formed as a subsidiary of ashland oil in 1975 .

in 1998 , arch coal acquired the coal assets of atlantic richfield .

arch coal operated 11 mines in the united states and had $2.6 billion in revenue in 2015 .

the company made several acquisitions in 2009-2011 , spending several billion dollars .

arch coal debt - financed the acquisition of metallurgical coal producer international holding group for $3.4 billion in 2011 .

about 76% of arch's coal comes from the prb , primarily its black thunder mine in wyoming .

arch's revenue fell from $3.9 billion in 2011 to $1.65 billion in 2016 and had major losses in the interim ( 2011-2016 ) .

in 2015 , arch coal was the leading metallurgical coal producer in the united states and the second leading thermal coal producer , accounting for 14.6% of total coal production .

arch was the third - largest producer in 2005 , producing in every u.s. coal basin , with mining complexes in wyoming , colorado , illinois , west virginia , kentucky , and virginia .

arch coal filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy in january 9 , 2016 , as its shares fell from a high of $260 per share in early january 2011 to less than $1 in 2015 .

arch coal emerged from chapter 11 bankruptcy on october 5 , 2016 .

the company restructured its debt and has a new entity trading on the new york stock exchange ( nyse ) ( arch ) .

arch "streamlined" its portfolio of large - scale , modern , low - cost mines with a new debt level of $363 million .

the company now has third - party bonds to cover its reclamation bonding requirement .

cloud peak energy cloud peak energy inc. is headquartered in wyoming and operates three surface mines in the prb — two in wyoming ( antelope and cordero rojo mines ) and one in montana ( spring creek mine ) .

cloud peak energy was incorporated in july 2008 .

cloud peak did not file for bankruptcy protection .

cloud peak energy was formed after the rio tinto group ( a large - scale mining corporation ) based in england spun off its 48.3% ownership in 2010 .

in 2015 , the company accounted for 8.4% of u.s. coal production and had 1,400 employees .

the number of employees fell to 1,300 in 2016 .

gross revenues fell from $1.5 billion in 2011 to $1.1 billion in 2015 .

cloud peak avoided layoffs because of transfers and attrition .

at current coal prices , no new mines are being developed , as it will take time to work through stockpiles and overcapacity .

cloud peak believes that the outlook for 2017 is better than 2016 .

the company has reduced its practice of self - bonding for reclamation to $10 million in 2016 from $200 million in 2015 .

its surety bonds accounted for $418 million out of $428 million in reclamation bonds .

cloud peak exports coal to the asian market .

alpha natural resources alpha natural resources ( anr ) , formed from a private equity group in 2002 , acquired the majority of pittston coal co. ( which was a subsidiary of the brink's co. ) .

anr made a number of acquisitions from 2003 to 2011 , including massey energy co. , which was debt - financed for $7.1 billion in 2011 .

the massey acquisition gave anr more than 150 mines and 40 coal preparation plants and a huge metallurgical - coal reserve base .

because of its heavy debt and low demand for coal , anr filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy on august 3 , 2015 .

anr emerged from chapter 11 bankruptcy in july 2016 and reorganized as a smaller company with 18 mine operations and eight coal preparation plants in west virginia and kentucky .

the reorganization discharged over $4 billion in debt , which included selling its prb mines and multiple holdings in kentucky .

up until its bankruptcy filings , anr had been self - bonded .

in 2016 , anr split into two companies — contura energy ( with the higher - valued assets in the prb ) and anr ( with the lower - valued assets elsewhere ) .

anr spun off its prb mine to ensure private bonding for reclamation projects in wyoming under contura energy ( with some of the same executives from anr ) .

contura bought anr mines in virginia , west virginia , and pennsylvania .

murray energy corporation murray energy was founded in 1988 by robert murray , who purchased the ohio valley coal company's powhatan mine .

murray energy continued to purchase mines in the illinois basin , northern appalachia , and utah .

murray invested in foresight energy , lp , in 2010 , after paying $1.4 billion for a 50% stake .

in 2013 , murray took over consol coal for $3.5 billion ( including $1.8 billion in employment obligations , such as pension benefits , workers compensation , and disability payments ) .

murray currently operates 12 active coal mines ( 11 in the united states and 1 in colombia with 6,000 miners ) .

according to murray , it is the largest privately held coal mining company in the united states .

murray energy did not file for bankruptcy protection .

standard & poor's downgraded murray's credit rating to the lowest possible level before default .

there was particular financial stress among coal producers in the northern appalachia region because of the marcellus shale natural gas play .

murray said that "as the coal industry is destroyed , so will reliable , low cost electricity in america. .

appendix c. selected coal - related crs reports crs report r43011 , u.s. and world coal production , federal taxes , and incentives , by marc humphries and molly f. sherlock crs insight in10460 , the federal coal leasing moratorium , by marc humphries crs report r43198 , u.s. coal exports , coordinated by marc humphries  crs report r43690 , clean coal loan guarantees and tax incentives: issues in brief , by peter folger and molly f. sherlock crs report r44090 , life - cycle greenhouse gas assessment of coal and natural gas in the power sector , by richard k. lattanzio crs report r44341 , epa's clean power plan for existing power plants: frequently asked questions , by james e. mccarthy et al .

crs report r44150 , the office of surface mining's stream protection rule: an overview , by claudia copeland crs report rs21421 , mountaintop removal mining: background on recent controversies , by claudia copeland crs in focus if10617 , pension benefits for united mine workers of america retirees , by john j. topolesk .

