the appointments clause of the constitution generally requires high - level "officers of the united states" to be appointed through nomination by the president , with the advice and consent of the senate .

however , appointment to these advice and consent positions can be a lengthy process , and officers sometimes unexpectedly vacate offices , whether by resignation , death , or other absence , leaving before a successor has been chosen .

in particular , there are often a large number of vacancies during a presidential transition , when a new president seeks to install new officers in important executive positions .

the most recent transition of administrations was no exception , and reports have noted that a number of offices across the executive branch currently remain vacant .

in the case of such a vacancy , congress has long provided that individuals who were not appointed to that office may temporarily perform the functions of that office .

generally , to serve as an acting officer for an advice and consent position , a government officer or employee must be authorized to perform the duties of a vacant office by the federal vacancies reform act of 1998 ( vacancies act ) .

the vacancies act allows only certain classes of employees to serve as an acting officer for an advice and consent position , and specifies that they may serve for only a limited period .

if a covered acting officer's service is not authorized by the vacancies act , any attempt by that officer to perform a "function or duty" of a vacant office has "no force or effect. .

this report first describes how the vacancies act operates and outlines its scope , identifying when the vacancies act applies to a given office , how it is enforced , and which offices are exempt from its provisions .

the report then explains who may serve as an acting officer and for how long , focusing on the limitations the vacancies act places on acting service .

finally , the report turns to issues of particular relevance to congress , primarily highlighting the vacancies act's enforcement mechanisms .

the vacancies act generally provides "the exclusive means for temporarily authorizing an acting official to perform the functions and duties of any office of an executive agency .

 .

 .

for which appointment is required to be made by the president , by and with the advice and consent of the senate. .

the vacancies act's requirements are triggered if an officer serving in an advice and consent position in the executive branch "dies , resigns , or is otherwise unable to perform the functions and duties of the office. .

because the vacancies act is generally exclusive and subject to limited exceptions , a person may not temporarily perform "the functions and duties" of a vacant advice and consent position unless that service comports with the vacancies act .

the vacancies act specifies that a "function or duty" is one that , by statute or regulation , must be performed by the officer in question .

section 3348 provides that , "unless an officer or employee is performing the functions and duties [of an office] in accordance with" the act , "the office shall remain vacant. .

if there is no acting officer serving in compliance with the vacancies act , then generally "only the head of [an agency] may perform" the functions and duties of that vacant office .

as a result , section 3348 usually allows three types of people to perform the functions and duties of an advice and consent office when it is vacant: the agency head , a person complying with the vacancies act , or a person complying with another statute that allows acting service .

section 3348 further provides that "an action taken by any person who" is not complying with the vacancies act "in the performance of any function or duty of a vacant office .

 .

 .

shall have no force or effect. .

the supreme court has suggested that the vacancies act renders any noncompliant actions "void ab initio ," meaning that the action was "null from the beginning. .

the consequences that flow from a determination that an action is "void" are more severe than if a court were to announce that the action was merely "voidable. .

a "voidable" action is one that may be judged invalid because of some legal defect , but that "is not incurable. .

for instance , before a court strikes down a voidable agency decision , it will often inquire into whether the legal defect created actual prejudice .

if an error is harmless , the court may uphold the agency action .

critically , acts that are "void" may not be ratified or rendered harmless , meaning that another person who properly exercises legal authority on behalf of an agency may not subsequently approve or replicate the act , thereby rendering it valid .

the vacancies act affirms this consequence by explicitly specifying that an agency may not ratify any acts taken in violation of the statute .

as is discussed in more detail later in this report , the vacancies act has primarily been enforced through the courts , when a person with standing challenges an agency action on the basis that it was undertaken by an officer who was performing a function or duty of a vacant office in violation of the vacancies act .

if such a challenge is successful , a court would be likely to vacate the challenged agency action .

section 3348 of the vacancies act allows only certain officers or employees to perform the "functions and duties" of a vacant advice and consent office .

unless an acting officer is serving in compliance with the vacancies act , only the agency head can perform a nondelegable duty of a vacant advice and consent office .

the vacancies act creates two primary types of limitations on acting service: it limits ( 1 ) the classes of people who may serve as an acting officer , and ( 2 ) the time period for which they may serve .

the vacancies act provides "the exclusive means" to authorize "an acting official to perform the functions and duties" of a vacant office — unless another statute "expressly" ( a ) authorizes the president , a court , or the head of an executive department , to designate an officer or employee to perform the functions and duties of a specified office temporarily in an acting capacity ; or ( b ) designates an officer or employee to perform the functions and duties of a specified office temporarily in an acting capacity[. .

across the executive branch , there are many statutes that expressly address who will temporarily act for specified officials in the case of a vacancy in the office .

in fact , the senate report on the vacancies act expressly identified 40 agency - specific provisions that "would be retained by" the act .

to take one example , the senate report anticipated that the vacancies act would not disturb the provision governing a vacancy in the office of the attorney general .

that statute provides that "[i]n case of a vacancy in the office of attorney general , or of his absence or disability , the deputy attorney general may exercise all the duties of that office .

 .

 .

. .

in the event that there is an agency - specific statute designating a specific government official to serve as acting officer , the vacancies act will no longer be exclusive .

but even if the vacancies act does not ex clusively apply to a specific position , it will not necessarily be wholly inapplicable .

it is possible that both the agency - specific statute and the vacancies act may be available to temporarily fill a vacancy .

the senate report can be read to support this view: it states that "even with respect to the specific positions in which temporary officers may serve under the specific statutes this bill retains , the vacancies act would continue to provide an alternative procedure for temporarily occupying the office. .

however , if two statutes simultaneously apply to authorize acting service , this raises the question of which statute governs in the case of a conflict .

if there are inconsistences between the two statutes and an official's service complies with only one of the two statutes , such a situation may prompt challenges to the authority of that acting official .

the vacancies act sets out a detailed scheme delineating three classes of governmental officials that may serve as acting officers and expressly limits the duration of an acting officer's service .

by contrast , agency - specific statutes tend to designate only one official to serve as acting officer and often do not specify a time limit on that official's service .

accordingly , for example , if an acting officer is designated by the president to serve under the vacancies act but is not authorized to serve under the agency - specific statute , a potential conflict may exist between the two laws .

where two statutes encompass the same conduct , courts will , if possible , "read the statutes to give effect to each. .

courts are generally reluctant to conclude that statutes conflict and will usually assume that two laws "are capable of co - existence , .

 .

 .

absent a clearly expressed congressional intention to the contrary. .

with this principle in the background , judges have sometimes concluded that the vacancies act should operate concurrently with these agency - specific statutes , and that government officials should be able to temporarily serve under either statute .

accordingly , courts have resolved any potential conflict by holding that whichever statute is invoked is the controlling one .

at times , however , this method of reconciling the relevant statutes could conflict with the general interpretive rule that more specific statutes should usually prevail over more general ones — even where the more general statutes were enacted after the more specific ones .

for example , in hooks ex rel .

nlrb v. kitsap tenant support se rvices , one federal court of appeals rejected a litigant's contention that an agency - specific statute displaced the vacancies act and provided "the exclusive means" to temporarily fill a vacant position .

the agency - specific statute at issue in that case provided that if the office of the nlrb's general counsel is vacant , "the president is authorized to designate the officer or employee who shall act as general counsel during such vacancy. .

it also provided for a shorter term of acting service than the vacancies act .

the president , however , had invoked the vacancies act to designate an acting general counsel .

the court concluded that "the president is permitted to elect between these two statutory alternatives to designate" an acting officer .

accordingly , the court rejected the argument that because the officer's designation did not comply with the agency - specific statute , "the appointment was necessarily invalid. .

but the two statutes governing a vacant office might not always be so readily reconciled .

in hooks , both the vacancies act and the agency - specific statute expressly authorized the president to select an acting officer .

a more difficult question may be raised when an agency - specific statute instead seems to expressly limit succession to a particular official .

the federal courts recently considered such a contention in a dispute over who was authorized to serve as the acting director of the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) .

the position of cfpb director became vacant in late 2017 , and the president invoked the vacancies act to designate mick mulvaney , the director of the u.s. office of management and budget , to serve as acting director of the cfpb .

the deputy director of the cfpb , leandra english , filed suit , arguing that she was the lawful acting director under an agency - specific statute that provided that the cfpb's deputy director "shall .

 .

 .

serve as acting director in the absence or unavailability of the director. .

english argued that the agency - specific statute displaced the vacancies act under normal principles of statutory interpretation , as a later - enacted and more specific statute .

the u.s. district court for the district of columbia rejected these arguments and held that the president had permissibly invoked the vacancies act to designate mulvaney as acting director .

in the trial court's view , both statutes were available: the agency - specific statute "requires that the deputy director 'shall' serve as acting director , but .

 .

 .

under the [vacancies act] the president 'may' override that default rule. .

the court invoked two interpretive canons , the rule that statutes should be read in harmony and the rule against implied repeals , and concluded that under the circumstances , an "express statement" was required to displace the vacancies act entirely .

accordingly , because the agency - specific statute was "silent regarding the president's ability to appoint an acting director," it did not render the vacancies act unavailable .

english appealed this decision to the d.c .

circuit , but decided to discontinue her appeal before the appellate court issued its decision .

in cases such as hooks and english , courts are considering how to reconcile statutory provisions .

congressional silence on the relationship between agency - specific provisions and the vacancies act can raise difficult questions for courts trying to discern how to resolve any perceived inconsistencies between these statutes .

congress can itself resolve tensions between the vacancies act and agency - specific statutes by clarifying the conditions under which these statutes apply .

for example , the statute governing vacancies in the office of attorney general provides that "for the purpose of section 3345 of title 5 the deputy attorney general is the first assistant to the attorney general. .

this statute expressly clarifies — in at least one respect — how the two statutes interact .

the vacancies act only bars acting officials from performing the nondelegable functions and duties of a vacant advice and consent position .

unless a statute or regulation requires the holder of an office — and only that officer — to perform a function or duty , the vacancies act appears to permit an agency to delegate those duties to any other employee , who may then perform that duty without violating the vacancies act .

therefore , in many circumstances , an agency officer or employee who has not been appointed to a particular advice and consent position could perform many , if not all , of the responsibilities of that position .

for example , the government accountability office ( gao ) considered in 2008 whether a senior official in the department of justice's office of legal counsel ( olc ) , the principal deputy assistant attorney general , had violated the vacancies act by performing the responsibilities of an absent officer , the assistant attorney general for the olc .

the gao concluded that the principal deputy had not violated the vacancies act because he had merely been performing the duties of his own position , which included the delegated duties of the vacant office .

the gao approved of this delegation after reviewing the relevant statutes and regulations and concluding that "there [were] no duties" that could be performed only by the assistant attorney general .

while there are few cases considering what types of duties may be nondelegable for purposes of the vacancies act , the courts that have considered the issue have upheld the ability of government officials to perform the delegated duties of a vacant office , so long as the delegation is otherwise lawful .

outside the context of the vacancies act , courts often presume that delegation is permissible "absent affirmative evidence of a contrary congressional intent. .

however , if a statute expressly prohibited delegation of a duty , that would likely render that duty nondelegable for the purposes of the vacancies act .

courts have also recognized that some statutes may limit the class of officers to whom a duty is delegable , meaning by implication that the duties are not delegable outside of that specified class .

as discussed above , the text and the legislative history of the vacancies act suggest that congress intended the act to bar the performance of only nondelegable functions or duties .

this limitation on the scope of the vacancies act could potentially undermine one of the act's primary purposes: to prevent the executive from appointing "officers of the united states" without senate advice and consent .

namely , section 3347 provides that the vacancies act is "the exclusive means" to authorize a person to temporarily perform the duties of a vacant advice and consent office , and specifies that a statute that vests an agency head with the general authority to delegate duties will not suffice to override the vacancies act .

at the same time , however , a general vesting and delegation statute could permit an agency head to delegate any delegable responsibilities of a vacant office to another officer or employee .

as a result , if the responsibilities of a particular advice and consent position primarily consist of delegable duties , a general delegation statute could allow an agency employee to perform most of that position's responsibilities even though that employee was not appointed to that position through the advice and consent process — seemingly contrary to the goals of the vacancies act .

if congress were concerned about the ability of an acting officer to perform certain functions or duties of an advice and consent position , it could pass a statute specifying that those functions and duties must be performed by the officer in that position .

then , the vacancies act would limit the ability of other officers to perform those duties when the position is vacant .

congress could also enact other statutory limitations on the ability of certain officers to delegate their authority .

any such statute could place substantive limitations on the types of duties that are delegable or could create procedural limitations on the way in which duties may be delegated .

alternatively , if unsatisfied with the current language , congress could amend the definition of "function or duty" in the vacancies act .

the vacancies act may be enforced through both the political process and through litigation .

several provisions of the vacancies act are centrally enforced through political measures rather than through the courts .

for example , while the act provides that an "office shall remain vacant" unless an acting officer is serving "in accordance with" the vacancies act , the statute does not create a clear mechanism to directly implement this provision .

accordingly , the text of the vacancies act does not contemplate a means of removing any noncompliant acting officers from office .

similarly , if the comptroller general determines that an officer has served "longer than the 210-day period," the comptroller general must report this to the appropriate congressional committees .

however , this provision itself does not require the comptroller general to make any such determination and contains no additional enforcement mechanism .

but if the comptroller general does make such a report to congress , this reporting mechanism may prompt congressional action pressuring the executive branch to comply with the vacancies act , exerted through normal channels of oversight .

for instance , in march 2018 , the house committee on ways and means subcommittee on social security held a hearing on a vacancy in the office of the commissioner of social security .

the day before the hearing , the comptroller general issued a letter reporting that the acting commissioner , nancy berryhill , was violating the vacancies act .

shortly thereafter , berryhill reportedly stepped down from the position of acting commissioner , serving instead in her position of record as deputy commissioner of operations .

arguably , the most direct means to enforce the vacancies act is through private suits in which courts may nullify noncompliant agency actions .

the vacancies act appears to render noncompliant actions void .

as noted earlier , a determination that an action is void means that legally , it is as if the action had never been taken in the first place .

but as a practical matter , not every act taken in violation of the vacancy act will necessarily be formally rendered void in a court of law .

although the vacancies act is , in a sense , self - executing , violations of the vacancies act are generally enforced only if a third party with standing ( such as a regulated entity that has been injured by agency action ) successfully challenges the action as void in court .

the dearth of case law examining the vacancies act suggests that such cases are relatively rare .

even in the context of these lawsuits , it is not always entirely clear what relief a court may afford a regulated entity , if the court concludes that an acting officer has violated the vacancies act .

there is little case law interpreting what it means for an agency action to have "no force or effect" in the context of the vacancies act .

the supreme court has suggested that any such actions would be "void ab initio . .

to determine the consequences of such a determination , courts might turn to cases interpreting the judicial review provision of the administrative procedure act ( apa ) .

the apa directs courts to "hold unlawful and set aside" any agency action that is "arbitrary , capricious , an abuse of discretion , or otherwise not in accordance with law. .

this standard has clear parallels to the statement in the vacancies act that any action not "in accordance with" the vacancies act has "no force or effect. .

however , it does not appear that any court has yet officially recognized this similarity or compared the two standards .

as noted above , in nlrb v. sw general , inc. , the supreme court explicitly left open the question of remedy with respect to those officials who are carved out of section 3348 .

certain offices are exempt from the provision that nullifies the noncompliant actions of an acting officer , and the statute does not otherwise specify what consequences follow , if any , if a person temporarily serving in one of those offices violates the vacancies act .

the d.c .

circuit and the supreme court in sw general accepted the parties' apparent agreement that the actions of a noncompliant acting general counsel of the nlrb — one of the excepted offices — were voidable .

the determination that an agency action is voidable , rather than void , might have important consequences for the outcome of any court challenge because it could allow a court to consider mitigating arguments such as the harmless error doctrine or the ratification doctrine .

however , notwithstanding its decision to accept the parties' litigating postures in that case , the d.c .

circuit expressly left open the possibility that the vacancies act might "wholly insulate the acting general counsel's actions," so that the actions of an acting officer in one of these named offices are not even voidable .

it is possible that the vacancies act does not undermine the legality of the actions of these specified officers , even if they violate the act , and that , under this interpretation , these positions could be indefinitely filled by acting officers without consequence under the vacancies act .

these questions may be clarified in future litigation , but congress could , if it so chose , add statutory language more explicitly addressing or otherwise clarifying the consequences of violating the vacancies act , particularly with respect to those offices exempt from the enforcement mechanisms contained in section 3348 .

congress could also amend the existing enforcement mechanisms , possibly by altering the reporting requirements or by adding additional consequences for violations of the vacancies act .

