in an increase over prior terms , the supreme court of the united states issued six opinions involving patent law during its october 2016 term .

these decisions addressed issues ranging from patent exhaustion , multicomponent products , and biosimilar patents to procedural issues like venue and the statute of limitations for infringement claims .

the increase in patent cases heard by the high court coincides with an apparent increase in patent litigation generally .

as observed by judge kathleen o'malley of the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit ( federal circuit ) , the court that has exclusive jurisdiction over most appeals involving patents: "while federal filings in complex civil cases in regional circuits have been down in recent years , the patent litigation business is booming .

indeed , patent filings in district courts have almost doubled from 2010 — when there were 3,301 patent actions filed — to 2013 , when ... there were 6,497 such cases instituted. .

the increase in patent litigation may reflect a broader interest in patents generally .

as judge timothy dyk , also of the federal circuit , has written: "[p]atent law has ... moved further into the mainstream .

and the importance of intellectual property to the broader american economy has continued to grow , with an estimated 84% of the s&p 500 market value attributable to intangible assets in 2015. .

another commentator has noted that "patent law is indisputably more visible to lawyers and to the general public today than it was a decade or two ago .

stories about patent law , patent litigation , and even the federal circuit itself are regular fixtures of leading newspapers...." accordingly , an understanding of patent law and the cases issued during the supreme court's recently concluded october 2016 term will likely be of interest to congress .

to this end , this report begins with an overview of patent law .

it then discusses the supreme court's role in the development of patent law generally before examining the court's recent decisions in detail .

finally , the report closes with a preview of developments in patent law that are on the horizon , such as the continued viability of certain administrative proceedings related to the validity of patents , which is the subject of two cases scheduled to be heard during the court's upcoming term , as well as patent reform activity in the legislative and executive arenas .

the patent law regime in the united states is grounded in the u.s. constitution itself ; article i , section 8 , clause 8 of the constitution provides: "the congress shall have power ... to promote the progress of science and useful arts , by securing for limited times to .. .

inventors the exclusive right to their respective .. .

discoveries. .

nonetheless , the rights associated with patents do not arise automatically .

rather , to obtain patent protection , the patent act of 1952 requires inventors to file a patent application with the pto .

in addition to the effects of the patent decisions issued by the supreme court during its october 2016 term , there are a number of patent - related issues on the horizon .

such issues stem from future supreme court cases to be heard during its next term ; legislative proposals in congress ; and executive initiatives in the intellectual property area .

as noted , the pto's inter partes review proceedings are one of the major patent reforms made by the aia , but their continued availability is contingent on the judgment of the supreme court .

specifically , on june 12 , 2017 , the supreme court granted certiorari in oil states energy services v. greene's energy group on the sole question as to "[w]hether inter partes review — an adversarial process used by the [pto] to analyze the validity of existing patents — violates the constitution by extinguishing private property rights through a non - article iii forum without a jury. .

while the federal circuit summarily dismissed the oil states case ( i.e. , without a written opinion ) , it previously rejected a constitutional challenge to inter partes review proceedings in a written decision .

specifically , in mcm portfolio v. hewlett - packard , the federal circuit addressed whether inter partes review proceedings violate ( 1 ) article iii of the constitution , by delegating issues to the pto that must be adjudicated by a federal court , and ( 2 ) the constitution's seventh amendment because there is no jury in pto proceedings .

article iii establishes the federal court system , providing that the "judicial power shall extend to all cases , in law and equity , arising under ... the laws of the united states," while the seventh amendment provides: "in suits at common law , where the value in controversy shall exceed twenty dollars , the right of trial by jury shall be preserved...." in rejecting the constitutional challenge , the federal circuit reasoned that: the patent right derives from an extensive federal regulatory scheme , and is created by federal law .

congress created the pto , an executive agency with specific authority and expertise in the patent law , and saw powerful reasons to utilize the expertise of the pto for an important public purpose — to correct the agency's own errors in issuing patents in the first place... .

there is notably no suggestion that congress lacked authority to delegate to the pto the power to issue patents in the first instance .

it would be odd indeed if congress could not authorize the pto to reconsider its own decisions .

the supreme court denied certiorari in mcm portfolio , while granting it in oil states .

in its brief on the merits , filed on august 24 , 2017 , oil states raises two main arguments .

first , the company asserts that "[i]nter partes review impermissibly transfers the responsibility for deciding common - law suits from article iii judges to administrative agency employees who are beholden to executive branch officials — precisely the evil the framers sought to avoid. .

second , oil states contends that "[i]nter partes review impermissibly supplants juries as well as judges," in violation of the seventh amendment .

greene's energy group's brief on the merits is currently due on october 23 , 2017 , while oil states' reply is due november 20 , 2017 .

there appears to be much anticipation as to the outcome of this case .

one commentator has stated that "[t]he supreme court's decision holds the potential to be one of the most significant patent decisions in decades. .

in deciding this case , the supreme court must determine whether a patent is a private property right , like real property , and therefore revocable only in an article iii tribunal , as opposed to a pub l ic right created by an administrative agency empowered to revoke that right .

notably , the patent act itself contains a provision stating "patents shall have the attributes of personal property. .

if the court were to find that patents are private property rights and hold that inter partes review proceedings are unconstitutional , there would be a cascade of consequences for the u.s. patent regime .

among the possible consequences experts are currently discussing is the question of what will happen to patents that were invalidated in inter partes review proceedings .

since the proceedings began in 2012 , the pto has received approximately 7,000 petitions and , of the more than 1,500 final decisions it has issued , roughly 1,300 have invalidated at least some patent claims .

one commentator has framed the question this way: "'what happens to all those patents ? .

do they suddenly spring back to life ? ' .

relatedly , as discussed above , is the fact that the pto invalidates patents through other administrative proceedings , including reexamination proceedings , which have been available since the 1980s .

in addition to the question of the fate of patents invalidated during inter partes review proceedings is that of those invalidated during reexamination .

further , if the supreme court rules that inter partes review proceedings are unconstitutional , this will call into question the constitutionality of the pto's other revocation proceedings , including reexamination and post - grant reviews .

finally , should the court hold that inter partes review proceedings are unconstitutional , the question of the impact on the caseload of the federal courts looms large .

as noted , about 7,000 petitions for inter partes review proceedings have been filed in the last five years .

while it is unlikely that all such petitions would amount to infringement complaints lodged in the federal courts , it seems likely that the elimination of pto revocation proceedings will have a tangible effect on the dockets of the federal courts .

notably , as of the date of this report , the only other patent case scheduled to be heard during the court's october 2017 term also involves inter partes review proceedings .

in sas institute v. matal , the court granted certiorari to answer the following question: does 35 u.s.c .

§ 318 ( a ) , which provides that the [ptab] in an inter partes review "shall issue a final written decision with respect to the patentability of any patent claim challenged by the petitioner," require that board to issue a final written decision as to every claim challenged by the petitioner , or does it allow that board to issue a final written decision with respect to the patentability of only some of the patent claims challenged by the petitioner , as the federal circuit held ? .

under current pto practice , a petitioner may challenge a patent "on all or some of the challenged claims," and the pto may institute a proceeding on a subset of the petition's challenged claims .

obviously , the challenge as to whether the pto must address all patent claims challenged by a petitioner will become moot if the court strikes down inter partes review proceedings as unconstitutional in oil states .

standing alone , however , sas institute also has implications for the pto because it has the potential to eliminate a practice of the agency that allows it to manage its workload by limiting the number of challenged claims it must analyze .

as noted , patent reform appears to be of perennial concern to congress .

for instance , prior to the enactment of the aia in 2011 , there were several years of legislative activity in this area .

with regard to patent reform , issues that have received attention include , but are not limited to: ( 1 )  remedies for patent infringement , including the availability of damages , injunctive relief , and attorney fees ; ( 2 ) administrative proceedings before the pto , such as those enacted in the aia ; ( 3 ) the issue of non - practicing entities ( i.e. , patent trolls ) ; and ( 4 ) the high costs and burdens of patent litigation for u.s. businesses , and the costs that are passed on to consumers , particularly in the drug context .

most recently , in the 115 th congress , the support technology and research for our nation's growth and economic resilience patents act ( stronger patents act ) of 2017 was introduced .

the bill's stated purpose is "to strengthen the position of the united states as the world's leading innovator by amending title 35 ... to protect the property rights of the inventors that grow the country's economy. .

the bill contains many provisions of the support technology and research for our nation's growth patents act of 2015 ( strong patents act ) of the 114 th congress , as well as provisions from the targeting rogue and opaque letters act of 2015 ( trol act ) .

at center , the stronger patent act addresses the pto's post - grant proceedings , with much of its provisions devoted to reforms of the inter partes review and post - grant review proceedings .

for example , the bill would align the pto's patent claim construction standard with that of the federal courts .

the bill would also require that findings of patent invalidity by the pto be proved by "clear and convincing" evidence , as they are in district court litigation .

with regard to standing in pto proceedings , the bill would limit potential petitioners to only those individuals and enterprises who have a demonstrated adverse relationship to the challenged patent to the exclusion of nonpracticing entities ( i.e. , patent trolls ) .

in addition to provisions amending pto administrative proceedings , title ii of the bill empowers the federal trade commission to take certain enforcement actions against nonpracticing entities that send misleading patent - related demand letters .

while addressing some of the concerns raised in the oil states litigation with regard to inter partes review , as one observer has noted , the bill may modify or overturn the holdings of at least five intellectual property - related supreme court cases from the past decade , including ebay inc. v. mercexchange , microsoft corp. v. at&t corp. , global - tech appliances v. seb sa , akamai techs .

v. limelight networks , and cuozzo speed techs .

v. lee .

the future of the bill remains to be seen , but it should be noted that similar patent reform legislation introduced in prior congresses , such as the strong patents act of 2015 , did not lead to enactment .

finally , on the executive front , the central policy pronouncement related to patents and intellectual property issued since president donald trump took office was the initiation of an investigation into china's intellectual property practices , including patent protection .

on august 14 , 2017 , president trump issued a presidential memorandum directing the united states trade representative ( ustr ) to "determine ... whether to investigate any of china's laws , policies , practices , or actions that may be unreasonable or discriminatory and that may be harming american intellectual property rights , innovation , or technology development" pursuant to section 301 of the trade act of 1974 .

the ustr initiated such an investigation on august 18 , 2017 , and is scheduled to convene a public hearing on october 10 , 2017 .

while the investigation is in its early stages , it could result in remedial trade actions in response to a finding of unfair intellectual property practices , such as the suspension of trade agreement concessions or the imposition of duties or import quotas , among others .

