o riginally enacted by the first congress as part of the judiciary act of 1789 , the alien tort statute ( ats ) has been described as a provision that is "u nlike any other in american law" and "unknown to any other legal system in the world. .

in its current form , the complete text of the ats provides that "[t]he district courts shall have original jurisdiction of any civil action by an alien for a tort only , committed in violation of the law of nations or a treaty of the united states. .

although it is only a single sentence long , the ats has been the subject of intense interest in recent decades , as it evolved from a rarely used jurisdictional statute to a prominent vehicle for foreign nationals to seek redress in u.s. courts for human rights offenses and acts of terrorism .

t his report examines the development of the ats , beginning with its origins in the first congress and continuing through to the supreme court's recent decision in jesner v. arab bank , plc , where the court held that foreign corporations are not subject to ats liability .

deconstructed , the ats statute provides federal district courts with jurisdiction to hear cases with four elements: ( 1 ) a civil action ( 2 ) by an alien ( 3 ) for a tort ( 4 ) committed in violation of the law of nations or a treaty of the united states .

the significance of these requirements is as follows: 1 .

a c ivil action : the ats allows only for civil ( rather than criminal ) liability .

2 .

by an alien : a crucial , distinctive feature of the ats is that it provides jurisdiction for u.s. courts to hear claims filed only by aliens ( i.e. , non - u.s. nationals ) .

the ats does not provide jurisdiction for suits alleging torts in violation of the law of nations by u.s. nationals — although other statutes may allow for such claims .

3 .

for a tort : as a general matter , a tort is "a civil wrong , other than breach of contract , for which a remedy may be obtained , [usually] in the form of damages[.] .

4 .

in violation of the law of nations or a treaty of the united states : the ats requires that the tort asserted be considered a violation of either the "law of nations" or a treaty ratified by the united states .

the term "law of nations" is now often understood to refer to "customary international law. .

as a general matter , customary international law is international law that is derived from "a general and consistent practice of states followed by them from a sense of legal obligation. .

state practices that form the basis for customary international law are often referred to as international "norms. .

but the process of identifying what norms are actionable under the ats is a complex judicial function that was the subject of much debate and was addressed by the supreme court in sosa v .

alvarez - machain , discussed below .

under article iii of the constitution , congress is empowered ( but not obligated ) to create a system of federal courts inferior to the supreme court .

as one of its first official duties , the first congress passed legislation , now known as the judiciary act of 1789 ( judiciary act ) , creating a system of federal district and circuit courts .

the original iteration of the ats was included in section 9 of the judiciary act — a provision which broadly addressed the jurisdiction of the federal district courts .

congress made minor modifications to the ats in 1873 and 1911 .

the current version , quoted above , was enacted in 1948 .

twenty years after judge bork and judge edwards framed the debate over whether the ats creates a cause of action , the supreme court addressed the cause - of – action question in sosa v. alvarez - machain .

in kiobel , a group of nigerian nationals residing in the united states filed an ats suit against dutch , british , and nigerian oil companies for allegedly aiding and abetting human rights abuses committed by the nigerian police and military in nigeria .

the second circuit dismissed the case on the ground that corporations cannot be liable for violations of the law of nations under the ats , and the supreme court originally granted certiorari on the question of corporate liability .

after hearing oral argument , the court requested additional briefing and ordered reargument on a new issue that would become dispositive for the case: does the ats confer jurisdiction to hear claims for violations of the law of nations occurring within the territory of a sovereign other than the united states ? .

in the supreme court's most recent ats case , jesner v. arab bank , plc , the court granted certiorari to resolve another lingering circuit split in ats litigation: may corporations be deemed liable under the ats ? .

jesner was the second time the supreme court took up the issue of corporate liability under the ats .

although it ultimately decided kiobel on extraterritoriality grounds , the court originally granted certiorari in that case to review a holding in the second circuit that the law of nations does not recognize corporate liability .

at the time certiorari was granted in je s n er , however , the second circuit was the only circuit to reach this conclusion .

all other circuits that considered the issue had determined that corporate liability is available under the ats .

after nearly two centuries of relative obscurity , the ats emerged as a prominent legal mechanism for human rights and terrorism - related litigation after the second circuit's decision in filártiga .

but while numerous suits premised on the ats were filed by foreign nationals in the aftermath of filártiga , the supreme court has never ruled in the plaintiff's favor in an ats case .

instead , the high court placed significant limitations on the scope of viable ats claims through decisions in sosa , kiobel , and , most recently , jesner .

some commentators see the supreme court's ats jurisprudence as having limited the statute's jurisdictional reach so significantly as to result in the end of the ats's era of importance .

others interpret the high court's rulings as having left the door open for certain limited categories of cases against natural persons or u.s. corporate defendants .

ultimately , the jesner court emphasized the need for "further action from congress" before recognizing an expansion of ats jurisdiction beyond its 18th century roots , and therefore the future of ats litigation may be dictated by the legislative branch rather than the courts .

