t he national park service's ( nps's ) backlog of deferred maintenance ( dm ) — maintenance that was not done as scheduled or as needed — is an issue of ongoing interest to congress .

the agency estimated its dm needs for fy2016 at $11.332 billion .

although other federal land management agencies also have dm backlogs , nps's backlog is the largest .

because unmet maintenance needs may damage park resources , compromise visitors' experiences in the parks , and jeopardize safety , nps dm has been a topic of concern for congress and for nonfederal stakeholders .

potential issues for congress include , among others , how to weigh nps maintenance needs against other financial demands within and outside the agency , how to ensure that nps is managing its maintenance activities efficiently and successfully , and how to balance the maintenance of existing parks with the establishment of new park units .

this report addresses frequently asked questions about nps dm .

the discussion is organized under the headings of general questions , funding - related questions , management - related questions , and questions on congress's role in addressing the backlog .

congress has addressed nps's maintenance backlog through oversight , funding , and legislation .

for example , in the 115 th congress , both the house and the senate have held oversight hearings to investigate options for addressing nps dm .

annual appropriations for nps are discussed in crs report r42757 , national park service: fy2017 appropriations and ten - year trends .

several recent laws and proposals outside of annual appropriations , including the national parks centennial act of 2016 and bills introduced in the 115 th congress , are discussed under the following questions .

the national parks centennial act ( p.l .

114-289 ) , enacted in december 2016 , contained a variety of provisions aimed at addressing the nps maintenance backlog as well as meeting other park goals .

the law created two funds that may be used to reduce dm — the national park centennial challenge fund and the second century endowment for the national park service .

both funds receive federal monies from the sale of senior recreation passes , as well as donations .

dm projects are a prioritized use of the centennial challenge fund and are among the potential uses of endowment funds .

the law also made changes to extend eligibility for the public land corps and increase the authorization of appropriations for the volunteers in the parks program .

participants in these programs perform a variety of duties that help address dm , among other activities .

in addition , the law authorized appropriations of $5.0 million annually for fy2017-fy2023 for the national park foundation to match nonfederal contributions .

contributions to the foundation are used for a variety of nps projects and programs , including projects on the maintenance backlog .

bills in the 115 th congress related to nps deferred maintenance include the following .

h.r .

1577 , the national park service transparency and accountability act , would require the secretary of the interior to submit to congress a report evaluating the nps's capital investment strategy and its results , including a determination of whether the strategy is achieving its intended outcomes and any recommendations for changes .

h.r .

2584 / s. 751 , the national park service legacy act of 2017 , would establish a national park service legacy restoration fund with funding from mineral revenues .

annual amounts deposited into the fund would begin at $50.0 million for fy2018-fy2020 and would rise gradually to $500.0 million for fy2027-fy2047 .

the funds would be available to nps for expenditure without further appropriation .

they would be used for "high - priority deferred maintenance needs of the service," with 20% of the funding going to transportation - related maintenance and the remaining 80% going to repair and rehabilitation of non - transportation - related assets .

projects with a nonfederal cost share would receive special treatment in priority rankings .

the funding could not be used for land acquisition , and it could not supplant discretionary funding for nps facility operations and maintenance .

h.r .

2863 , the land and national park deferred maintenance ( land ) act , would establish a national park service maintenance and revitalization conservation fund .

the fund would receive $450.0 million each year from mineral revenues , of which $375.0 million would go to nps , with $25.0 million going to each of three other agencies: fws , blm , and fs .

the monies would be available for expenditure without further appropriation and would be used for "high priority deferred maintenance needs that support critical infrastructure and visitor services. .

funds could not be used for land acquisition .

s. 1460 , section 5101 , would establish a national park service maintenance and revitalization conservation fund as part of a broader energy - modernization bill .

although the fund would have the same name as in h.r .

2863 , the senate version would provide for deposits to the fund of $150.0 million per year from offshore revenues collected under the outer continental shelf lands act ( 43 u.s.c .

1338 et seq. ) .

the funds would be available for expenditure only when appropriated by congress .

the monies would be used for "high - priority deferred maintenance needs of the service that support critical infrastructure and visitor services" and could not be used for land acquisition .

