article ii section 1 of the u.s. constitution , as modified by the 12 th amendment , provides for an indirect election of the president and vice president by presidential electors .

although the states are authorized to appoi nt them "in such manner as the legislature thereof may direct," today , presidential electors are themselves elected by qualified voters in all the states .

in order to win , candidates must win a majority of the electoral votes .

although the words do not appear in the constitution , the electors are known collectively as the electoral college , and this arrangement is generally referred to as the electoral college system .

it has proved to be a durable institution or process , due in part to the fact that the u.s. constitution is , by design , not easily amended .

its longevity may also be due to the fact that it has delivered a chief executive who commanded a majority of electoral votes in 53 of 54 presidential contests since the 12 th amendment took effect in 1804 .

also important from the standpoint of democratic principle and majority rule is the fact that the electoral college system has elected the candidates who won the most popular votes — "the people's choice" — in 49 of these 54 elections .

despite its origins as the handiwork of the constitution's framers , the electoral college system has been criticized as undemocratic , archaic , cumbersome , and weighted in favor of — or against — different states and groups since the first presidential elections .

at the same time , electoral college defenders have asserted that it is a key foundation of federalism , it contributes to a stable and moderate political party system , and that it has delivered "the people's choice," the popular vote winner in 91% of presidential elections since 1804 .

congress actively considered electoral college reform for nearly 30 years between the late 1940s and 1979 , bringing multiple proposals to the floor of the senate and house of representatives during this period .

reform advocates , however , were never able to achieve the two - thirds vote required to propose a constitutional amendment in both houses during the same congress .

by the early 21 st century , the questions of reforming electoral college constitutional provisions or substituting direct popular election of the president and vice president gradually disappeared from the congressional agenda .

in 2016 , however , for the second time in 16 years , and for the fourth time in the nation's history , a president and vice president were elected who won a majority of electoral votes , but fewer popular votes than their principal opponents .

this outcome occurred because the system requires a majority of electoral votes , rather than of popular votes , to win the presidency .

this feature , which is original to the constitution , has been the object of both criticism and proposals for change since the early days of the republic ; its recurrence in 2016 contributed to renewed interest among some in replacement of the electoral college by direct popular election .

following the election , four proposals to establish direct popular election were introduced in the last weeks of the 114 th congress , while two more have been offered to date in the 115 th congress .

this report identifies and provides an analysis of these proposals and will be updated to report on any additional developments in electoral college reform .

following the presidential election of november 8 , 2016 , proposals to establish direct popular election of the president and vice president were introduced in congress for the first time since 2011 .

four resolutions were offered late in the 114 th congress and two more have been offered to date in the 115 th congress .

these measures were introduced as joint resolutions , the traditional legislative vehicle for proposed constitutional amendments .

they fall into one of two categories ; the first includes resolutions that would establish direct popular election but otherwise make few , if any , other changes in the constitution .

the second category would establish direct popular election , and would also enable congress to provide by law for additional federal authority over a range of election - related issues .

these vary from measure to measure , but generally include provisions to enhance and extend federal jurisdiction in such areas as residence standards , definition of citizenship , national voter registration , inclusion of u.s. territories and other associated jurisdictions in the presidential election process , establishment of an election day holiday , and ballot access standards for parties and candidates .

aside from the introduction of new proposals late in the 114 th and the early 115 th congress , the question of electoral college reform has been largely absent from the congressional agenda in recent years .

the issue has , however , been the subject of considerable action in the states and the non - governmental sector over the past decade .

the electoral college system has endured since the first presidential elections in 1789 , notwithstanding over 700 reform proposals , three decades of congressional action from the 1940s through the 1970s , and the fact that in two of the five most recent elections a president has been elected with an electoral college majority but fewer popular votes than his principal opponents .

what are some of the constitutional and political elements that may have contributed to its longevity ? .

perhaps the most important factor contributing to the durability of the electoral college is article v of the constitution , which establishes procedures for constitutional amendments .

the founders intentionally made it difficult to revise the constitution , establishing requirements for three separate super - majority votes: by two - thirds in both houses of congress and in three - quarters of the states .

to this may be added the fact that congress exercises still further influence on the amendment process because it can choose ratification by state legislatures , or by ad hoc state ratification conventions , at its discretion .

in practice , the standard for ratification is even higher , since it is customary to attach a seven - year deadline for ratification to all proposed amendments .

to date , no electoral college reform amendment has been able to meet these exacting requirements , notwithstanding sometimes vigorous action in congress over the years .

most successful constitutional amendments have emerged as responses to the stimulus of sudden transformative events , such as the 22 nd amendment , which established a two - term limit for presidents in most instances , or benefitted from the "ripeness" of an idea that had been before the public for many years , such as the 26 th amendment , which extended the right to vote to citizens 18 years of age or older .

sometimes both factors contributed to the successful proposal and ratification of a proposed change to the constitution , as was the case with the 25 th amendment , which governs presidential succession and disability .

committed and persistent advocacy and leadership among senior members of both houses of congress is another factor that has proved essential to the success of proposed constitutional amendments .

public awareness of the issue in question and a broad national consensus that reform was necessary have also historically contributed to the success of proposed amendments .

the 12 th amendment , to date the only major constitutional change to the electoral college system that met these qualifications , was a direct response to turmoil accompanying the presidential election of 1800 .

the failure of the original constitutional electoral college provisions led to a constitutional crisis that , once surmounted , motivated congress to propose , and the states to ratify , the 12 th amendment , in what could be described as record time , considering the era .

although "public opinion" in its modern sense can scarcely be said to have existed at the time , america's political elites had been strongly influenced by the election and its aftermath .

today , by comparison , although substantial majorities of americans , as measured by survey research , approve of direct popular election , neither a compelling national consensus nor the urgency of reform has been demonstrated with respect to the electoral college .

finally , as noted above , successful amendments have almost always depended on support and focused effort by congressional leaders who helped move amendments through the legislative process in both chambers of congress to proposal to the states and ratification by them .

for instance , both the 25 th and 26 th amendments enjoyed the approval and active support of then - house judiciary committee chairman emanuel celler and senator birch bayh , then - chairman of the senate judiciary committee's subcommittee on the constitution .

in summation , demonstrated need for an amendment , and in some instances demonstrated urgency , widespread awareness of , and a favorable consensus toward , the measure among the public , and committed congressional involvement , particularly in guiding proposals through the rigors of the amending process , have been key to the success of constitutional amendments in the past .

the concurrent alignment of these factors would arguably be necessary for the advancement of electoral college reform in the 115 th congress .

