congress has led both u.s. and international efforts to eliminate severe forms of trafficking in persons , particularly with its enactment of the victims of trafficking and violence protection act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-386 ) .

division a of that act , the trafficking victims protection act of 2000 ( tvpa ) , established u.s. antitrafficking policy to ( 1 ) prevent trafficking , ( 2 ) protect trafficking victims , and ( 3 ) prosecute and punish traffickers ( known as the three ps ) .

a key element of the tvpa's foreign policy objectives involved a new requirement for the secretary of state to produce an annual report on human trafficking and to rank foreign governments based on their antitrafficking efforts .

in the ensuing reports , which the state department titled as trafficking in persons ( tip ) reports , the department developed a ranking system in which the best countries were identified as tier 1 and the worst tier 3 .

moreover , the tvpa stipulated that the worst performers ( tier 3 countries ) in the tip report could be subject to potential restrictions on certain types of u.s. foreign aid and other u.s. and multilateral funds — a policy that is intended to motivate countries to avoid tier 3 by prioritizing antitrafficking efforts .

the tip report's annual release remains a topic of widespread interest among international and domestic stakeholders , including congress .

since the tvpa's enactment 17 years ago , congress has continued to adjust the requirements associated with how countries are ranked in the tip report , as well as the policy consequences of such rankings .

 ( see figure 1 below. ) .

these changes were often the result of congressional dissatisfaction with some aspect of the tip report: due to difficulty discerning differences among tier 2 countries , congress modified the tvpa in 2003 to create a special watch list , composed of countries that deserve enhanced scrutiny .

out of concern that countries were listed for too many consecutive years on the special watch list , congress modified the tvpa in 2008 to limit the number of years a country may remain on it .

in response to the plight of children exploited in armed conflict , congress modified the tvpa in 2008 to require the state department to identify countries whose governments recruit and use child soldiers .

with the objective of linking u.s. trade policy to antitrafficking outcomes , congress in 2015 prohibited tier 3 countries from participating in authorized trade negotiations .

as a result of greater awareness of antitrafficking best practices , congress has incrementally expanded its expectations for governments to conduct serious and sustained effor ts to address human trafficking .

in light of ongoing congressional scrutiny of the state department's tip report and its country ranking process , several bills in the 115 th congress have been introduced to further modify requirements associated with the tip report .

some of these proposed changes could significantly change — and at least temporarily complicate — the current tip report's methodology .

a critical question is whether further changes to the tip report's methodology will incentivize countries to boost their antitrafficking efforts or , in contrast , may erode the legitimacy of the tip report as a credible tool to advocate for human trafficking concerns .

this crs report describes the legislative provisions that govern the u.s. department of state's production of the annual tip report , reviews country ranking trends in the tip report , and identifies recent congressional oversight of and legislative activity to modify the tip report .

answers to selected frequently asked questions ( faqs ) are included throughout the report .

the contents of each annual tip report are governed by two provisions , one in the tvpa , as amended , and a second in the child soldiers prevention act of 2008 ( cspa ) .

in addition , current law requires the president and the secretary of state to prepare related follow - on documentation for certain categories of countries .

these include reporting requirements that were added to the tvpa as part of tvpa reauthorization acts , as well as requirements contained in the bipartisan congressional trade priorities and accountability act of 2015 ( tpa ) , as amended .

as discussed above , a central and required element of each tip report is the evaluation of each government's commitment to eliminating severe forms of trafficking in persons .

countries are assessed on the basis of four minimum standards and 12 criteria prescribed by the tvpa , as amended .

while the four minimum standards have not been amended since the tvpa was first enacted , the criteria for evaluating what constitutes serious and sustained efforts to eliminate trafficking have been modified and expanded through multiple reauthorizations of the tvpa since 2000 .

although these provisions prescribe the means through which the state department evaluates the efforts of foreign governments , country - specific considerations often leave state department officials considerable discretion in categorizing countries ( for further discussion , see section on " ranking dispute resolution " below ) .

the tvpa established that certain types of foreign assistance may not be provided to governments that are not committed to meeting the minimum standards for the elimination of severe forms of trafficking in persons ( tier 3 countries ) .

it is the policy of the united states not to provide nonhumanitarian , non - trade - related foreign assistance to any government that — ( 1 ) does not comply with minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking ; and ( 2 ) is not making significant efforts to bring itself into compliance with such standards .

the tvpa created the office to monitor and combat trafficking in persons ( j / tip ) within the state department , whose director holds the rank of ambassador - at - large .

the j / tip director is charged with overseeing the annual publication of the tip report , among other responsibilities laid out in the tvpa .

in parallel to the drafting of the introductory material and the country narratives , the department's bureau of democracy , human rights , and labor ( drl ) initiates the process for identifying countries to be included in the list of governments that recruit and use child soldiers .

although not specified in law , each tip report typically covers country developments beginning in april of each year and ending in march of the following year .

an implicit objective of the tvpa was to leverage the country ranking process of the tip report as a foreign policy tool to motivate foreign governments to prioritize and address human trafficking .

some suggest the tip report can be used as a potent form of soft power as both a "name - and - shame" or "blacklist" process and a mechanism for country - by - country monitoring of antitrafficking progress .

in theory , publications like the tip report can mobilize domestic and international pressure for policy change .

in practice , while some countries appear to be responsive to the tip report , others remain intractable .

out of 187 countries ranked in the 2017 tip report , 36 countries were ranked tier 1 and more than 80% of the ranked countries in this year's tip report remained noncompliant with the minimum standards laid out by the tvpa for eliminating trafficking in persons .

pathways to the t op .

several countries' rankings have improved from noncompliant to tier 1 , including armenia , which was rated tier 3 in 2002 and eventually improved to tier 1 by 2013 .

guyana , which was rated tier 3 in the 2004 and experienced multiple years on the tier 2 watch list before attaining a tier 1 rating for the first time in 2017 .

israel , which was rated tier 3 in 2001 and eventually improved to tier 1 by 2012 .

south korea , which was rated tier 3 in 2001 and immediately improved to tier 1 the following year .

progress in reverse .

other countries , which used to be fully compliant with the minimum standards to eliminate trafficking ( tier 1 ) , have since become noncompliant , including benin , which attained tier 1 status in 2003 , but after many years on tier 2 , further declined to the tier 2 watch list in 2016 and 2017 .

bosnia and herzegovina , which began as a tier 3 country in 2001 , attained tier 1 status in 2010 , but later declined to tier 2 watch list in 2014 .

it has been a tier 2 country since 2015 .

cyprus , which attained tier 1 status in 2016 after many years vacillating between tier 2 and tier 2 watch list , dropped back down to tier 2 in 2017 .

hong kong , which began as a tier 1 country in 2001 and remained so until 2008 .

in 2009 , it dropped to tier 2 and dropped again in 2016 to tier 2 watch list , where it remained in 2017 .

hungary , which attained tier 1 status in 2007 , but dropped to tier 2 watch list in 2017 .

iceland , which attained tier 1 status in 2012 , but dropped to tier 2 in 2017 .

mauritius , which began as a tier 1 country in 2003 and has since vacillated between compliant and noncompliant .

after dropping to tier 2 watch list in 2015 , it rose to tier 2 in 2016 , where it remained in 2017 .

morocco , which attained tier 1 status in 2003 , but has been rated tier 2 since 2015 .

nepal , which attained tier 1 status in 2005 , but has since been rated tier 2 .

nigeria , which attained tier 1 status in 2009 , but dropped to tier 2 watch list in 2017 .

no change .

the rankings of several other countries have been unchanged .

unchanged tier 1: australia , austria , belgium , denmark , germany , italy , the netherlands , new zealand , norway , spain , united kingdom , and united states .

unchanged tier 2 : aruba , bhutan , el salvador , kosovo , mongolia , palau , and uganda .

unchanged tier 3: eritrea and north korea .

of the 45 countries on the tier 2 watch list in the 2017 tip report , 22 had been tier 2 watch list in 2016 and 9 required waivers to remain on the tier 2 watch list for their third or fourth consecutive year .

 ( see table 4 above for the list of tier 2 watch list countries in the 2017 tip report and discussion in section on " watch list downgrades " above. ) .

the state department's tip report is highly anticipated each year in congress , with congressional oversight and evaluation taking the form of hearings , requests for gao reports , and legislation .

hearings .

in recent years , the senate foreign relations committee has held closed briefings with state department officials in anticipation of the tip report's release as well as public hearings after its publication .

the house foreign affairs committee , particularly its subcommittee on africa , global health , global human rights , and international organizations , has also long held hearings on the tip report .

comptroller reports .

to date , gao has prepared two reports that directly address the state department's tip report , one in 2006 and a second in 2016 .

both contain gao recommendations that remain pending or unimplemented .

legislation in the 115 th congress .

several bills in the 115 th congress have been introduced to further modify requirements associated with the tip report , including h.r .

2200 , the frederick douglass trafficking victims prevention and protection reauthorization act of 2017 , which passed the house on july 12 , 2017 , and contains several changes to the tip report's country ranking process .

other bills introduced in the 115 th congress that , if passed , would modify requirements associated with the tip report include h.r .

436 , the human trafficking prioritization act ; s. 377 , the trafficking in persons report integrity act ; h.r .

1191 , the child soldier prevention act of 2017 ; and h.r .

2219 and s. 952 , the end banking for human traffickers act of 2017 .

common themes in the legislative proposals to modify the tip report's methodology focus on reducing the prospects for political interference , while also increasing public transparency and congressional oversight into the state department's country ranking process .

a key focus of the proposals involves changes to the special watch list or tier 2 watch list .

various bills seek to modify: the number of years a country may remain on the tier 2 watch list , from a maximum of four years ( two consecutive years on tier 2 watch list , plus a maximum of two waivers to remain on the list for two more years ) to three ( two consecutive years on tier 2 watch list , plus one waiver ) ; the conditions under which a country may remain on the tier 2 watch list ( excluding those that have committed to take future antitrafficking steps , but have not already taken concrete steps to implement policies that would constitute significant efforts toward becoming compliant with the tvpa's minimum standards for eliminating trafficking ) ; expectations for upgrading a tier 2 watch list country that exhausted its permitted time on that list and was subsequently downgraded to tier 3 for lack of progress , including whether or how long it would be permitted to return to the tier 2 watch list in the future ; public documentation requirements to justify the continued listing of a country on the tier 2 watch list ; and country narratives in the tip report to explicitly rationalize a country's upgrade or downgrade compared to its previous - year ranking .

some bills also seek to further define key terms in the tvpa used by the state department to determine country rankings , including proposed changes to the scope of foreign assistance subject to restriction ; changes to the tvpa's four minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking ; additions to the currently 12 criteria used to evaluate whether a country is making serious and sustained efforts to eliminate trafficking ( the fourth minimum standard ) ; revisions to what constitutes significant efforts to become compliant with the four minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking ; and new definitions for the terms concrete actions and credible evidence .

if these proposals are enacted , they would constitute significant changes to the current tip report's methodology .

a critical issue is whether changes to the tip report's methodology would motivate countries to do more to combat human trafficking or , in contrast , could undermine its value as a tool of soft power diplomacy .

some countries , which criticize the current ranking process as opaque , may prefer more detailed statutory instructions for how to assign tier rankings .

additional transparency in the tip report's rankings and country narratives could clarify expectations for future upgrades .

other countries , particularly those with limited resources and capabilities to address human trafficking , may have more difficulty proving progress in the report .

if changes to the tip report's ranking process result in more countries falling to tier 3 , additional policy question may arise , including whether the president would subject more tier 3 countries to foreign aid restrictions or whether the administration would use waivers to minimize the consequences of poor rankings in the tip report .

