in the past , congress has regularly acted to extend expired or expiring temporary tax provisions .

collectively , these temporary tax provisions are often referred to as "tax extenders. .

of the 33 expiring provisions addressed in the most recent tax extender legislation , included in the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( bba18 ; p.l .

115-123 ) , 18 were energy - related .

thirteen of the energy tax provisions addressed in bba18 were provisions that had expired in 2016 and were extended through 2017 .

thus , even though these provisions were recently extended , they remain expired .

these 13 expired energy tax provisions are reviewed in this report .

the expired energy tax provisions are diverse in purpose , providing various types of tax incentives for renewable electricity , alternative and renewable fuels , vehicles , building energy efficiency , and other energy activities .

before bba18 , expired energy tax provisions were extended in the protecting americans from tax hikes ( path ) act of 2015 , enacted as division q of the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

this law retroactively extended temporary tax provisions that had expired at the end of 2014 .

unlike much of the previous tax extender legislation , this law did not temporarily extend most or all expired provisions .

instead , a number of temporary provisions were made permanent , while others were extended through 2016 or 2019 .

while certain business , individual , and charitable provisions were made permanent or extended through 2019 , energy - related provisions were generally extended for two years , through 2016 , in the path act .

there were longer - term extensions for certain renewables in division p of p.l .

114-113 .

specifically , the law provided longer - term extensions with scheduled phaseouts of tax credits for wind and solar .

the renewable electricity production tax credit ( ptc ) for wind was extended through 2019 , with the phaseout starting for facilities beginning construction in 2017 .

for wind facilities that begin construction during 2017 , the credit is reduced by 20% .

the credit is reduced by 40% for facilities that begin construction in 2018 , and reduced by 60% for facilities that begin construction in 2019 .

the 30% investment tax credit ( itc ) for business solar was extended through 2019 and the deadline changed from a placed - in - service deadline to a construction start date .

the business solar itc was set to be 26% for facilities beginning construction in 2020 and 22% for facilities beginning construction in 2021 , so long as these facilities are placed in service before the end of 2023 .

the business solar itc is scheduled to return to 10% in 2022 .

the tax credit for residential solar was extended through 2021 , with a phaseout starting in 2020 .

several provisions in bba18 provided extensions for energy - tax provisions that matched the longer - term extensions that had been enacted as part of the path act .

specifically , the itc for nonsolar technologies was extended and modified , such that the phaseout and termination for nonsolar technologies matched what had been established for solar in the path act .

five - year cost recovery that is generally available to itc - eligible property , as well as wind property , was also extended through 2021 .

the tax credit for residential energy - efficient property was also extended through 2021 for nonsolar technologies , with a phaseout in 2020 and 2021 .

further discussion of these provisions is not included in this report , as these provisions did not expire in 2017 .

additional energy tax provisions were included in bba18 .

specifically , the law extended the per - barrel excise tax on oil used to fund the oil spill liability trust fund , modified the tax credit for production from advanced nuclear power facilities , and enhanced the carbon dioxide sequestration credit .

again , further discussion of these provisions is not included in this report , as these provisions did not expire in 2017 .

there are several options for congress to consider regarding temporary provisions .

the 2017 tax revision ( p.l .

115-97 ) adds new context in considering further extension of expired temporary tax provisions .

broadly , the revised tax system became effective in 2018 .

thus , one perspective might be that extending expired provisions through 2017 allows these provisions to remain available up until the revised tax system took effect at the beginning of 2018 .

whether the temporary tax provisions that expired at the end of 2017 have a place in the new tax system is a question the 115 th congress may consider .

ultimately , provisions that expired at the end of 2017 could be extended .

the extension could be retroactive , such that provisions will be available for all of the 2018 tax year .

the extensions also could be short term , long term , or permanent .

another option would be to allow expired provisions to remain expired .

table 1 provides information on ( 1 ) the cost of the one - year extension of expired energy tax provisions in bba18 , over the 2018 to 2027 budget window ; and ( 2 ) the estimated reduction in federal revenues that would result from making expired energy tax provisions permanent .

irc section 451 ( i ) permits taxpayers to elect to recognize any capital gain from the sale of qualifying electricity transmission property to an independent transmission company ( itc ) , pursuant to a federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) restructuring policy , evenly over eight years beginning with the year of the sale .

the sale proceeds must be reinvested in other electricity assets within four years .

this special tax incentive is available for sales made through december 31 , 2017 .

generally , any gain realized from a sale or disposition of a capital asset is recognized in the tax year in which the gain was realized , unless there is a specific exemption or deferral .

the recognition of gain over eight years , rather than in the year of sale , is a deferral , rather than a complete forgiveness , of tax liability .

the economic benefit derives from the reduction in the present value of the tax owed below what the tax would otherwise be if it were required to be recognized in the year of sale .

the deferral of gain on the sale of transmission assets was enacted on a temporary basis as part of the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-357 ) , with the goal of encouraging energy transmission infrastructure reinvestment and assisting those in the industry who are restructuring .

it is intended to foster a more competitive industry by facilitating the unbundling of transmission assets held by vertically integrated utilities .

under restructuring , states and congress have considered rules requiring the separate ownership of generation and distribution and transmission assets .

however , vertically integrated electric utilities still own a large segment of the nation's transmission infrastructure .

the tax provision encourages the sale of transmission assets by vertically integrated electric utilities — the unbundling of electricity assets — to independent system operators or regional transmission organizations , who would own and operate the transmission lines .

the provision is intended to improve transmission management and service , and facilitate the formation of competitive electricity markets .

in recent years , this provision has been extended as part of "tax extenders" legislation .

most recently , the provision was extended through 2017 in bba2018 .

the restructuring of the electric power industry has resulted in significant reorganization of power assets , and may continue to do so .

in particular , it may result in a significant disposition of transmission assets and possibly , depending on the nature of the transaction , trigger an income tax liability and interfere with industry restructuring .

under an income tax system , the sale for cash of business assets subject to depreciation deductions triggers a tax on taxable income in the year of sale to the extent of any gain .

corporations pay capital gains on sales of capital assets , such as shares of other corporations .

but gains on the sale of depreciable assets involve other rules .

for example , sales of personal property , such as machinery , are taxed partly as capital gains and partly as ordinary income .

the overall taxable amount is the difference between the sales price and basis , which is generally the original cost minus accumulated depreciation .

that amount is taxed as ordinary income to the extent of previous depreciation allowances ( depreciation is "recaptured" ) .

the credit for indian coal production provides a tax credit for indian coal produced from reserves , which on june 14 , 2005 , were owned by an indian tribe or held in trust by the united states for a tribe .

the amount of the credit is $2.00 per ton ( adjusted for inflation ; $2.387 per ton in 2016 ) .

the credit is available for coal sold after december 31 , 2005 , and before january 1 , 2018 .

the coal does not need to be sold for the production of electricity or any specific purpose .

before 2015 , the credit was only available for indian coal produced at facilities that were placed in service before january 1 , 2009 .

indian coal was added to the production tax credit ( ptc ) as a new qualifying resource by the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) .

when enacted , the credit was available for coal sold to an unrelated third party during the seven - year period beginning after december 31 , 2005 , and ending before january 1 , 2013 .

the credit was $1.50 per ton of coal sold during the first four years of the period , and $2.00 per ton for coal sold during the last three years of the period .

congress extended the credit for indian coal for one year in atra , reasoning such an extension would "encourage continued mining of coal resources on indian lands. .

the credit has subsequently been extended as part of "tax extenders. .

in addition to extending the credit through 2016 , the path act modified the provision , removing the january 1 , 2009 , placed - in - service requirement and modifying the third party sale requirement .

the path act also exempts the credit from the alternative minimum tax ( amt ) .

the credit for the production of indian coal was extended through 2017 in bba2018 .

proponents of the indian coal production tax credit have argued the credit helps compensate indian coal producers for more restrictive regulatory requirements faced by coal producers on indian lands , and encourages investment and jobs on indian lands .

concerns related to the credit include environmental and social considerations related to the use of coal - fired power .

