the maternal and child health ( mch ) services block grant is administered by the maternal and child health bureau ( mchb ) of the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) in the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

this block grant is intended to improve the well - being of the low - income maternal and child population .

according to hrsa , the mch services block grant serves as a "safety - net provider for the [maternal and child health] population by providing gap - filling health care services , as well as essential public health services , to the [maternal and child health] population. .

generally , these services are provided to pregnant women , mothers , children , and children with special health care needs ( cshcns ) , some of whom are also eligible for and receive services from medicaid or the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) .

the mch services block grant is composed of three funding programs .

the first is a block grant and is the largest of the three funding programs .

it is provided to states and territories ( referred to collectively as states in this report ) to enable them to coordinate programs , develop systems , and provide a broad range of health services .

the second funding program is the special projects of regional and national significance ( sprans ) program .

sprans is a competitive grant program that funds research and training projects that focus on low - income pregnant women , mothers , and children , including cshcns .

the third funding program is the community integrated service systems ( ciss ) program .

ciss is a competitive grant program that funds projects that support the development and expansion of integrated services at the community level .

the mch services block grant is the oldest federal - state partnership program .

a federal - state partnership is a program that joins a federal agency with a state or jurisdiction , in order for the two to address a certain issue .

under this federal - state partnership , states make available federal and nonfederal funds to provide health care services to their maternal and child health populations ( see the " requirements of block grant allocation and distribution " section of this report ) .

the fy2015 dollar amounts from these sources , the latest available , are presented in table a - 1 .

congress established this block grant under title v of the social security act ( ssa , p.l .

74-271 , as amended ) .

the mch services block grant was established to serve as a single block grant under the previous ssa statutory heading , "title v – grants to states for maternal and child welfare" ; which was referred to as "title v." in 1981 , congress combined the mch services block grant with other maternal and child health services and programs .

such services and programs aimed to improve the health of mothers and children , particularly those in low - income households .

they included maternal and child health services , services for disabled children , child welfare services , and vocational rehabilitation services .

title v services included activities related to abstinence , postpartum depression , and personal responsibility educational services and programs .

the 97 th congress named this consolidation the mch services block grant and renamed it in statute as the "title v mch services block grant," which is commonly referred to as "title v." this change was implemented by the omnibus budget reconciliation act ( obra ) of 1981 ( p.l .

97-35 ) , as amended .

the 1981 obra gave states more flexibility in determining how to use federal funds to address maternal and child health needs .

in addition , the 1981 obra required that each state receive , at a minimum , the combined funding of the programs consolidated under it .

congress made additional changes to the mch services block grant under the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1989 ( p.l .

101-239 ) .

these changes increased the authorization of appropriations ; called for greater accountability ; and created stricter rules for application and reporting requirements for states , including a statewide needs assessment requirement .

over time , additional programs targeting cshcns and low - income women and children were added to the ssa and the public health service act ( phsa ) .

title v also supports services that are offered by the maternal , infant , and early childhood home visiting ( miechv ) program and the state - based cshcns program .

the primary use of funds under the mch services block grant , including formula grants to states , competitive grants for special projects of regional and national significance ( sprans ) , and competitive grants for projects through the community integrated services systems ( ciss ) program , is to provide core public health services for low - income mothers and children .

projects funded by sprans include maternal and child health workforce development , genetic services , and diagnostic and treatment services for hemophilia .

ciss grants fund projects that support integrated maternal and child health services at the community level .

the mch services block grant is allocated by formula .

the following allocation requirements are provided by 42 u.s.c §702 ( a ) : sprans: 15% of the appropriation that does not exceed $600 million , and 15% of funds remaining above $600 million after ciss funds are set aside .

ciss: 12.75% of the appropriation that is above 600 million .

block grants to states: remainder of the total appropriation .

these allocation requirements have not always been implemented ; for example , they were not implemented for the fy2016 funding ( see the " appropriations history " section of this report ) .

at the state and national levels , section 505 of the ssa requires three reporting mechanisms: 1 .

a needs assessment , which must be performed every five years ( as discussed in the " requirements to receive funds " section of this report ) .

2 .

an annual report , including program participation data , state maternal and child health measures , and state pediatric and family workforce measures .

3 .

an independent audit , which must be performed every two years .

each state must prepare and submit an annual report to the secretary of hhs on all title v activities .

the reports must be presented in a standardized format .

states must provide a list of activities and recipients of title v funding , along with a description of progress toward meeting national and state health objectives , and their consistency with the state's needs assessment .

specifically , these reports must include information on program participation , standardized measures of maternal and child health , and data on maternal and child health systems , including measures of the pediatric and family practice workforce .

while the measures are designed to standardize reporting across the states , states vary in terms of their capacity for collecting and reporting data .

for example , states must provide the number of individuals served , either in person or by phone , by the title v block grant .

the numbers provided by states may be estimates if the actual numbers are not available .

states are also required to report expenditures by the four broad categories of service ( direct health care services , enabling services , population - based services , and infrastructure - building services ) .

states are required to annually report pediatric and family practice workforce data to hrsa , including information on the number of obstetricians , family practitioners , certified family nurse practitioners , certified nurse midwives , pediatricians , and certified pediatric nurse practitioners who were licensed in the state in that year .

states are also required to report data on whether individuals who are eligible for programs such as medicaid and supplemental security income ( ssi ) are receiving services , or whether pregnant women have access to adequate prenatal care .

for example , states report the number of medicaid - eligible individuals who received a service paid for by the medicaid program .

in addition to the above - mentioned annually reported indicators , states select and report 7 to 10 priority needs in their five - year strategic plans ; states may annually adjust the strategic plans as their priorities change .

priority needs that were frequently identified in states' fy2017 mch services block grant applications include family support services , oral health services , childhood obesity prevention and treatment , mental and behavioral health systems , and access to services for children with disabilities .

hrsa must annually compile the information reported by states and present the data to the house committee on energy and commerce and the senate committee on finance in a report to congress .

this report must include a summary of the information reported to the secretary of hhs by the states ( described in the previous section ) and a compilation of specified maternal and child health indicators , nationally and by state .

states can access their vital statistics and health data from the national center for health statistics ( nchs ) of cdc .

the nchs does not collect vital statistics or health data for american samoa , commonwealth of the northern mariana islands , federated states of micronesia , guam , marshall islands , palau , puerto rico , or u.s. virgin islands .

therefore , these jurisdictions must report their own data .

the secretary must also provide a report on funded sprans and ciss projects to those committees .

appendix a .

source of funding for title v block grants to states , the district of columbia , and other jurisdictions , by state , fy2015 appendix b. appropriation history of the family - to - family health information centers the family - to - family health information centers ( f2f hics ) program was authorized under the following legislation: the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-171 ) received a direct appropriation of $3 million for fy2007 , $4 million for fy2008 , and $5 million for fy2009 .

the patent protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 ) replaced the $5 million to be appropriated in fy2009 and provided $5 million for each of fy2009-fy2012 for the program .

the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-240 ) funded the program at $5 million for fy2013 .

the bipartisan budget act of 2013 ( p.l .

113-67 ) provided a half year of funding ( $2.5 million ) , which expired april 1 , 2014 .

protecting access to medicare act of 2014 ( pama ; p.l .

113-93 ) provided $2.5 million for the remainder of fy2014 ( from april 1 , 2014 , to september 30 , 2014 ) , and it provided $2.5 million for the first half of fy2015 ( october 1 , 2014 , through march 31 , 2015 ) .

the medicare access and chip reauthorization act of 2015 ( macra ; p.l .

114-10 ) struck the partial funding provided and provided full - year funding of $5 million for fy2015 .

it also provided $5 million for each of fy2016 and fy2017 .

appendix c. mch services block grant funding history for the past 10 years appendix d. abbreviations used in this repor .

