this report provides an overview of u.s. arms sales to the middle east .

the report includes brief information on u.s. arms sales to the region since the end of the cold war ; data on current arms sales by country , with reference to specific cases , as they relate to regional and global geopolitical developments ; and analysis of how arms sales shape and reflect u.s. policy in the region in light of actions by congress and the executive branch .

the data in this report is based on a combination of resources , chiefly crs report r44716 , conventional arms transfers to developing nations , 2008-2015 , by [author name scrubbed] .

this report also uses the state department's world military expenditures and arms transfers ( wmeat ) reports , as well as other official and unofficial open - source data .

the countries above and their respective approaches to arms sales affect u.s. foreign policy objectives and congressional interests in multiple ways .

this section outlines related issues that congress may wish to consider via the legislative process ( including authorization and appropriations ) and / or oversight .

the term "qualitative military edge" ( qme ) was embraced by the reagan administration and its successors to refer to the advantage in military technology that israel , with a smaller territory and population than some of its historical adversaries , seeks to maintain .

the concept stems from traditional security concerns about israel's arab neighbors , with whom israel engaged in numerous conflicts over the course of several decades .

no formal definition in law existed until lawmakers codified u.s. support for israel's qme as u.s. policy in 2008 ( p.l .

110-429 ,ยง201 ) .

that legislation requires that any proposed u.s. arms sale to "any country in the middle east other than israel" must include a notification to congress with a "determination that the sale or export of such would not adversely affect israel's qualitative military edge over military threats to israel. .

it defines qme as the ability to counter and defeat any credible conventional military threat from any individual state or possible coalition of states or from non - state actors , while sustaining minimal damages and casualties , through the use of superior military means , possessed in sufficient quantity , including weapons , command , control , communication , intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance capabilities that in their technical characteristics are superior in capability to those of such other individual or possible coalition of states or non - state actors .

during its review of several planned sales over the years , congress has considered israeli concerns about arms transfers to some arab states , including a 1981 sale of airborne warning and control system ( awacs ) surveillance planes ( which ultimately occurred ) and a 1986 effort to sell several classes of missiles , both to saudi arabia .

in the former case , israeli concerns over plans to sell certain precision - guided weapons to saudi arabia and other persian gulf states delayed a major arms sales package that the george w. bush administration contemplated in 2007 .

however , israel now views iran as a top security challenge , a view shared by saudi arabia and other historic israeli adversaries in the region .

increasing levels of israeli alignment and even cooperation with arab states in combatting shared threats from iran and its allies , as well as the islamic state and other terrorist groups , might inform future evaluations of the role of israel's qme in u.s. arms sales to the region .

qme concerns may have played a role in the large sale of f - 15s to qatar in 2016 , which israel reportedly opposed , accusing qatar - based television channel al jazeera of incitement and citing qatari support for hamas .

some suggested that "israel sought to leverage the qatar sales" to boost the amount of military assistance it was negotiating with the united states .

the new u.s. - israel 10-year memorandum of understanding ( mou ) was signed in september 2016 .

senate foreign relations committee chairman bob corker stated in july 2016 that "when the mou is completed , hopefully as part of that , or shortly thereafter , these sales [to qatar] will be completed. .

the state department formally notified congress about the qatar sale on november 17 , 2016 .

in addition , the large package of arms sales to saudi arabia announced during president trump's may 2017 visit to the kingdom has reportedly raised israeli anxieties , with advocacy groups voicing concern and several ministers suggesting that the united states did not consult with israel in advance .

still , opposition to the saudi proposal appears muted in comparison to similar packages proposed in the past .

u.s. policy in the middle east appears to be partly driven by a desire to constrain iran's ability to threaten u.s. partners and / or assets in the region or to constrain the free flow of energy - related commerce through waterways such as the strait of hormuz .

u.s. arms sales to regional partners are important in countering iran ; in addition to various types of aircraft , ballistic missile defense ( bmd ) and naval assets are key considerations in regional countries' defense postures .

attack by ballistic missiles has been identified by many observers as the "greatest strategic threat to the gulf states," but success in constructing a unified , integrated missile defense has remained elusive since the early 1990s .

all gulf cooperation council ( gcc ) states have bmd capabilities , mostly from the united states in the form of patriot advanced capability - 3 ( pac - 3 ) and thaad systems , as well as various british , french , and russian platforms .

many proposed u.s. arms sales to the gulf have focused on improving these defense capabilities .

for instance , a proposed $2 billion deal with the uae for 60 patriot advanced capability 3 ( pac - 3 ) missiles , 100 patriot guidance enhanced missile - tactical ( gem - t ) missiles , and related support and equipment was described by the defense security cooperation agency in may 2017 as "consistent with u.s. initiatives to provide key allies in the region with modern systems that will enhance interoperability with u.s. forces and increase security. .

a $15 billion sale of thaad missiles to saudi arabia proposed in october 2017 was similarly described as increasing "saudi arabia's capability to defend itself against the growing ballistic missile threat in the region" and supporting saudi security "in the face of iranian and other regional threats. .

barriers to a unified gcc approach to missile defense include reluctance to share intelligence and disputes over where a central command would be located .

in addition , smaller gulf states are generally wary of ceding power to saudi arabia , the bloc's largest member and de facto leader .

some observe that the gulf bmd challenge is "less about money and interceptors and more about gcc members' historical distrust and reluctance to work together. .

some members of congress appear to focus closely on questions of gcc unity , particularly in light of a continuing rift among leading gcc countries and qatar .

in june 2017 , chairman corker announced that he would withhold preliminary ( i.e. , pre - notification ) approval of all future arms sales to gcc states until congress could obtain "a better understanding of the path to resolve the current dispute. .

sales of various naval systems to gcc states have also been an important part of u.s. strategy to counter iran .

the arms package announced by the trump administration ( discussed above ) after the president's trip to saudi arabia included a $6 billion sale of four multi - mission surface combatant ships ( mmscs , more heavily armed versions of the littoral combat ship ) , about which congress was originally notified in october 2015 .

press reporting indicates that the saudis may later purchase an additional four mmscs .

similarly , qatar has taken steps toward obtaining its first warships , announcing a $6 billion deal with italy to purchase seven vessels ( including four corvettes ) in august 2017 .

as u.s. naval forces in the gulf report increased levels of "unsafe" and "unprofessional" confrontations carried out by iranian vessels , bolstering the capabilities of gcc navies could be one way to add pressure on iran in the gulf and perhaps reduce the u.s. burden there .

some have argued that while the united states and its gulf partners share many key goals and a broad desire to contain iran , they are still independent states with disparate agendas , and that outsourcing at least some u.s. deterrence to potentially less capable partners increases the risk of instability and perhaps unintended conflict .

iran and some observers blame the militarization of the region on massive u.s. arms sales , which have set the stage for what some describe as a "missile race. .

officials from gulf states have at times complained that an "extended deterrence" framework is not practical because of what they see as burdensome bureaucratic and legal conditions on u.s. assistance .

some u.s. officials have echoed these concerns in supporting faster and more easily facilitated arms procurements , warning that efforts to block arms sales to countries like saudi arabia can be detrimental to u.s. security interests ( see " providing weaponry to governments suspected of human rights " below ) .

much recent congressional interest in arms sales has been influenced by the ongoing ( since 2015 ) war in yemen and the use of u.s. - supplied platforms and munitions by the saudi - led coalition .

the ongoing war between the saudi - led coalition and a coalition of forces spearheaded by a group known as the houthis has contributed to a severe humanitarian crisis in what was already the arab world's poorest country , with millions at risk of a growing cholera epidemic and the country on the brink of famine .

the u.n. and various nongovernmental organizations have criticized the saudi - led coalition's bombing campaign .

the war has largely been waged with u.s. - provided weapons that members of the saudi - led coalition already possessed when the fighting began .

some lawmakers have expressed concern over reports of saudi strikes ( using u.s. - supplied munitions ) on civilian targets and how strikes on nonmilitary infrastructure have contributed to the humanitarian crisis .

in an october 2017 annual report on children and armed conflict , the u.n. implicated the members of the coalition for killing and maiming children , with "510 deaths and 667 injuries attributed to the saudi arabia - led coalition. .

in september 2016 , the senate voted against a measure ( s.j.res .

39 ) that would have blocked sales of abrams tanks and other defense equipment to saudi arabia , but the relatively large number of senators who sought to block the sale ( 27 , versus 71 who sought to permit it ) led some members who backed the disapproval resolution to speculate that support for arms sales to saudi arabia might continue to decline .

in june 2017 , the senate narrowly rejected ( 47-53 ) a measure ( s.j.res .

42 ) that would have blocked three specific sales ( all notified on may 19 , 2017 ) to saudi arabia of various air - delivered weapons systems , including joint direct attack munition ( jdam ) kits , which convert free - fall bombs into guided ( or "smart" ) weapons .

proponents of the sale argued that such technologies serve to minimize the risk of civilian casualties , defended saudi arabia's right to legitimate self - defense , and warned about the overall impact on u.s. efforts to combat iranian influence , describing the houthis as iranian "proxies. .

opponents of the sale cited a number of concerns , including saudi arabia's reliability as an ally , human rights concerns within the kingdom and the government's role in promoting extremism , and the sale's potential to downgrade israel's qualitative edge , among others .

anticipating further sales , some members have sought to put conditions on such transfers .

two measures ( s.j.res .

40 and h.j.res .

104 ) would forbid the transfer of any air - to - ground munitions to saudi arabia unless the president certifies that all coalition partners are "taking all feasible precautions to reduce the risk of harm to civilians," allowing the delivery of humanitarian aid , and targeting terrorist organizations like al qaeda and the islamic state as part of their operations in yemen .

in addition , the legislation would require a briefing on saudi operations in yemen before the transfer or notification of proposed sale of such weapons .

one legal analysis has concluded that sales of arms , especially those used in airstrikes , to saudi arabia "should not be presumed to be permissible" under either the aeca and / or the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( faa ) , each of which limit to whom , and for what kinds of use , the united states may sell arms .

these limitations include prohibitions against the sale of weapons to countries that consistently violate human rights , restrict the delivery of humanitarian assistance , or use weapons in a way that differs ( whether intentionally or not ) from their originally agreed - upon sale .

a state department spokesman in may 2017 , when questioned about the saudi use of u.s. weapons in yemen , cited saudi arabia's right to self - defense , emphasized the provision of technical assistance on targeting , and said that the saudis have taken steps to lessen the chance of civilian casualties and that "we're constantly trying to improve that process. .

at the same time , the issue has been raised in the united kingdom , where , in response to a legal challenge from the campaign against arms trade , a high court ruled in july 2017 that arms exports to saudi arabia could continue .

the court cited a "wider and more sophisticated range of information" presented ( mostly in secret , on national security grounds ) by the british government to justify ruling in its favor .

many members of congress take an interest in trying to ensure respect for human rights around the world , especially in countries that maintain close relations with the united states and over which the united states arguably has a degree of influence through its provision of arms or other services for purposes of building partner capacity ( bpc ) .

however , this interest has also been observed to create tension between a desire to support the rule of law and personal freedoms in various countries and the security implications of potentially harming cooperation with partner governments .

at a march 2017 senate armed services committee hearing , centcom commander general joseph l. votel said , [i]n recent years we have seen an increase in restrictions placed on assistance provided to partner nations , limiting their ability to acquire u.s. equipment based on human rights and / or political oppression of minority groups .

while these are significant challenges that must be addressed , the use of fmf and fms [foreign military sales] as a mechanism to achieve changes in behavior has questionable effectiveness and can have unintended consequences.... we should avoid using the programs as a lever of influence or denial to our own detriment .

this tension , typically framed as one between values and security , or as one between different types of security , often plays out in the middle east , and arms sales are a critical part of the equation .

bahrain has been a prominent setting for this debate .

the united states has maintained a naval command in bahrain for decades , even before the small gulf kingdom's independence in 1971 .

the two nations signed a defense cooperation agreement ( dca ) in 1991 , and president george w. bush designated bahrain a "major non - nato ally" in march 2002 .

however , concerns over the bahraini government's response to a protest movement that emerged in february 2011 have complicated the relationship .

bahrain's governing elite ( dominated by minority sunnis and led by the ruling al khalifa family ) is accused of widespread human rights violations against the shiite majority .

in early 2016 , bahrain submitted a request to purchase a number of f - 16s and to upgrade its existing aircraft in a deal worth as much as $4 billion .

however , when the obama administration informally pre - notified the sale to congress , it explained that the sale would not move forward unless bahrain took steps toward improving its record on human rights .

the trump administration dropped those conditions in march 2017 , even though u.n. investigators have asserted a "sharp deterioration" of human rights over the past year in bahrain .

congress was formally notified of the sale in september 2017 .

in his above - referenced march 2017 committee testimony , general votel explicitly mentioned the case of bahrain .

he said that "the slow progress on key fms cases , specifically additional f - 16 aircraft and upgrades to bahrain's existing f - 16 fleet , due to concerns of potential human rights abuses in the country , continues to strain our relationship. .

critics of the sale have argued that the bahrain defense force ( which largely excludes shiites in favor of non - bahraini sunnis ) itself contributes to instability in the country , and that the condition - free provision of u.s. weapons only exacerbates the problem .

in the 114 th congress , legislation was introduced ( h.r .

3445 and s. 2009 ) to prohibit the transfer of weapons that could be used for crowd control purposes , including small arms , ammunition , and humvees , unless the state department could certify that the government had implemented all recommendations made by the report of the government - established bahrain independent commission of inquiry ( bici ) .

egypt is another example of the challenging dynamics around human rights .

in october 2013 , several months after president sisi's seizure of power , the obama administration announced the indefinite suspension of delivery of certain major defense articles ( such as f - 16s and m1a1 tanks ) until the egyptian government demonstrated progress toward democracy .

the weapons suspension lasted about a year and a half , until march 2015 , when president obama allowed deliveries of certain weapons systems to proceed , while noting that future military assistance would take a different form .

congress , for its part , has sought to tie arms transfers to egypt's adherence to certain democratic and human rights standards .

since fy2012 , enacted appropriations measures have included language withholding certain portions of egypt's fmf allotment unless the executive branch can certify egypt's progress on various metrics related to human rights .

other than in fy2014 , these measures have authorized the executive branch to waive such restrictions on national security grounds , and successive secretaries of state have routinely exercised these waiver authorities .

the fy2017 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

115-31 ) carried over a provision that was first included in the fy2016 appropriations act .

the provision ( ยง7041 ( a ) ) withholds 15% of egypt's $1.3 billion fmf allocation unless the secretary of state provides a report certifying that the egyptian government is making progress in advancing human rights , implementing political and civil society reforms , releasing political prisoners , holding security forces responsible for alleged violations , and ensuring u.s. officials' access to monitor assistance .

in august 2017 , the trump administration announced that while it would waive the certification requirement on national security grounds , it would withhold 15% , or $195 million , of egypt's fmf , conditioning its eventual release on egypt addressing various policy concerns .

after public speculation about which policy disagreements between the united states and egypt prompted the decision , a state department spokeswoman stated that "it's about democracy and it's about human rights. .

turkey , like egypt , has attracted congressional attention for what many see as a deteriorated human rights situation .

although the united states has not provided turkey with significant military or economic aid since the 1990s , and is not a key trading partner of turkey , some members of congress have tried to limit or place conditions on arms transfers to turkey .

for example , following an incident during turkish president recep tayyip erdogan's may 2017 visit to washington , dc , in which members of his security detail appear to have assaulted individuals protesting near the turkish ambassador's residence , the house passed a version of the fy2018 national defense authorization act ( h.r .

2810 ) with a "sense of congress" provision ( ยง1284 ) .

the provision would call for continued scrutiny of a proposed u.s. sale of handguns to turkish presidential security personnel .

members of congress may revisit existing prohibitions on the transfer of u.s. weapons to specific security force units and personnel that have engaged in human rights violations , and whether those measures are effective .

many u.s. arms transfers are funded through the foreign military financing ( fmf ) account , which provides partners with assistance for the purchase of u.s. military equipment and training .

these purchases are almost always processed through the foreign military sales ( fms ) program .

fmf funds are managed by the state department , but the program is implemented by the department of defense .

direct commercial sales ( dcs ) licenses are also approved by the state department .

president trump's fy2018 budget request proposes to cut fmf to a number of regional governments , including bahrain , iraq , lebanon , morocco , oman , and tunisia , while preserving fmf for israel ( level with previous requested amounts , at $3.1 billion ) , egypt ( also level , at $1.3 billion ) , and jordan ( $350 million in fmf - overseas contingency operations [oco] funding , down from $450 million in fy2016 ) .

those three nations make up $4.75 billion ( or 93% ) of the total $5.1 billion fmf request for fy2018 .

pakistan is the only other identified recipient , with $100 million .

under the fy2018 proposal , the remaining $200 million would be channeled into a "global fund" to be allocated to u.s. partners around the world , with a focus on loans "where possible and appropriate. .

some observers have questioned the wisdom of converting fmf grants to loans , arguing that such a move could weaken the u.s. defense industrial base , making weapons procurement more expensive for the united states itself , and that countries accustomed to obtaining weapons at no cost would turn to cheaper alternative providers like russia or china .

at least one senator has expressed the same misgivings .

the 2017 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

115-31 ) included language directing the administration to submit a report to congress on the budgetary , diplomatic , and foreign policy impact of a transition to more fmf loans , including its impact on fy2018 budget proposals .

that report conceded that some fmf recipients may turn to other suppliers ( explicitly naming china and russia ) , but that the potential of such a move would be mitigated by "the high quality of defense articles and services produced by the united states compared to other suppliers. .

the report to the house state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations bill for fy2018 ( h.rept .

115-253 ) notes that the bill does not include the requested authority for loan assistance on a global basis .

however , the report indicates that the committee would consider providing it for individual countries , recommending that the state department include requests for such authority ( and its potential impact ) in future budget justifications .

the report accompanying the senate committee bill ( s.rept .

115-152 ) states that the committee "does not support transitioning fmf assistance from grants to loans," noting that "prior to the submission of the cbj no study was conducted on the impact of the proposal to u.s. national security interest or the security of stability of allies and partners , including the loss of influence through increased arms sales by the prc [people's republic of china] and russia to fmf grant recipients. .

members of congress who wish to track the extent and composition of arms sales in the middle east , or more broadly , could consider proposing other reporting requirements , including for the fms program or for direct commercial sales ( for which public information has generally been less readily available ) .

congress has long taken an interest in ensuring that arms sold to foreign countries are used responsibly and for the purposes agreed upon as part of their sale ( a legal requirement for certification that goes back to the 1960s ) .

in 1996 , congress amended the aeca to include section 40a ( p.l .

104-164 ) , which directs the president to "establish a program that provides for end - use monitoring in order to improve accountability with respect to defense articles sold , leased , or exported under the aeca or faa. .

the goals of end - use monitoring include preserving u.s. technological superiority by impeding adversaries' access to sensitive items and ensuring that arms are used solely by the intended recipients based on the terms under which the sale is made .

in addition , as part of the standard terms and conditions of a letter of agreement ( loa ) , the recipient country agrees to "permit observation and review by ... representatives of the u.s. government with regards to the use of such articles. .

end - use monitoring has been an important consideration in evaluating arms sales to iraq , as members of congress try to balance the iraqi government's need for weapons to use against the islamic state and other threats with the potential for those arms to fall into the wrong hands , including the very groups their use is intended to combat .

since 2015 , there have been widespread reports of the use of u.s. weaponry by popular mobilization forces or units ( pmfs or pmus ) , some of whom are supported by iran .

u.s. officials have reportedly denied the existence of any confirmed instances of iraqi forces transferring u.s. arms to pmfs , and their iraqi counterparts have stated that all u.s. - provided weapons remain under iraqi army control .

however , the challenges of tracking the whereabouts of u.s. arms are considerable in a country that has received tens of billions of dollars of weapons in the past decade alone .

the challenges of accounting for the whereabouts of u.s. arms have perhaps grown as the united states has transferred more weapons into iraq to help iraqi forces confront the islamic state .

in may 2017 , amnesty international obtained ( via a freedom of information act request ) and released a september 2016 dod audit that determined that the army "did not have effective controls" to track equipment transfers provided to iraqi forces through the iraq train and equip fund ( itef ) .

the audit characterized the army's recordkeeping as inconsistent , out of date , and prone to human error .

a dod spokeswoman stated , "the bottom line is that the us military does not have a means to track equipment that has been taken from the government of iraq by isil. .

the implications for these sales under the aeca are unclear .

the dod spokeswoman cited above explained the situation by saying that "the current conflict in iraq limits some aspects of ... monitoring activities , including travel to many areas of iraq and access to iraqi units in combat areas , as well as combat use , damage and losses of war material. .

end - use monitoring is considered an important part of ensuring that recipient governments in the middle east adhere to human rights standards .

in april 2016 , the government accountability office ( gao ) published a report that recommended "strengthening" end - use monitoring of military equipment sold to egypt , citing the egyptian government's failure to admit u.s. officials to storage sites and other issues .

similar gao reports have been published on aid to lebanon ( february 2014 ) and gcc countries ( november 2011 ) .

common recommendations across these reports include greater coordination between the departments of state and defense ( which operate two different eum programs ) , more comprehensive vetting of recipients of security assistance , and the development of guidance ( by both departments ) establishing procedures for documenting end - use monitoring efforts and violations thereof .

members of congress may consider whether existing eum frameworks are sufficient , and whether additional authorities , appropriations , or other legislative directives might support , streamline , or otherwise strengthen these efforts .

appendix a .

historical u.s. arms sales to the middle east , 1950-2009 appendix b .

selected resolutions disapproving of arms sales to the middle east appendix c. selected dsca major arms sales notifications to middle east , 2010-present appendix d. total proposed u.s. arms sales to selected countries by yea .

