this report provides background information and discusses potential issues for congress regarding the navy's ffg ( x ) program , a program to procure a new class of 20 guided - missile frigates ( ffgs ) .

the navy's proposed fy2020 budget requests $1,281.2 million for the procurement of the first ffg ( x ) .

the ffg ( x ) program presents several potential oversight issues for congress .

congress's decisions on the program could affect navy capabilities and funding requirements and the shipbuilding industrial base .

this report focuses on the ffg ( x ) program .

a related navy shipbuilding program , the littoral combat ship ( lcs ) program , is covered in detail in crs report rl33741 , navy littoral combat ship ( lcs ) program: background and issues for congress , by ronald o'rourke .

other crs reports discuss the strategic context within which the ffg ( x ) program and other navy acquisition programs may be considered .

 table 3 summarizes congressional action on the navy's fy2020 funding request for the lcs program .

appendix a .

navy briefing slides from july 25 , 2017 , ffg ( x ) industry day event this appendix reprints some of the briefing slides that the navy presented at its july 25 , 2017 , industry day event on the ffg ( x ) program , which was held in association with the request for information ( rfi ) that the navy issued on july 25 , 2017 , to solicit information for better understanding potential trade - offs between cost and capability in the ffg ( x ) design .

the reprinted slides begin on the next page .

appendix b .

competing industry teams this appendix presents additional background information on the industry teams competing for the ffg ( x ) program .

february 16 , 2018 , press report about five competing industry teams a february 16 , 2018 , press report about the five competing industry teams reportedly competing for the ffg ( x ) program ( i.e. , the five industry teams shown in table 1 ) stated the following: the navy would not confirm how many groups bid for the [ffg ( x ) ] work .

at least one u.s. - german team that was not selected for a [conceptual] design contract , atlas usa and thyssenkrupp marine systems , told usni news they had submitted for the [dd&c] competition.... during last month's surface navy association [annual symposium] , several shipbuilders outlined their designs for the ffg ( x ) competition .

austal usa shipyard: austal usa in mobile , ala. parent design: independence - class [i.e. , lcs - 2 class] littoral combat ship one of the two littoral combat ship builders , austal usa has pitched an upgunned variant of the independence - class lcs as both a foreign military sales offering and as the answer to the navy's upgunned small surface combatant and then frigate programs .

based on the 3,000-ton aluminum trimaran design , the hull boasts a large flight deck and space for up to 16 mk - 41 vertical launching system ( vls ) cells .

fincantieri marine group shipyard: fincantieri marinette marine in marinette , wisc .

parent design: fincantieri italian fremm as part of the stipulations of the ffg ( x ) programs , a contractor can offer just one design in the competition as a prime contractor but may also support a second bid as a subcontractor .

fincantieri elected to offer its 6,700-ton italian fregata europea multi - missione ( fremm ) design for construction in its wisconsin marinette marine shipyard , as well as partner with lockheed martin on its freedom - class pitch as a subcontractor .

the italian fremm design features a 16-cell vls as well as space for deck - launched anti - ship missiles .

general dynamics bath iron works shipyard: bath iron works in bath , maine parent design: navantia álvaro de bazán - class f100 frigate the 6,000-ton air defense guided - missile frigates fitted with the aegis combat system have been in service for the spanish armada since 2002 and are the basis of the australian hobart - class air defense destroyers and the norwegian fridtjof nansen - class frigates .

the navantia partnership with bath is built on a previous partnership from the turn of the century .

the f100 frigates were a product of a teaming agreement between biw , lockheed martin and navantia predecessor izar as part of the advanced frigate consortium from 2000 .

huntington ingalls industries shipyard: ingalls shipbuilding in pascagoula , miss .

parent design: unknown out of the competitors involved in the competition , hii was the only company that did not present a model or a rendering of its ffg ( x ) at the surface navy association symposium in january .

a spokeswoman for the company declined to elaborate on the offering when contacted by usni news on friday .

in the past , hii has presented a naval version of its legend - class national security cutter design as a model at trade shows labeled as a "patrol frigate. .

lockheed martin shipyard: fincantieri marinette marine in marinette , wisc .

parent design: freedom - class [i.e. , lcs - 1 class] littoral combat ship of the two lcs builders , lockheed martin is the first to have secured a foreign military sale with its design .

the company's ffg ( x ) bid will have much in common with its offering for the royal saudi navy's 4,000-ton multi - mission surface combatant .

the new saudi ships will be built around an eight - cell mk - 41 vertical launch system and a 4d air search radar .

lockheed has pitched several other variants of the hull that include more vls cells .

"we are proud of our 15-year partnership with the u.s. navy on the freedom - variant littoral combat ship and look forward to extending it to ffg ( x ) ," said joe depietro , lockheed martin vice president of small combatants and ship systems in a friday evening statement .

"our frigate design offers an affordable , low - risk answer to meeting the navy's goals of a larger and more capable fleet. .

may 28 , 2019 , press report about one industry team deciding to not submit a bid on may 28 , 2019 , it was reported that one of the five industry teams that had been interested in the ffg ( x ) program had informed the navy on may 23 that it had decided to not submit a bid for the program .

the may 28 , 2019 , press report about this industry team's decision stated: lockheed martin won't submit a bid to compete in the design of the navy's next - generation guided - missile ( ffg ( x ) ) frigate competition , company officials told usni news on tuesday [may 28] .

the company elected to focus on its involvement developing the frigate combat system and other systems rather than forward its freedom - class lcs design for the detailed design and construction contract naval sea systems command plans to issue this summer , joe depietro , lockheed martin vice president of small combatants and ship systems , told usni news .

"we reviewed the entire program and obviously , given some of the stuff that has already happened that is outside of the contract for the program — that includes the designation of our combat management system , combatss 21 , derived off of aegis ; we have the mk - 41 vertical launch system ; the processing for our anti - submarine warfare area ; advanced [electronic warfare] and platform integration," he said .

"as we evaluated all of those different areas , we determined not to pursue , as a prime contractor , the ffg ( x ) detailed design and construction. .

the company informed the navy on may 23 it would not join the other bidders for the hull design , two sources familiar with the notification told usni news .

while the design passed two navy reviews , the company told the service it felt the freedom design would be stretched too far to accommodate all the capabilities required , one source told usni news… .

while lockheed is moving away from leading a frigate team , the company will be heavily involved with whoever wins .

the ffg ( x ) 's combatss - 21 combat management system will be derived from the company's aegis combat system , and lockheed martin makes the ship's vertical launch system .

