under the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , which took effect in january 1994 , motor vehicle and vehicle parts manufacturers have integrated their production operations in the united states , canada , and mexico .

president donald trump has criticized the agreement , and on may 18 , 2017 , the trump administration notified congress of its intent to renegotiate the agreement , as required by the 2015 trade promotion authority ( tpa ) .

the 115 th congress may consider legislation for a "modernization" of nafta under tpa , a process by which congress agrees to expeditiously consider implementing legislation for a trade agreement negotiated by the president , provided he meets certain statutory negotiating objectives and congressional notification and consultation requirements .

on july 17 , 2017 , the administration announced its objectives in forthcoming negotiations .

this report discusses the development of u.s. motor vehicle production under nafta and analyzes the north american motor vehicle market , including production , plant locations , and continental trade patterns .

it summarizes the motor vehicle rules of origin in nafta and compares them with similar requirements in other trade agreements , and examines how the potential changes in nafta might affect the motor vehicle and motor vehicle parts industries in the united states .

u.s. motor vehicle manufacturing has changed significantly since nafta took effect .

while u.s. domestic production of finished vehicles has fluctuated somewhat , mexico has become a major center of parts and motor vehicle manufacturing , fully integrated into the u.s. and canadian supply chains .

the number of european , japanese , and south korean automakers with u.s. vehicle production has also grown during this time ( figure 1 ) .

there were nearly 800,000 jobs in u.s. motor vehicle and parts manufacturing in 2016 ( figure 2 ) , with the largest share of employment in parts manufacturing ( 580,000 in 2016 ) .

since 1996 , both vehicle assembly and parts manufacturing employment have decreased by 27% .

there are many reasons for changing employment levels , including economic conditions , trade patterns , and technological change .

domestic sales of motor vehicles have recovered from their major decline during the recent recession , and the bankruptcies and restructurings of gm and chrysler .

sales in 2016 reached 17.5 million units , the highest annual figure on record .

imported vehicles — those manufactured outside of north america — have maintained a relatively constant share of total sales ( figure 3 ) .

integration of the u.s. , canadian , and mexican automotive industries began decades before nafta .

nevertheless , tariffs and nontariff barriers added additional cost and complicated the flow of components and finished vehicles among the three countries .

in some cases , this led manufacturers to produce similar engines , transmissions , or other products in each country , even when it might have been more efficient to manufacture them in a single location .

a series of trade agreements and domestic policy changes in each country enabled much closer integration of north american motor vehicle manufacturing .

an important objective of any trade agreement is to ensure that preferential treatment confers primarily to products of signatory countries .

a second goal is to limit the negative impact of the agreement on import - sensitive domestic industries .

thus , agreements such as nafta include rules of origin to make certain that transshipment and light processing of goods largely produced in non - nafta countries — such as simple assembly or repackaging — are not used to circumvent higher duties .

determining the country of origin is fairly straightforward when a product is "wholly obtained" from , or manufactured in , only one country .

however , when a finished product's component parts are manufactured in many countries , determining origin can be a complex process .

rules - of - origin requirements differ in each trade agreement because they are individually negotiated among the parties to the agreement .

for importers to benefit from a trade agreement , they must demonstrate that their imports meet the respective rules - of - origin criteria .

in nafta , the rules of origin affecting motor vehicles and parts are established by a method intended to ensure that a certain percentage of the value of a manufactured product ( as determined by the cost of inputs , labor , and other direct costs of processing operations ) originates in the nafta region .

this regional value content ( rvc ) test involves specific equations to determine the value of originating materials , the adjusted value of the product , the value of non - originating materials , and other costs , such as processing operations and shipping ( figure 11 ) .

in u.s. trade agreements , including nafta , three alternative methods are often used to calculate rvc in automotive products .

trade agreements often give manufacturers and importers more than one option for calculating the rvc , because one method of calculation may be more beneficial than the other for particular companies or industries .

the three types of rvc calculations are the following: "build - d own" method: determines the regional value content by subtracting the value of the non - originating merchandise from the adjusted value of the finished product .

the adjusted value includes all costs , profit , general expenses , parts and materials , labor , shipping , marketing , and packing .

since the build - down method allows manufacturers to count all the costs involved in building and marketing the final automobile or the component , a higher percentage ( 55% ) is associated with this calculation in comparison to the other two allowable methods of calculating regional value content .

"build - u p" method : starts with the value of originating materials .

the value of nafta inputs is added together , and if their total value exceeds 35% of the adjusted value of the vehicle or the component , the product would qualify for the benefits of the agreement .

the build - up method is included in trade agreements principally to benefit manufacturers of exports other than automobiles. .

net cost" method : captures only the costs involved in manufacturing , including factory labor , materials , and direct overhead .

other costs , such as sales promotion , marketing , royalties , and profit , are excluded from the calculation .

the use of a small , easily identifiable set of input costs is thought to make the net cost method easier to use in calculating rvc .

as the net cost method excludes selling , general , and administrative ( sg&a ) costs , profits , expenses , royalties , and promotional costs , its 35% rvc requirement is approximately equivalent to the 55% rvc requirement under the build - down method described above .

a renegotiation of nafta is likely to be considered by congress under trade promotion authority .

on may 18 , 2017 , the trump administration sent a 90-day notification to congress of its intent to begin talks with mexico and canada to renegotiate or modernize the free trade agreement as required by tpa .

nafta provides , "the parties may agree on any modification of or addition to this agreement .

when so agreed , and approved in accordance with the applicable legal procedures of each party , a modification or addition shall constitute an integral part of the agreement. .

under tpa , the president must consult with congress before giving the required 90-day notice of his intention to start negotiations .

the trump administration's consultations included meetings between u.s. trade representative robert lighthizer and members of the house ways and means committee and senate finance committee and with members of the house and senate advisory groups on negotiations .

ustr received more than 12,000 public comments on nafta renegotiation .

on july 17 , 2017 , ustr published a summary of the trump administration's specific objectives with respect to the negotiations , and later announced that negotiations with mexico and canada would start on august 16 , 2017 .

in order to use the expedited procedures of tpa , the president must notify and consult with congress before initiating and during negotiations , and adhere to several reporting requirements following the conclusion of any negotiations resulting in an agreement .

the president must conduct the negotiations based on the negotiating objectives set forth by congress in the 2015 tpa authority .

if the president adheres to these and other requirements , then implementing legislation from the resulting agreement can be considered under expedited procedures , including guaranteed time - limited consideration , no amendments , and an up - or - down vote .

implementation of a renegotiated agreement in domestic law would likely take one of two forms: ( 1 ) a renegotiated agreement that would require changes to u.s. law or ( 2 ) changes to the agreement that could be made effective by presidential proclamation .

if renegotiation is expected to require changes to u.s. law , the president likely would seek expedited treatment of the implementing legislation under tpa .

on the other hand , the president could proclaim ( i.e. , declare ) some modifications to nafta pursuant to existing statutory authority .

these could include certain tariff modifications , or changes to basic and specific rules of origin , and some customs provisions .

certain consultation and layover requirements are applicable to proclamations concerning rules of origin changes for autos and auto parts: modifications to specific tariff - shift rules of origin ( annex 401 ) ; automotive tracing requirements for specific parts ( annexes 403.1 , 403.2 ) ; regional value - content provisions for certain canadian autos ( annex 403.3 ) ; and modification of rules of origin definitions .

renegotiation of other provisions of nafta requiring changes to u.s. law likely would need implementing legislation .

such legislation could be considered under tpa .

tpa currently is in effect until july 1 , 2021 , provided that congress does not pass an extension disapproval resolution in the 60 days prior to july 1 , 2018 .

the federal government's senior trade advisory panel , the advisory committee for trade policy and negotiations ( actpn ) , issued its report and recommendations for modernizing nafta on june 28 , 2017 , stating that "it is time to bring nafta into the 21 st century and to turn it into a high standards agreement in accordance with the negotiating objectives of the 2015 trade promotion authority ( tpa ) . .

actpn did not make specific recommendations with regard to motor vehicle trade , but its report does address some of the specific issues raised by motor vehicle industry and union organizations .

for example , with regard to rules of origin , the majority of actpn members — but not its labor union members — urge caution in making changes to the rules of origin to ensure that they do not disrupt efficient supply chains and raise production costs , undercut u.s. competitiveness , and potentially backfire and lead to job losses in the u.s. and less sourcing because companies will import components and pay the most favored nation ( mfn ) tariff .

the actpn report also discusses general recommendations for other policy issues of interest to the motor vehicle industry and unions , including government procurement , customs procedures , environmental and labor standards , worker rights , currency manipulation , and investor state dispute settlement .

each of these issues was raised when the ustr held a series of public hearings seeking recommendations on nafta negotiating objectives from june 27 to june 29 , 2017 , taking testimony from a broad range of witnesses .

the ustr hearings were conducted by the nafta modernization panel and included officials who sit on the trade policy staff committee , including representatives from ustr and the departments of commerce , treasury , state , and agriculture .

the industry representatives — alliance of automobile manufacturers , the association of global automakers , motor and equipment manufacturers association ( mema ) , the auto care association , and the american automotive policy council ( aapc ) — spoke about the evolution of the current supply chain and the benefits they see it has brought to the north american vehicle market .

they advocate changes to enhance the agreement and support the current nafta rules of origin , which they say strike the right supply chain balance , promote exports from north america , and reduce costs .

the motor vehicle associations argued for nafta modernization , including changes that would update customs procedures , including e - commerce , to reduce border delays ; expand intellectual property protection ; remove technical barriers to trade by improving regulatory cooperation on future vehicle standards and recognize current u.s. federal motor vehicle safety standards so u.s. - certified vehicles will be accepted across the region ; align data protection and privacy laws so data can be exchanged across borders more easily ; and update labor and environmental provisions consistent with more recent free trade agreements .

in addition , aapc called for inclusion of enforceable provisions to deter currency manipulation and elimination of investor - state dispute settlement provisions .

the united auto workers union ( uaw ) , testifying separately on june 29 , argued that a new agreement is needed to provide more benefits to workers in all three signatory countries .

the uaw called nafta a "failure" and said it supports renegotiation in order to reverse the u.s. deficit in motor vehicle trade and raise worker wages .

the uaw also supports new provisions that would curb currency manipulation ; add labor and environmental standards with enforcement mechanisms ; bar investor - state dispute settlement provisions ; eliminate the federal procurement chapter of nafta ; ensure that buy america provisions are retained ; and strengthen the rules of origin to prevent non - nafta countries from benefiting from the agreement .

the uaw also supports retention of the current documentation and product tracing requirements that establish the origin of motor vehicle parts .

links to statements submitted by the industry and labor union representatives to ustr in june 2017 are provided in table 3 .

the trump administration's announced objectives do not include specific motor vehicle industry goals , unlike some of the specific objectives for agricultural goods and textiles and apparel .

however , its broad objectives are consistent with a number of recommendations cited by speakers at ustr's late june 2017 hearings , including maintaining existing duty - free market access for industrial goods and removing nontariff barriers ; promoting greater regulatory compatibility and cooperation and removing technical barriers to trade ; updating customs procedures ; strengthening the rules of origin to "ensure that the benefits of nafta go to products genuinely made in the united states and north america" and ensuring that such rules "incentivize the sourcing of goods and materials from the united states and north america" ; preventing the establishment of restrictions on cross - border data flows ; improving intellectual property protection ; bringing labor and environmental provisions into the main nafta agreement , instead of in side agreements , while expanding their scope ; and developing a mechanism "to ensure that the nafta countries avoid manipulating exchange rates in order to prevent effective balance of payments adjustment or to gain an unfair competitive advantage. .

