the first section of this report provides an overview of the consideration of fy2018 judiciary appropriations , with subsections covering each major action , including the initial submission of the request on may 23 , 2017 ; a hearing held by the house appropriations subcommittee on financial services and general government ; the house appropriations subcommittee markup on june 29 , 2017 ; and the house appropriations committee markup on july 13 , 2017 .

the status of fy2018 judiciary appropriations is summarized in table 1 .

this overview is followed by a section on prior - year actions and funding .

the report then provides an overview of judiciary accounts .

appropriations for the judiciary comprise approximately 0.2% of total budget authority .

two accounts that fund the supreme court ( the salaries and expenses of the court and the expenditures for the care of its building and grounds , which are the responsibility of the architect of the capitol ) together total approximately 1% of the total judiciary budget .

the rest of the judiciary's budget provides funding for the lower federal courts and related judicial services .

the largest account , approximately 72% of the total fy2017 enacted level , is the salaries and expenses account for the u.s. courts of appeals , district courts , and other judicial services .

this covers the "salaries of circuit and district judges ( including judges of the territorial courts of the united states ) , justices and judges retired from office or from regular active service , judges of the u.s. court of federal claims , bankruptcy judges , magistrate judges , and all other officers and employees of the federal judiciary not otherwise specifically provided for," and "necessary expenses of the courts. .

two other large accounts provide funds for defender services ( 15.1% ) and court security ( 8.2% ) .

the remaining judiciary budget is divided among the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit ( 0.4% of fy2017 enacted ) , u.s. court of international trade ( 0.3% ) , fees of jurors and commissioners ( 0.5% ) , administrative office of the u.s. courts ( 1.2% ) , federal judicial center ( 0.4% ) , u.s .

sentencing commission ( 0.2% ) , and judicial retirement funds ( 2.1% ) .

three specialized courts within the federal court system are not funded under the judiciary budget: the u.s. court of appeals for the armed forces ( funded in the department of defense appropriations bill ) , the u.s. court of appeals for veterans claims ( funded in the military construction , veterans affairs , and related agencies appropriations bill ) , and the u.s. tax court ( funded under independent agencies , title v , of the fsgg bill ) .

federal courthouse construction is funded within the general services administration account under independent agencies , title v , of the fsgg bill .

the judiciary uses nonappropriated funds to help offset its funding requirements .

the majority of these nonappropriated funds are from fee collections , primarily court filing fees .

these monies are used to offset expenses within the salaries and expenses accounts of courts of appeals , district courts , and other judicial services .

some of these funds may be carried forward from one year to the next .

these funds are considered "unencumbered" because they result from savings from the judiciary's financial plan in areas where budgeted costs did not materialize .

according to the judiciary , such savings are usually not under its control ( eg , the judiciary has no control over the confirmation rate of article iii judges and must make its best estimate on the needed funds to budget for judgeships , rent costs , and technology funding for certain programs ) .

the budget request and appropriations figures presented here reflect the net resources for the judiciary , and do not include these offsetting nonappropriated funds .

the judiciary also has "encumbered" funds — no - year authority funds appropriated for specific purposes .

these are used when planned expenses are delayed , from one year to the next ( eg , costs associated with office space delivery , and certain technology needs and projects ) .

the fy2018 judiciary budget request totals $7.86 billion .

this total includes $7.23 billion in discretionary funds and $0.64 billion in mandatory funding , which is used to pay the salaries and benefits of judges .

table 3 lists the discretionary amounts enacted for fy2017 , the president's fy2018 request , and the committee - reported level in the house .

the total fy2018 discretionary request for the supreme court , $94.2 million , is contained in two accounts: ( 1 ) salaries and expenses ( $78.5 million ) , and ( 2 ) care of the building and grounds ( $15.7 million ) .

the total represents a 2.5% increase over the fy2017 enacted level .

the house committee - reported bill provides $93.5 million .

this court , consisting of 12 judges , has jurisdiction over , and review of , among other things , certain lower court rulings on patents and trademarks , international trade , and federal claims cases .

the fy2018 discretionary budget request is $31.1 million , a 2.9% increase over the fy2017 enacted level .

the house committee - reported bill provides $30.6 million .

this court has exclusive nationwide jurisdiction over civil actions against the united states , its agencies and officers , and certain civil actions brought by the united states arising out of import transactions and the administration as well as enforcement of federal customs and international trade laws .

the fy2018 discretionary request of $18.65 million is an increase of 1.3% over the fy2017 enacted level .

the house committee - reported bill provides $18.56 million .

the total fy2018 discretionary funding request of $6,946.0 million covers 12 of the 13 courts of appeals and 94 district judicial courts located in the 50 states , district of columbia , commonwealth of puerto rico , commonwealth of the northern mariana islands , and the territories of guam and the u.s. virgin islands .

the account is divided among salaries and expenses , the vaccine injury compensation trust fund , court security , defender services , and fees of jurors and commissioners .

the fy2018 discretionary request for this account is $5,169.0 million , an increase of 3.4% over the fy2017 enacted level .

the house committee - reported bill provides $5,082.7 million .

established to address a perceived crisis in vaccine tort liability claims , the vaccine injury compensation program funds a federal no - fault program that protects the availability of vaccines in the nation by diverting a substantial number of claims from the tort arena .

the fy2018 request is $8.2 million , a 26.3% increase over the fy2017 enacted level .

the house committee - reported bill provides $7.4 million .

this account provides for protective services , security systems , and equipment needs in courthouses and other federal facilities to ensure the safety of judicial officers , employees , and visitors .

under this account , the majority of funding for court security is transferred to the u.s .

marshals service to pay for court security officers under the judicial facility security program .

the fy2018 request is $583.8 million , an increase of 3.3% over the fy2017 enacted level .

the house committee - reported bill provides $574.6 million .

this account funds the operations of the federal public defender and community defender organizations , and compensation , reimbursements , and expenses of private - practice panel attorneys appointed by federal courts to serve as defense counsel to indigent individuals .

the cost for this account is driven by the number and type of prosecutions brought by u.s. attorneys .

the fy2018 request is $1,132.3 million , an increase of 8.4% over the fy2017 enacted level .

the house committee - reported bill provides $1,110.4 million .

this account funds the fees and allowances provided to grand and petit jurors , and compensation for jury and land commissioners .

the fy2018 request is $52.7 million , an increase of 31.9% over the fy2017 enacted level .

the house committee - reported bill provides $39.9 million .

as the central support entity for the judiciary , the aousc provides a wide range of administrative , management , program , and information technology services to the u.s. courts .

aousc also provides support to the judicial conference of the united states , and implements conference policies and applicable federal statutes and regulations .

the fy2018 request for aousc is $90.3 million , an increase of 3.2% over the fy2017 enacted level .

the house committee - reported bill provides $87.9 million .

as the judiciary's research and education entity , the federal judicial center undertakes research and evaluation of judicial operations for the judicial conference committees and the courts .

in addition , the center provides judges , court staff , and others with orientation and continuing education and training .

the center's fy2018 request is $29.1 million , an increase of 2.6% over the fy2017 enacted level .

the house committee - reported bill provides $28.7 million .

the commission promulgates sentencing policies , practices , and guidelines for the federal criminal justice system .

the fy2017 request is $18.6 million , an increase of 2.6% over the fy2017 enacted level .

the house committee - reported bill provides $18.3 million .

mandatory funding in the judiciary budget includes constitutionally required funding for the salaries and benefits of article iii judges , as well as statutory direct spending for the salaries and benefits of certain article i judges .

as cost estimates change , the administrative office of the u.s. courts updates mandatory needs to congress .

table 4 presents the fy2017 enactment for each account , as well as the fy2018 house committee - reported scores for current estimated needs .

the fy2018 judicial budget request contains provisions related to ( 1 ) salaries and expenses for employment of experts and consultant services ; ( 2 ) transfers between judiciary appropriations accounts of up to 5% ; ( 3 ) a limitation of $11,000 for official reception and representation expenses incurred by the judicial conference of the united states ; ( 4 ) language enabling the judiciary to contract for repairs under $100,000 ; ( 5 ) the continuation of a court security pilot program ; ( 6 ) a two - year extension of the authorization of certain temporary judgeships ; and ( 7 ) the consolidation of certain clerks of court offices .

the house committee - reported bill includes the first six of these items .

