the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( p.l .

93-288 , hereinafter the stafford act ) authorizes the president to issue declarations that authorize a range of federal assistance in response to natural or man - made incidents that overwhelm state , local , or tribal capacities .

when a major disaster overwhelms a state or tribal nation's response capacity , the state's governor or the tribal nation's chief executive may submit a request for a major disaster declaration .

under section 401 of the stafford act all requests for a declaration by the president that a major disaster exists shall be made by the governor of the affected state .

such a request shall be based on a finding that the disaster is of such severity and magnitude that effective response is beyond the capabilities of the state and the affected local governments and that federal assistance is necessary .

to help evaluate a state or tribal nation's need for assistance , the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) uses a preliminary damage assessment ( pda ) as a mechanism "to determine the impact and magnitude of damage and the resulting unmet needs of individuals , businesses , the public sector , and the community as a whole. .

although not explicitly mentioned in the stafford act , pdas play a crucial role in the declaration process .

state and tribal governments use information from a pda to determine whether to request a major disaster declaration and , if so , the basis for that major disaster request .

fema relies in part on the pda to provide a recommendation to the president concerning whether a major disaster declaration is warranted and , if so , which types of federal supplemental assistance should be made available .

despite the importance of pdas in the declaration process , pda information has only recently been made available to the public .

in 2008 , fema , at the direction of congress via general provisions in appropriations legislation , began to post pda reports on its website .

the same provision was included in appropriations legislation through 2015 , but it was not included in the consolidated appropriations act of 2016 .

pda reports summarize "damage assessment information used to determine whether to declare a major disaster. .

however , pda reports do not necessarily provide the entirety of information that could be included in pdas .

in spite of their limitations , pda reports contain a great deal of information concerning ( 1 ) damage estimates ; ( 2 ) demographic information of the affected area , including percentages of elderly populations and low - income households ; and ( 3 ) insurance coverage in the area .

pda reports can also be used to track the timeline of a declaration request because they include request and declaration ( or denial ) dates .

crs constructed a dataset using information from pda reports and coupled that dataset with data on declarations and obligations from the disaster relief fund ( drf ) , through which fema funds pa and ia , to analyze the possible use of pdas in the disaster declaration process .

conducting a pda is a "bottom - up" process in which information is gathered from affected citizens , elected officials , and professionals in various fields and gradually rises to key decision - makers .

in general , the pda process begins with a pre - assessment at the state , local , or tribal level .

if state , local , or tribal authorities decide a joint fema - state ( or fema - tribal nation ) pda is warranted , a damage assessment team is assembled to assess and document the damage caused by an incident .

the team that oversees the pda process typically consists of representatives from the state government , representatives from the appropriate fema regional office , local officials familiar with the area , and , in some instances , representatives from the american red cross and / or the small business administration ( sba ) .

after the relevant information is gathered , it is consolidated , reconciled , and submitted with the governor's or chief executive's request to the president for a major disaster declaration .

the following sections describe each phase of the process in more detail .

a major disaster declaration under the authorities of the stafford act can trigger three major types of assistance: public assistance ( pa ) , individual assistance ( ia ) , and hazard mitigation assistance .

under fema regulations the assistant administrator for the disaster assistance directorate has been delegated authority to determine and designate the types of assistance to be made available .

the initial designations will usually be announced in the declaration .

determinations by the assistant administrator for the disaster assistance directorate of the types and extent of fema disaster assistance to be provided are based upon findings whether the damage involved and its effects are of such severity and magnitude as to be beyond the response capabilities of the state , the affected local governments , and other potential recipients of supplementary federal assistance .

the assistant administrator for the disaster assistance directorate may authorize all , or only particular types of , supplementary federal assistance requested by the governor .

although all declared major disasters include hazard mitigation assistance through the hazard mitigation grant program ( hmgp ) , fema relies on information from the pda to determine whether pa and / or ia should be recommended .

the following sections describe each of the factors considered in that determination .

where possible , the following sections also analyze the extent to which each factor seems to influence pa and ia determinations using data from fema's publicly available pda reports .

pda reports also provide information about the length of time between a major disaster request and its ultimate declaration or denial by the president .

this information is often useful for setting expectations of when federal supplemental help may be authorized .

table 7 categorizes the 587 major disaster requests in the pda dataset into four categories — declared / not expedited , declared / expedited , denied / not appealed , and denied / appealed — and tallies the number of weeks between request and decision for each category .

as would be expected , the declared / expedited requests are skewed toward the beginning of the timeline and the denied / appealed requests are skewed toward the end of the timeline .

of the requests that were neither expedited nor appealed , 89.8% were decided within a month after requested , 63.7% were decided within two weeks after requested , and 18.5% were decided within the week they were requested .

beyond expedited and appealed requests , there are other reasons to expect the timeline to be different .

for example , when an incident results in a great amount of damage , it is reasonable to assume the decision will be made more quickly than when an incident causes relatively less , albeit still as devastating , amount of damage .

this assumption is supported by the data .

when considering the estimated costs of pa , requests in which the per capita impact indicator was exceeded by the per capita impact estimate were decided , on average , 6.4 days sooner than requests in which the indicator was not exceeded .

furthermore , ia requests that estimated more than $7.5 million in costs were decided on average in 6.2 days versus 13.4 days for those requests that estimate less than $7.5 million in costs .

this may indicate that those factors may make it far easier , or more obvious , to fema that ia should be recommend as part of a disaster declaration .

the type of disaster event may also impact the pda timeline .

when excluding those requests that were either expedited or appealed , the average number of days for key stages of the pda process for fires , floods , hurricanes , severe storms , severe winter storms , tornadoes , and tropical storms are reported in table 8 .

across the 485 events included in the table , the average amount of time between when the incident begins and when the governor or tribal leader submits the request is 27.6 days .

however , for flooding events , the average time is 48.5 days , likely reflecting the unique access issues that prevent damage assessment teams from evaluating damage until the flood waters have receded .

conversely , the average time is shorter for hurricanes , likely reflecting the lead time and ability to anticipate the severity of those events given forecasting .

similar to the time between when the incident begins and the request is submitted , the time between when the request is submitted and when the decision is announced varies by event .

for example , the average time between when the request is submitted and when the decision is announced for all events is 13.4 days .

however , decisions on major disaster requests for fire - related events occur , on average , 20.5 days after they are submitted .

this likely reflects the availability of fire management assistance grants under stafford act authorities , which facilitate response to fires without the need for a presidentially declared disaster .

beyond the declaration decision , pdas may be useful predictors of the ultimate obligations for pa and ia .

by combining the information from pda reports with information from the disaster relief fund ( drf ) , it is possible to assess how accurate the pda process is for estimating the amount of public and individual assistance ultimately obligated .

this information may be useful for assessing the adequacy of the pda process for evaluating whether federal supplemental assistance is necessary following an event .

before examining the differences between drf obligations and pda estimates , a few words of caution are warranted .

first , the estimates included in the pda report are just that — estimates .

therefore , some might argue that some degree of inaccuracy should both be expected and tolerated .

second , given the process by which information from a pda results in a major disaster declaration , there may be an incentive for damage assessment teams to gather enough data to demonstrate that damages and costs exceed the state's capacity while not necessarily gathering data that captures the totality of those damages and costs .

consequently , to the extent there are differences between drf obligations and pda estimates , it might be expected that the pda estimates under - estimate ultimate obligations .

table 9 and table 10 include summary statistics on the differences in obligations and estimates for pa and ia , respectively .

for pa , a typical pda estimate differs from its corresponding drf obligation , as measured by the median absolute value difference , by just over $3.1 million ( see table 9 ) .

overall , pdas over - estimated pa obligations in 56.3% of the cases .

however , the largest amount by which a pda over - estimated pa obligations was $64.6 million whereas the largest amount by which a pda under - estimated pa obligations was $453.9 million .

the magnitude of difference between the greatest over - estimation and greatest under - estimation may be due to the incentive to gather enough data to demonstrate that damages and costs exceed the state's capacity while not necessarily gathering data that captures the totality of those damages and costs , as mentioned in the previous paragraph .

for ia , a typical pda estimate differs from its corresponding drf obligation , as measured by the median absolute value difference , by just under $3.6 million ( see table 10 ) .

overall , pdas were just as likely to overestimate ia obligations as to underestimate them .

however , the largest amount by which a pda over - estimated ia obligations was $19.4 million whereas the largest amount by which a pda under - estimated pa obligations was $361.5 million .

again , the magnitude of difference between the greatest over - estimation and greatest under - estimation may be due to the incentive structure mentioned earlier .

these differences for ia are similar to the differences for pa , but as a percentage of total obligations , the ia estimates are further from the projected obligations than their pa counterparts .

as this report notes , the pda is a crucial component of the declaration process and has evolved to become a collaborative process that results in agreed upon figures for consideration by the governor or chief executive , fema , and , ultimately , the president .

due to congress' insistence on making pda reports public , there is now a rich collection of data that allows for a review of various aspects of the pda landscape .

crs analysis has discerned a generally consistent quality of pdas across fema regions .

pdas appear to be useful tools in assessing the impact of disaster events and , as such , seem to provide a consistent rationale for the ultimate decisions regarding a governor's or chief executive's request for supplemental federal assistance .

although the amount of damages and costs can vary widely by incident , just as incidents can present various challenges to the estimating processes , fema appears generally to adhere to consistent indicators in declarations decisions , such as per capita amounts to support a request for pa .

while estimates do not always comport with eventual drf spending , they do serve as a guide to the scope of the disasters and the likely categories of spending .

the pda reports also offer some insights into the swiftness of disaster response efforts .

crs analysis of pda reports indicates that in most cases states or tribal nations will receive a decision within two weeks of submitting a request .

this finding likely indicates that once the necessary information has been submitted , the decision - making process can generally proceed with little delay .

that analysis also reveals that different types of disaster events take different amounts of time , on average , for assessment .

for example , damage caused by a tornado is quickly assessed whereas damage from flooding may take longer because damage assessment teams need to wait for the waters to recede .

the pda process is likely to be improved in the future as fema and the states develop better survey tools that capture more information without encumbering the goal of providing emergency assistance .

the efficiency of the pda process , however , also relies on the factors used for assessing disaster damage .

as mentioned earlier , those factors are likely to change in the near future .

congressional oversight of these changes is likely to be a high priority for the foreseeable future .

