the 116 th congress , in both its legislative and oversight capacities , faces numerous trade policy issues related to the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) renegotiations and the proposed united states - mexico - canada agreement ( usmca ) .

on may 18 , 2017 , the trump administration sent a 90-day notification to congress of its intent to begin talks with canada and mexico to renegotiate and modernize nafta , as required by the 2015 trade promotion authority ( tpa ) .

talks officially began on august 16 , 2017 .

on september 30 , 2018 , leaders from the united states , canada , and mexico announced the conclusion of the negotiations for a modernized nafta , which would now be called the usmca .

on november 30 , 2018 , the proposed usmca was signed by president donald j. trump , then president enrique peña nieto of mexico , and canadian prime minister justin trudeau .

president trump stated his intention to withdraw from or renegotiate nafta during his election campaign and has hinted at the possibility of nafta withdrawal since he entered into office .

key issues for congress in regard to the consideration of the proposed usmca include the constitutional authority of congress over international trade , its role in revising , approving , or withdrawing from the agreement , u.s. negotiating objectives and the extent to which the proposed agreement makes progress in meeting them as required under tpa .

congress may also consider the agreement's impact on u.s. industries , the u.s. economy , and broader u.s. trade relations with canada and mexico , two of the united states' largest trading partners .

the proposed usmca , if approved by congress , would revise some key provisions such as auto rules of origin , which , some argue roll back longstanding u.s. fta provisions .

on the other hand , it establish new updated provisions in areas such as digital trade and intellectual property rights .

a key question for congress may be whether the agreement strikes the right balance overall .

after numerous rounds of negotiations , on august 31 , 2018 , after the united states and mexico announced a preliminary u.s. - mexico agreement , president trump notified congress of his intention to "enter into a trade agreement with mexico – and with canada if it is willing. .

on september 30 , 2018 , u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) robert lighthizer announced that the three countries had reached an agreement on a usmca trade deal that would revise , modernize , and replace nafta upon ratification .

canada , in its negotiating objectives , pledged to make nafta more "progressive" by strengthening labor and environmental provisions , adding a new chapter on indigenous rights , reforming the investor - state dispute settlement process , and protecting canada's supply - management system for dairy and poultry , among other objectives .

mexico's set of negotiating objectives prioritized free trade of goods and services , and included provisions to update nafta , such as working toward "inclusive and responsible" trade by incorporating cooperation mechanisms in areas related to labor standards , anticorruption , and the environment , as well as strengthening energy security by enhancing nafta's chapter on energy .

while the ustr's nafta negotiating objectives included many goals consistent with tpa , ustr also sought , for the first time in u.s. trade negotiations , to reduce the u.s. trade deficit with nafta countries , among other specific objectives .

u.s. objectives appeared to seek to "rebalance the benefits" of the agreement , echoing president trump's statements that nafta has been a "disaster" and the "worst agreement ever negotiated. .

some u.s. negotiating positions could be seen to have the explicit or implicit goal of promoting u.s. economic sovereignty and / or rolling back previous liberalization commitments in specific areas , such as reviewing and potentially sunsetting the agreement every five years , questioning the validity of binational dispute settlement , enhancing government procurement restrictions , and increasing u.s. and north american content in the auto rules of origin .

trump administration officials also spoke of unraveling the north american and global supply chains as a way of attempting to divert trade and investment from canada and mexico to the united states .

mexican and canadian negotiators viewed such proposals as counterproductive to the spirit and mutual economic benefits of nafta and repeated their positions to modernize nafta with provisions such as those in the proposed trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) .

the differences between views on modernizing the agreement and u.s. proposals led to perceived tensions in the negotiations .

the proposed usmca presents an opportunity to incorporate elements of more recent ftas that have entered into force or were negotiated , such as the u.s. - korea fta ( korus ) and the proposed tpp .

the u.s. and global economies have changed significantly since nafta entered into force 25 years ago , especially due to technology advances .

the widespread use of the commercial internet , for example , has dramatically affected consumer habits , commercial activities such as e - commerce and supply chain management .

negotiators also sought updated provisions in other areas such as intellectual property rights ( ipr ) , labor , and the environment .

the increased role of state - led or supported firms in trade competition with private sector firms is also a new issue of debate and focus of new rules - setting .

many economists and business representatives generally look to maintain and strengthen the trade and investment relationship with canada and mexico under nafta or the proposed usmca , and to further improve overall relations and economic integration within the region .

however , labor groups and some consumer - advocacy groups argue that nafta resulted in outsourcing and lower wages that have had a negative effect on the u.s. economy .

some proponents and critics of nafta agree that nafta should be modernized , but have contrasting views on how to revise the agreement .

this report provides a brief overview of nafta and the role of congress in the renegotiation process , and discusses key provisions in the proposed usmca , as well as issues related to the negotiations .

it also provides a discussion of policy implications for congress going forward .

it will not examine existing nafta provisions and economic relations in depth .

for more information on these issues , please see crs report r42965 , the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , by m. angeles villarreal and ian f. fergusson .

nafta negotiations were first launched under president george h. w. bush .

president william j. clinton signed into law the nafta implementation act on december 8 , 1993 ( p.l .

103-182 ) .

nafta entered into force on january 1 , 1994 .

it is significant because it was the first fta among two wealthy countries and a lower - income country and because it established trade liberalization commitments that led the way in setting new rules for future trade agreements on issues important to the united states .

these include provisions on intellectual property rights ( ipr ) protection , services trade , agriculture , dispute settlement procedures , investment , labor , and the environment .

nafta addressed policy issues that were new to ftas and was influential in concluding major multilateral trade negotiations under the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) and its successor , the world trade organization ( wto ) .

the united states now has 14 ftas with 20 countries .

nafta's market - opening provisions gradually eliminated nearly all tariff and most nontariff barriers on goods and services produced and traded within north america .

at the start of nafta , average applied u.s. duties on imports from mexico were 2.07% and over 50% of u.s. imports from mexico entered duty free .

in contrast , the united states faced higher tariff , nontariff , and investment barriers in mexico .

trade among nafta partners has more than tripled since the agreement entered into force , forming integrated production chains among all three countries .

many trade policy experts and economists give credit to nafta for expanding trade and economic linkages among the parties , creating more efficient production processes , increasing the availability of lower - priced and greater choice of consumer goods , and improving living standards and working conditions .

others blame nafta and subsequent u.s. ftas for disappointing employment trends , a decline in average u.s. wages , and for not having done enough to improve labor standards and environmental conditions abroad .

another important element of nafta is that it helped "lock in" trade and investment liberalization efforts taking place at the time , especially in mexico .

nafta was instrumental in developing closer u.s. relations with both mexico and canada and it may have accelerated ongoing trade and investment trends .

at the time that nafta was implemented , the u.s. - canada free trade agreement ( cusfta ) was already in effect and u.s. tariffs on most mexican goods were low , while mexico had the highest level of trade barriers among the three countries .

from the 1930s through part of the 1980s , mexico maintained a strong protectionist trade policy in an effort to be independent of any foreign power and as a means to promote domestic - led industrialization .

in 1991 , for example , u.s. businesses were very restricted in investing in mexico .

under mexico's restrictive law to promote mexican investment and regulate foreign investment , about a third of mexican economic activity was not open to majority foreign ownership .

mexico's failed protectionist policies did not result in increased income levels or economic growth , and the income disparity with the united states remains large , even after nafta .

nafta coincided with mexico's unilateral trade liberalization efforts .

after nafta , the united states and canada gained greater access to the mexican market , which was the fastest - growing major export market for u.s. goods and services at the time .

nafta also opened up the u.s. market to increased imports from mexico and canada , creating one of the largest free trade areas in the world .

since nafta , the three countries have made efforts to cooperate on issues of mutual interest , including trade and investment , and also in other , broader aspects of the relationship , such as regulatory cooperation , industrial competitiveness , trade facilitation , border environmental cooperation , and security .

under article ii of the constitution , the president has the authority , with the advice and consent of the senate , to make treaties .

under article i , section 8 , congress has the authority to lay and collect duties , and to regulate foreign commerce .

the president may seek expedited treatment of the implementing legislation of a renegotiated nafta under the bipartisan comprehensive trade promotion and accountability act of 2015 ( tpa ) .

nafta provides , "the parties may agree on any modification of or addition to this agreement .

when so agreed , and approved in accordance with the applicable legal procedures of each party , a modification or addition shall constitute an integral part of the agreement. .

under tpa , the president must consult with congress before giving the required 90-day notice of his intention to start negotiations .

the trump administration's consultations included meetings between u.s. trade representative robert lighthizer and members of the house ways and means committee and senate finance committee and with members of the house and senate advisory groups on negotiations .

the office of the united states trade representative ( ustr ) held public hearings and has received more than 12,000 public comments on nafta renegotiation .

in order to use the expedited procedures of tpa , the president must notify and consult with congress before initiating and during negotiations , and adhere to several reporting requirements following the conclusion of any negotiations resulting in an agreement .

the president must conduct the negotiations based on the negotiating objectives set forth by congress in the 2015 tpa authority .

see box below for the dates on which these requirements were or are expected to be met .

the trump administration , for the first time in the negotiating objectives of an fta , indicated its aim to improve the u.s. trade balance and reduce the trade deficit with nafta countries in the renegotiation of nafta .

the trade balance with nafta partners has fluctuated since the agreement entered into force , increasing from $9.1 billion in 1993 to $89.6 billion in 2017 .

president trump and some officials within his administration believe that trade deficits are detrimental to the u.s. economy .

ustr robert lighthizer stated after the second round of negotiations that while he wanted to negotiate an agreement that is approved by congress , he also wanted to bring down the trade deficit , as part of his mission , in order to help american workers and farmers .

other critics of nafta also argue that u.s. free trade agreements ( ftas ) have contributed to rising trade deficits with some trade partners .

economists generally argue that it is not feasible to use trade agreement provisions as a tool to decrease the deficit because trade imbalances are determined by underlying macroeconomic fundamentals , such as a savings - investment imbalance in which the demand for capital in the u.s. economy outstrips the amount of gross savings supplied by households , firms , and the government sector .

according to some economists , a more constructive alternative would be to help strengthen mexico's economy and boost mexico's imports from the united states .

others contend that ftas are likely to affect the composition of trade among trade partners , but have little impact on the overall size of the trade deficit .

they argue that trade balances are incomplete measures of the comprehensive nature of economic relations between the united states and its trading partners , and maintain that trade imbalances are determined by macroeconomic fundamentals and not by trade policy .

from this perspective , it is not clear how the administration would expect to reduce the trade deficit through the proposed usmca .

the proposed usmca , comprising 34 chapters and 12 side letters , retains most of nafta's chapters , making notable changes to market access provisions for autos and agriculture products , and to rules and disciplines , such as on investment , government procurement , and ipr .

new issues , such as digital trade , state - owned enterprises , anticorruption , and currency misalignment , are also addressed .

because nafta is 25 years old , the proposed usmca could be viewed as an opportunity to include obligations not currently covered in the original text , such as digital trade or more enforceable labor and environmental provisions .

the following selective topics provide an overview of proposed usmca provisions and a comparison to existing nafta provisions .

there are a number of significant issues for congress in the consideration of the proposed usmca .

key issues congress may examine include modernized provisions of the agreement , the role of the congress and the president in the nafta renegotiation and approval process , whether the agreement meets tpa objectives , the possible economic impact , especially in the auto industry , and how the agreement may impact u.s. relations with canada and mexico , two of the united states' largest trading partners .

some lawmakers believe that the renegotiations resulted in a positive outcome that would enhance relations with nafta partners through a modernized agreement .

other lawmakers have expressed concerns about specific aspects of the agreement , including labor , with a goal of revision .

what follows are a few selected areas of potential congressional interest .

a possible issue for congress relates to the roles of congress and the president in the modernization of the agreement or possible withdrawal .

implementing legislation for the usmca agreement may be considered under trade promotion authority ( tpa ) .

under tpa , if the president "makes progress in meeting" tpa's principal trade negotiating objectives and meets various consultative , notifications , and reporting requirements before , during , and after the conclusion of negotiations , congress shall provide expedited procedures for automatic introduction of the implementing bill submitted by the president , a timetable for guaranteed committee consideration and discharge , floor consideration , prohibition of amendments , and limitation on debate .

the process from introduction must be completed within 90 days , but it has often been completed much more quickly .

as tpa was in effect when the usmca was signed on november 30 , 2018 , it is eligible for tpa consideration .

there is no deadline for presidential submission or congressional consideration of implementing legislation .

tpa's requirement that the president fulfill consultation , notification and reporting obligations helps preserve the congressional role in trade agreements by giving congress the opportunity to influence the agreement before it is finalized .

congress may be interested in the extent to which the president advances u.s. negotiating objectives in tpa as approved by congress in 2015 , given several notable breaks in usmca with the contents of previous u.s. ftas .

should congress determine that the president has failed to meet these and other requirements , it may decide that the implementing bill is not eligible for consideration under tpa rules .

it would implement this decision by adopting a joint "procedural disapproval" resolution in both houses of congress or a consultation and compliance resolution in either house .

in addition , expedited procedures under tpa are considered rules of congress and can be changed at any time .

given that , either house can deny expedited treatment to implementing legislation .

in the house , the speaker may direct the rules committee to enact a rule stripping expedited treatment from the implementing legislation .

in the senate , changing a rule would require unanimous consent , or a supermajority to waive it .

president trump has indicated that he would consider withdrawing from nafta as a means of pressuring congress to support timely action on implementing legislation .

it is not clear , though , whether the president has the legal authority for withdrawing from an agreement without the consent of congress .

if president trump attempts to withdraw from the agreement , it is possible that congress would attempt to challenge or delay the effort .

the question of who has the authority to terminate nafta , a congressional - executive agreement , has been debated by lawmakers , legal experts , and others .

congress may examine the economic effects of a usmca and the broader strategic implications of possible withdrawal from nafta absent action on legislation to implement the uscma .

president trump has repeatedly threatened to withdraw from nafta .

some analysts maintain that these statements are not to be taken lightly because the potential cost of such actions could be very significant for the u.s. economy .

the united states shares strong economic ties with mexico and canada .

any disruption to the economic relationship could have adverse effects on investment , employment , productivity , and north american competitiveness .

in addition , mexico and canada could consider imposing retaliatory tariffs on u.s. exports if the united states were to withdraw , while at the same time maintaining existing and pursuing new ftas without the united states .

the full effects of the proposed usmca on north american trade relations are not be expected to be significant because nearly all u.s. trade with canada and mexico that meets rules of origin requirements is now conducted duty and barrier free under nafta .

the proposed usmca would maintain nafta's tariff and non - tariff barrier eliminations .

if the usmca is approved by congress and it enters into force , many economists and other observers believe that it is not expected to have a measurable effect on u.s. trade and investment with other nafta parties , jobs , wages , or overall economic growth , and that it would probably not have a measurable effect on the u.s. trade deficit .

the u.s. international trade commission ( itc ) is conducting an investigation into the likely economic impacts of the proposed usmca , a required element of the trade promotion authority ( tpa ) process .

tpa 2015 states that the itc must issue its report within 105 days of the president's signing of a trade deal .

the itc report , due by march 15 , 2019 , has been delayed because of the partial government shutdown , which lasted 35 days .

it is now expected to be released by april 20 , 2019 .

one exception to this overall economic evaluation may be the motor vehicle industry , which may experience more significant effects than other industries because of the changes in rules of origin in the usmca and because of the high percentage of motor vehicle goods that enter duty - free under nafta .

the highest share of u.s. trade with mexico is in the motor vehicle industry and it is also the industry with the highest percentage of duty - free treatment under nafta because of high north american content .

in 2017 , leading u.s. merchandise imports from nafta partners were motor vehicles ( $102.1 billion or 17% of total imports from canada and mexico ) , oil and gas ( $68.8 billion or 11% of imports ) , and motor vehicle parts ( $58.7 billion or 10% of imports ) .

about 98.6% of u.s. motor vehicle imports and about 77.5% of motor vehicle parts imports from canada and mexico entered the united states duty - free under nafta .

in comparison , only 12.6% of oil and gas imports and 49.3% of total u.s. imports from canada and mexico in 2017 received duty - free benefits under nafta as shown in figure 7 .

some analysts believe that the updated auto rules of origin requirements contained in the usmca could raise compliance and production costs and could lead to higher prices , which could possibly negatively affect u.s. vehicle sales .

the net impact , however , may be more limited depending on the capacity of u.s. automakers and parts manufacturers to shift suppliers and production locations and the ability to absorb higher costs , according to some observers .

some observers contend that manufacturers with a stronger presence in mexico , such as general motors and fiat chrysler automobiles , may be more impacted .

other observers and stakeholders are continuing to review the provisions in the new agreement and what effect , if any , these changes would have on u.s. economic relations with canada and mexico .

to some analysts , provisions in areas such as customs regulation , digital trade , sanitary and phytosanitary measures , and enforcement on labor and the environment are considered an improvement over similar provisions in nafta .

other proposed changes in the agreement , such as largely heightened ipr protections and generally less extensive investment provisions , have both supporters and detractors .

for example , there is some concern that the isds provisions in the usmca effectively may only apply to certain u.s. contracts in mexico's energy sector and possibly leave out other sectors such as services .

under usmca , investors in many sectors would be limited to filing isds claims for breaches of national treatment , most - favored nation treatment , or expropriation , but not indirect expropriation .

on july 1 , 2018 , mexico held presidential and legislative elections in which andrés manuel lópez obrador and his leftist morena party won by wide margins .

president lópez obrador entered into office on december 1 , 2018 .

he won the presidency with 53.2% of the vote , more than 30 percentage points ahead of his nearest rival .

morena's coalition also won majorities in both chambers of mexico's congress .

although president lópez obrador voiced skepticism about nafta in the past , he has stated on several occasions that he supports the agreement , arguing that it should be improved to benefit mexico rather than being terminated .

mexico's chief nafta negotiator under lópez obrador's administration , jesús seade , stated that the proposed usmca is a "satisfactory result" for mexico and that it will create an incentive for increased investment linkages and deeper economic integration .

an issue for congressional consideration is mexico and canada's ongoing trade initiatives and how they may affect the united states .

in addition to numerous ftas with other countries , canada and mexico are signatories to the tpp , now known as cptpp or tpp - 11 .

following the withdrawal of the trump administration from the then - proposed tpp in january 2017 , the 11 parties agreed on a final deal for the cptpp on january 23 , 2018 ; it was signed on march 8 , 2018 .

canada and mexico have ratified the agreement .

with six of the 11 countries having ratified it , the cptpp came into effect on december 30 , 2018 .

it provides canada and mexico preferential market access in numerous industries to several lucrative asian markets , especially japan , and may affect current trade and investment trends with the united states .

according to a june 2017 study , canada and mexico could have potential gains from cptpp , mainly because they would have increased access to other markets , especially japan , without having to compete with u.s. exports .

the study projects that canada's exports to cptpp countries , without the united states , would increase by 4.7% by 2035 and that mexico's would increase by 3.1% .

the study states that canada's agricultural exports , particularly beef , would benefit from access to the japanese market .

in addition to nafta , and the cptpp , canada has also negotiated other ftas .

canada's comprehensive economic and trade agreement ( ceta ) with the european union provisionally came into force on september 21 , 2017 .

this agreement provides preferential market access for goods and certain services ( including agriculture ) among other provisions such as those on geographical indications ( gis ) — geographical names that protect the quality and reputation of a distinctive product originating in a certain region .

for instance , canada agreed to recognize gis on certain cheeses generally viewed as common food names in the united states , some of which survived as recognized gis under the usmca .

canada likely will begin talks with the united kingdom for an fta , if the terms of brexit allow it to negotiate ftas with other countries .

canada also has a free trade agreement in force with south korea and has conducted exploratory discussions on launching fta negotiations with china .

in addition , canada has ftas with several countries in central and south america , and is an observer to the pacific alliance .

some observers contend that mexico's trade policy is the most open in the world .

it has a total of 11 free trade agreements involving 46 countries , including it the 11-member cptpp .

these also include agreements with most countries in the western hemisphere , as well as agreements with israel , japan , and the eu .

mexico and the eu renegotiated a new fta that is expected to open up the mexican market to more eu exporters and investors .

the two parties announced an agreement in principle on april 21 , 2018 .

the new agreement , which must be ratified by both parties before entering into force , includes commitments to cooperate on issues such as climate change , human rights , combating poverty , or researching new medicines .

mexico is also a party to the pacific alliance , a regional trade integration initiative formed by chile , colombia , mexico , and peru .

the trade bloc's main purpose is for members to forge stronger economic ties and integration with the asia - pacific region .

in addition to reducing trade barriers , the alliance has sought to integrate in areas including financial markets and the free movement of people .

in 2018 , the pacific alliance admitted singapore , australia , new zealand , and canada as associate members as a first step to deepening the relationship .

president trump stated to reporters on december 1 , 2018 , that he intended to notify canada and mexico of his intention to withdraw from nafta in six months .

article 2205 of nafta states that a party may withdraw from the agreement six months after it provides written notice of withdrawal to the other parties .

if a party withdraws , the agreement shall remain in force for the remaining parties .

private sector groups are urging the president to remain within nafta until the proposed usmca enters into force .

they claim that withdrawing from nafta would have "devastating" negative consequences .

congress may consider the ramifications of withdrawing from nafta and how it may affect the u.s. economy and foreign relations with mexico .

it may monitor and consider the congressional role in a possible withdrawal .

numerous think tanks and economists have written about the possible economic consequences of u.s. withdrawal from nafta .

for example an analysis by the peterson institute for international economics ( piie ) finds that a withdrawal from nafta would cost the united states 187,000 jobs that rely on exports to mexico and canada .

these job losses would occur over a period of one to three years .

by comparison , according to the study , between 2013 and 2015 , 7.4 million u.s. workers were displaced or lost their jobs involuntarily due to companies shutting down or moving elsewhere globally .

the study notes that the most affected states would be arkansas , kentucky , mississippi , and indiana .

the most affected sectors would be autos , agriculture , and non - auto manufacturing .

a 2017 study by impactecon , an economic analysis consulting company , estimates that if nafta were to terminate , real gdp , trade , investment , and employment in all three nafta countries would decline .

the study estimates u.s. job losses of between 256,000 and 1.2 million in three to five years , with about 95,000 forced to relocate to other sectors .

canadian and mexican employment of low skilled workers would decline by 125,000 and 951,000 , respectively .

the authors of the study estimate a decline in u.s. gdp of 0.64% ( over $100 billion ) .

the coalition of services industries ( csi ) argues that nafta continues to be a remarkable success for u.s. services providers , creating a vast market for u.s. services providers , such as telecommunications and financial services .

csi estimates that if nafta is terminated , the united states risks losing $88 billion in annual u.s. services exports to canada and mexico , which support 587,000 high - paying u.s. jobs .

some trade policy experts contend that nafta has been a bad deal for u.s. workers and cost the united states nearly 700,000 jobs as of 2010 .

they contend that renegotiating nafta offers new opportunities to update the agreement with a new labor template and updated provisions to raise labor standards and help protect u.s. workers .

the economic policy institute ( epi ) recommends that the united states seek stronger labor standards and enforcement in the nafta renegotiations .

usmca's modernized labor provisions may reflect some of the epi recommended changes of including ilo conventions concerning the freedom of association , collective bargaining , discrimination , forced labor , child labor , and workplace safety and health .

canada and mexico likely would maintain nafta between themselves if the united states were to withdraw .

u.s. - canada trade could be governed either by cusfta , which entered into force in 1989 ( suspended since the advent of nafta ) , or by the baseline commitments common to both countries as members of the world trade organization .

if cusfta remains in effect , the united states and canada would continue to exchange goods duty free and would continue to adhere to many provisions of the agreement common to both cusfta and nafta .

some commitments not included in the cusfta , such as intellectual property rights , would continue as baseline obligations in the wto .

however , it is unclear whether cusfta would remain in effect , as its continuance would require the assent of both parties .

in the unlikely event of a u.s. withdrawal from nafta , the united states would presumably would return wto most - favored - nation tariffs , the rate it applies to all countries with which the united state does not have an fta .

the united states and canada maintain relatively low simple average mfn rates , at 3.5% and 4.1% , respectively .

mexico has a higher 7.0% simple average rate .

however , all countries have higher "peak" tariffs on labor intensive goods , such as apparel and footwear , and some agriculture products .

of the three nafta parties , the united states has the lowest mfn tariffs in most categories .

applied tariffs are higher in mexico than the united states or canada , although canada has double - digit applied agricultural tariffs .

the united states and canada have relatively similar bound and applied tariffs at the wto .

mexico's bound tariff rates are very high and far exceed u.s. bound rates .

without nafta , there is a risk that tariffs on u.s. exports to mexico could reach up to 36.2% ( see table 2 ) .

in agriculture , u.s. farmers would face double - digit applied and trade - weighted rates in both mexico and canada .

mexico and canada likely would maintain duty - free treatment between themselves through maintenance of a bilateral nafta , or through commitments made in conjunction with the cptpp ( tpp - 11 ) if the united states withdrew from nafta , certain commitments would be affected , such as the following: services access .

the three nafta countries committed themselves to allowing market access and nondiscriminatory treatment in certain service sectors .

if the united states withdrew from nafta , it would still be obligated to adhere to the commitments it made for the wto's general agreement on trade in services .

while these commitments were made contemporaneously with nafta , given that the nafta schedule operated under a negative list basis — all sectors included unless specifically excluded — and gats on a positive list — specific sectors are listed for inclusion — nafta is likely more extensive .

government procurement .

as noted previously in this report , the nafta government procurement chapter sets standards and parameters for government purchases of goods and services .

the schedule annexes set forth opportunities for firms of each party to bid on certain contracts for specified government agencies .

the wto government procurement agreement ( gpa ) also imposes disciplines and obligations on government procurement .

unlike most other wto agreements , membership in the gpa is optional .

canada and the united states would still have reciprocal obligations as members of the gpa .

in fact , since the gpa was renegotiated in 2014 , commitments between the two are greater than under nafta .

however , mexico is not a member of the gpa , and u.s. withdrawal from nafta would allow mexico to adopt any domestic content or buy local provisions .

 ( since u.s. firms are more competitive in obtaining mexican contracts than mexican firms in the united states , this may adversely affect some u.s. domestic firms. ) .

investment .

unlike many chapters in nafta which have analogous counterparts in the wto agreements , the investment chapter in the wto does not provide the level of protection for investors as does nafta , subsequent u.s. trade agreements , or bilateral investment treaties .

if the united states withdrew from nafta , u.s. investors would lose protections in canada and mexico .

countries would have more leeway to block individual investments .

u.s. investors would not have recourse to the investor - state dispute settlement ( isds ) mechanism , but would need to deal with claims of expropriation through domestic courts , or recourse to government - to - government consultation .

canada and mexico likely would maintain investor protection between them through the prospective cptpp or through maintenance of nafta provisions .

the timeline for congressional consideration of the proposed usmca remains unclear in part because of the tpa timeline and also because of issues voiced by congress related to various provisions of the agreement and other ongoing trade issues with canada and mexico .

the agreement would have to be approved by congress and ratified by mexico and canada before entering into force .

on august 31 , 2018 , pursuant to tpa , president trump provided congress a 90-day notification of his intent to sign an fta with canada and mexico .

on january 29 , 2019 , as required by tpa 60 days after an agreement is signed , u.s. trade representative robert lighthizer submitted to congress changes to existing u.s. laws that will be needed to bring the united states into compliance with the proposed usmca .

a report by the itc on the possible economic impact of tpa is not expected to be completed until april 20 , 2019 due to the 35-day government shut down .

the report has been cited by some members of congress as key to their decisions on whether to support the agreement .

some policymakers have stated that the path forward to passage of the usmca by congress is uncertain partially because the three countries have yet to resolve disputes over u.s. steel and aluminum tariffs .

the united states , canada , and mexico are currently in a trade dispute over u.s. actions to impose tariffs on such imports due to national security concerns as discussed earlier in the report , the conclusion of the proposed usmca did not resolve the section 232 tariff dispute .

the u.s. business community , industry groups , some congressional leaders , and mexican government officials have publicly stated that the tariff issues must be resolved before the usmca could enter into force .

questions surrounding passage of mexico's proposed labor reforms could be a key issue for congress as lawmakers consider the proposed usmca .

under annex 23-a of usmca's labor chapter , mexico has commitments to adopt and maintain measures necessary for the effective recognition of the right to bargain collectively , including the establishment of an independent labor court for the adjudication of labor disputes .

the reforms were expected to be passed into law before january 1 , 2019 in order to avoid a delay of the usmca's entry into force .

mexico has not yet passed the reforms .

mexican officials have stated that passing labor reforms are a priority for president lópez obrador and the mexican congress and that the legislation could be passed as early as february 2019 .

other issues are also surfacing as major areas of debate among members and between the executive branch and congress , as discussed above .

