the u.s. constitution provides congress with powers over the armed forces , including the power "to make rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval forces. .

as such , congress has oversight of department of defense ( dod ) policies and programs .

congressional efforts to address military sexual assault intensified in 2004 in response to rising public concern about the rate and number of assaults and perceptions of an inadequate response by the military to support the victims and to hold perpetrators accountable .

in february of 2004 , the senate armed services committee subcommittee on personnel held a hearing on policies and programs for preventing and responding to incidents of sexual assault in the armed services .

in his opening statement , the ranking member , senator e. benjamin nelson , stated , we're greatly alarmed at reports of sexual assaults on our service women and the apparent failure of the military systems to respond appropriately to the needs of the victims .

women who choose to serve their nation in military service should not have to fear sexual attacks by their fellow servicemembers .

when they are victims of such an attack , they absolutely must have effective victim intervention services readily available to them , and they should not fear being punished for minor offenses when they report the attack , or being re - victimized through the investigative process .

in the same year , congress enacted law requiring the secretary of defense to develop a comprehensive policy on the prevention of sexual assaults involving servicemembers and to begin annual reporting on statistics and metrics related to sex - related violence in the military .

since 2004 , congress has enacted over 100 provisions intended to address various aspects of the problem as part of the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) .

the potential threat of sexual violence against military servicemembers has been part of the debates over whether women should be allowed to serve in the military and in certain combat roles , and whether they should be required to register for the selective service and be subject to a military draft .

in these debates , a frequently cited concern has been the possibility that women could be captured , exposing them to potential sexual violence from enemy forces .

however , the threat of sexual assault does not only come from enemy forces , nor is it only a threat for women in the military .

in the 1990s , several military sexual misconduct incidents ( eg , the navy's 1991 tailhook conference , and the army's aberdeen proving ground scandal ) garnered congressional attention .

these events highlighted the internal threat of assault perpetrated by one servicemember on another .

in 2003 , a sexual assault scandal at the air force academy again brought public attention to sexual assault in a training environment and called into question senior military leaders' efforts to establish an appropriate culture for prevention of and response to sexual assault .

shortly thereafter , allegations of sexual assaults by servicemembers on fellow servicemembers deployed to combat theaters in iraq and kuwait raised concerns that the prevalence of sexual violence in theater could have a negative effect on the morale and effectiveness of deployed units .

more recently , statistics have shown that in absolute numbers , more men than women in the military report experiences with unwanted sexual contact .

this has raised the profile of male sexual assault and dod policies and programs to support male victims .

finally , the exposure of sexist comments and nonconsensual sharing of sexually explicit / intimate images among the marines united social media group led many in congress to question the impact of service culture on sexism and sexual violence .

sexual violence is not a problem confined to the military .

actual prevalence in the civilian sector is difficult to estimate as many experts believe sexual assault is an underreported crime .

some national surveys suggest that up to 19.3% of women and 1.7% of men in the united states have been victims of sexual assault at some point in their lives .

there is a continued national dialogue with regard to sexual violence at universities , and other government and private organizations .

congress also has shown an interest in addressing society - wide issues through broad legal reforms .

nevertheless , there are particular aspects of military service ( eg , the possibility of remote assignments , the command structure , and the unique justice system ) that may require different policy solutions than those that might apply in the civilian workplace .

sexual assault can have both deleterious physical and psychological effects on the victim .

this is particularly true if the alleged victim and perpetrator are in the same unit .

according to a psychologist specializing in military sexual assault , "when you are raped by a stranger , you don't have to deal with that in day - to - day life .

[in the military , the victim] deals with the rape and the impact on her community and also the ongoing influence of the offender on her life outside of that specific assault. .

when an assault occurs in or around the workplace it can negatively affect the working environment and organizational functioning .

in the military context , when the ability of a unit to work together effectively is impaired , it can ultimately impact mission success .

survey data from 2016 indicates that among those servicemembers who experienced sexual assault in the previous year , 73% of the incidents occurred at a military location .

subject to the direction of the president , the secretary of defense has "authority , direction , and control over the department of defense. .

this authority allows the secretary to develop military personnel policies and programs .

congress , under its authority to regulate the armed forces , has taken considerable interest over the past 15 years in the effectiveness of dod's sexual assault prevention and response initiatives , and in the disposition of military sexual assault investigations .

congress has raised questions about accountability and organization , which can generally be summarized as: is dod organized to manage and oversee sexual assault prevention and response programming effectively ? .

are appropriate policies and procedures in place and are they adequately communicated to the military departments ? .

do sufficient , rigorous , and objective data - collection processes and metrics exist to measure the extent of the problem and to evaluate dod progress in addressing the issue ? .

dod uses the u.s. centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) terminology to define prevention and prevention strategies as they apply to sexual violence .

this section of the report mainly discusses primary prevention of sexual assault , characterized by the cdc as , population - based and / or environmental and system - level strategies , policies , and actions that prevent sexual violence from initially occurring .

such prevention efforts work to modify and / or entirely eliminate the events , conditions , situations , or exposure to influences ( risk factors ) that result in the initiation of sexual violence and associated injuries , disabilities , and deaths .

the cdc has identified four types of risk factors that are correlated with higher incidence of sexual assault , ( 1 ) individual risk factors ( eg , general aggressiveness and acceptance of violence , alcohol / drug use ) ; ( 2 ) relationship risk factors ( eg , association with sexually aggressive , hypermasculine , and delinquent peers ) ; ( 3 ) community risk factors ( eg , general tolerance of sexual violence , lack of institutional support ) ; and ( 4 ) societal risk factors ( eg , weak gender - equity laws / policies ) .

a full list of these risk factors is displayed in the appendix in table a - 2 .

military leaders have repeatedly stated a "zero tolerance" philosophy toward military sexual assault .

nevertheless , dod's prevention strategy acknowledges that the potential for assault exists , "individuals within the dod come from a wide variety of backgrounds and their past experiences shape their attitudes and behavior in response to life events .

individuals may express themselves in different ways , and for some , violence may be a choice. .

dod's prevention actions in this regard have been focused on reducing risk factors for sexual assault .

questions of congressional concern include: are military leaders adequately trained for , committed to , and held accountable for developing an organizational culture that reduces risk factors for sexual assault ? .

are sexual assault prevention training programs in the military timely , effective , and appropriate for the target audiences ? .

does dod have the appropriate authorities and are they taking adequate actions to screen out or deter potential perpetrators ? .

a third area of congressional focus is the provision of protection , advocacy and support services for victims of sexual assault — those currently serving and those who have been discharged or retired from military service .

although this analysis does not include congressional actions with relation to veteran services for victims of military sexual assault , it does include provisions associated with military discharges and the correction of discharge paperwork .

while this section focuses on dod services to victims of sexual assault , servicemembers may also be eligible for department of justice - funded programs in their respective states of residence .

congressional actions to protect and support victims of sexual assault fall under four main categories .

ensuring victim privacy and safety ; ensuring accessible and adequate medical and mental health services ; developing legal assistance programs for victims ; and protecting victims from retaliation or other adverse actions .

uniformed members of the military services who allegedly commit sexual assault crimes are subject to prosecution under the military justice system .

the military justice system is embodied in a code of military criminal laws called the uniform code of military justice ( ucmj ) which the president implements through the manual for courts - martial ( mcm ) .

the purpose of this system is to "promote justice , to assist commanders in maintaining good order and discipline , to promote efficiency and effectiveness within the military establishment , and thereby to strengthen the national security of the united states. .

prosecution of sexual assault offenders through the military justice system typically has a dual purpose: ( 1 ) to apply just punishment for illegal acts , and ( 2 ) to deter future offenders .

under the military justice system , members of the armed forces are subject to different rules , orders , proceedings , and consequences than their civilian counterparts .

much of the sexual assault legislation that congress has proposed and / or has been enacted over the past decade has been directed at reforming the military's relevant investigative and judicial processes .

the following sections summarize selected issues that have been on the forefront of congressional interest since 2004 .

members of congress may question if the reforms in this space have had any impact on the problem of sexual assault in the military .

as discussed at the beginning of this report , congress's desired outcomes for dod's sapr program are ( 1 ) continued preparedness , effectiveness and good order of military units , and ( 2 ) health and well - being of military servicemembers .

however , given the vast number of legal and policy changes in the military's approach to sexual assault over a relatively short period of time , evaluating the impact of these changes can be challenging .

as congress and others attempt to verify whether sexual assault rates are increasing or decreasing , some may look at the rates of actual reported incidents ( table 7 ) to identify trends .

some caution should be taken in this approach for several reasons .

first , it is only in the past few years that dod has begun collecting and reporting detailed incident data in a systematic , consistent , and comparable way across the armed forces .

this makes it challenging to validate any conclusions about the effects of recent reform efforts compared to past performance .

second , as previously discussed , it is assumed that a significant number of sexual assault incidents that occur are not reported .

therefore , analysis of self - reported anonymous survey data is considered to be a more accurate indicator of the actual rate of sexual assault in the military .

it should be noted , however , that changes in survey methodology limit the ability to observe trends over a longer period of time since prevalence rates from the fy2014 and fy2016 surveys are not directly comparable to prevalence data from previous years .

some of the reforms that have been implemented ( eg , improving command culture and training , provisions for restricted reporting ) are intended , in part , to encourage those who have been assaulted to make an incident report .

therefore , incident rates need to be viewed in the context of estimated prevalence rates from survey data ( see figure 2 ) .

if the rate of reported incidents increases in the short term , it could indicate negative or positive change .

on one hand , it could mean that there are more sexual assaults occurring .

however , given that estimated prevalence rates are higher than reported incident rates , it could mean that unreported incident rates are actually the same or lower .

this might be an indication not that more crime is occurring , but instead more individuals who have experienced assault feel comfortable about reporting .

for example , in fy2013 , dod reported 627 incidents involving male victims ( see table 7 ) .

the number of reported incidents for fy2014 and fy2015 were 921 and 821 respectively .

however , the estimated prevalence of male sexual assault in 2014 was about 10,500 members .

in the long run , congress might look for both estimated prevalence and incident rates to decrease .

however , in the short term , convergence of incident reporting and prevalence estimates might also be an indicator of positive change in command climate , confidence in the system , and / or victim awareness of his or her reporting processes and rights .

it is nearly impossible to determine how many sexual assaults may have not happened due to reforms that are intended to improve prevention programs .

in addition , it would be difficult to attribute any reduction in assault rates directly to such programs .

nevertheless , members of congress and their staff can monitor some indicators to determine whether prevention activities are being implemented in a manner consistent with best practices .

dod reports that it has implemented a standardized sexual assault training curriculum in accordance with statutory requirements .

there is some evidence to suggest that the services' training curricula and delivery generally complies with best practices in adult learning .

in addition , across the services , 2016 data indicate that 95% or more of men and women received training on topics related to sexual assault within the previous 12 months .

in addition , feedback from servicemembers on effectiveness and relevancy of the training was overwhelmingly positive .

while data on implementation suggests that training programs are generally reaching the targeted audiences , there is less data and evidence - based research on training program outcomes .

congress may continue monitoring servicemember awareness , participation , learning , and satisfaction with existing training and future programs .

there may also be an opportunity to compare the implementation of prevention programs and share best practices among the services within dod and also across other federal , state , or civilian programs ( eg , colleges and universities ) .

for example , the services have all adopted active bystander training , but each service and the national guard bureau have adopted slightly different training programs .

survey data from 2016 suggests that navy women and men were generally more likely than those from the other services to cite bystander training as influencing their decision to intervene in a situation that was believed to be sexual assault .

additionally , congress could direct funding to support additional research on effective sexual violence prevention programs .

many in dod and congress have recognized the importance of organizational culture and prevention of risk factors along a continuum of harm ( including , for example , sexual harassment and sexism , hazing , stalking , and alcohol use ) .

analysis of 2016 survey data indicates that when servicemembers perceive that their command climate is more supportive , or where they can speak more openly about sexual harassment issues , they are more willing to act to prevent sexual harassment .

this suggests that policies and programs to encourage open dialog and trust in leadership may support positive cultural changes .

congress may continue to monitor dod programs and progress for other associated risk factors .

for example , some of the services indicated in 2015 that they are funding research on the role of alcohol in sexual assault cases with a view for developing additional interventions .

as potential interventions are applied , it would be expected that the number of reported incidents associated with alcohol use or other risk factors would decline .

a large portion of the congressional reforms over the past decade have focused on ensuring that military victims of sexual violence have access to adequate and confidential support services immediately following the incident , throughout the investigative and judicial process , and in the longer term along the path to recovery .

servicemember confidence and satisfaction with these services may encourage victims to report sexual violence , to gain access to additional mental health services , and to engage with the investigative and / or judicial process to bring perpetrators to justice .

dod has noted positive trends in the rate of restricted reports converted to unrestricted reports and the rate of conversion .

dod considers these positive indicators of the robustness of the support structure in place and servicemember trust in the reporting system .

the percent of conversions was stable at 15% between fy2007 and fy2013 , but rose to 20% in fy2014 and has consistently been above 20% since ( see table 8 ) .

in 2016 , over 73% of servicemembers who made unrestricted reports of sexual assault reported being satisfied with their interactions with the sarcs , sapr vas , and svcs during the military judicial process .

in addition , 83% of victims felt that svcs kept them adequately informed them about the status or progress of their case during the judicial process , while less than 50% reported that their unit commander / director or enlisted advisor / supervisor kept them informed .

these figures are roughly equal to prior year ( 2015 ) metrics and suggest that victims perceive value in continuing or enhancing the svc programs .

an area for congressional oversight remains the training , professionalization , and standardization of victim support functions across the services and geographical locations .

