paraguay is a landlocked country in south america bordered by argentina , bolivia , and brazil , with a population of close to 7 million .

the country has experienced a turbulent political history marked by authoritarian leadership and corruption .

paraguay's current political environment was shaped by the country's chaotic history .

in the war of the triple alliance ( 1864-1870 ) , paraguay lost one - quarter of its original territory to its opponents — argentina , brazil , and uruguay — and more than half of its population died .

political instability followed for several decades , including three civil wars in the first half of the 20 th century .

the nation had a military dictatorship under general alfredo stroessner for 35 years ending in the late 1980s and has long been dominated by a single political party , the conservative colorado party ( partido colorado ) .

in 2008 , fernando lugo , a former roman catholic bishop , was elected from a coalition of centrist and leftist opposition parties , including the authentic radical liberal party ( partido liberal radical auténtico , or plra ) and several smaller parties .

lugo's election was widely seen as an important step in paraguay's democratic development , as it was the first time in the country's history that one party , the dominant colorado party , had peacefully transferred power to another .

many observers , however , saw lugo as a political neophyte who was unable to govern in a way that delivered on his promises to address paraguay's long - standing socioeconomic challenges .

his handling of a violent clash between landless farmers and the police in june 2012 sparked a successful effort to impeach him , cutting short lugo's five - year term in office .

lugo's impeachment trial , which lasted less than 24 hours and ended on june 22 , 2012 , was viewed with skepticism by many countries in the region .

lugo was succeeded by his vice president , frederico franco , who finished lugo's term .

lugo's ouster led to paraguay's suspension from its main trading bloc , the common market of the south ( mercosur ) , and other regional groups .

in april 2013 , horacio cartes of the colorado party was elected president with nearly 46% of the vote .

a multimillionaire tobacco magnate , cartes was a relative newcomer to politics and not a long - standing member of the colorado party .

in legislative elections held simultaneously with the presidential vote , the colorado party won a majority of the 80 seats in the lower house , the chamber of deputies , but fell short of a majority in paraguay's powerful senate , winning 19 of 45 seats .

under cartes , paraguay was readmitted to mercosur and another regional organization , the union of south american nations ( unasur ) , from which it also has been temporarily suspended for its perceived undemocratic impeachment of president lugo .

president cartes has taken steps to follow through on a campaign commitment to address poverty by expanding a conditional cash transfer program to poor families who demonstrate that they regularly attend medical appointments and can certify that their children attend school .

specifically , there are some newer programs that build on paraguay's largest program , translated as "sowing opportunities," and these provide assistance for income generation and ways to legally acquire the property on which poor families live .

however , cartes has experienced political resistance from both opposition parties and his now - fractured party .

leftist parties have opposed his public - private partnership ( ppp ) legislation , which they have alleged is a covert effort to privatize government - run utilities and infrastructure .

late in 2013 , nevertheless , paraguay passed a law on ppps that aimed to facilitate and promote private investment in upgrading highways , ports , airports , waterways , social infrastructure , and electricity transmission .

president cartes has heavily advocated ppps as a means to attract foreign investment to boost paraguay's long - term growth .

within the president's own colorado party , a large faction of legislators opposes several of cartes's policies and his appointment of mainly technocrats rather than colorado party loyalists to his cabinet .

in municipal and local elections in november 2015 , the colorado party lost five city mayoralties , including the important capital city of asunción .

the party continues to be divided in its support for president cartes , who campaigned for several of the losing candidates .

some observers note that factionalism in cartes's own colorado party — between traditionalists who wish to defend the party's long - standing patronage practices and those who have sided with the more technocratic approach adopted by president cartes , called cartistas — has served to undermine some of the president's initiatives .

for example , implementation of the ppp law has become subject to oversight by the congress of paraguay .

each new infrastructure contract is separately reviewed , significantly slowing approval .

this practice has stalled plans to streamline a notoriously inefficient public sector and to open some state enterprises up to private participation .

in may 2017 , one of the largest ppp projects , the modernization of the capital's international airport , was halted by the paraguayan comptroller - general , who requested that the contract be ended with the spanish company sacyr .

reportedly , the spanish company was not vetted adequately .

other large contracts involving ppps for infrastructure in asunción , where a large percentage of paraguayans live , also are under scrutiny by the current comptroller .

however , the economic growth spurred by low - tax policies , other financial - stabilization efforts , and booming soybean and cattle exports achieved during the cartes administration has been lauded by some of cartes's colleagues in the colorado party .

they have formed a coalition within the party that supports the president ( referred to as the honor colorado faction , or cartistas ) .

although reelection is prohibited by paraguay's 1992 constitution , this group urged president cartes to run for reelection anyway .

cartistas , who supported altering the constitution so cartes could run for reelection in the april 2018 general election , approached the left - wing coalition of former president fernando lugo , frente guasu , to suggest that both groups push a reform as an amendment through congress to allow for reelection , making both cartes and lugo eligible for the 2018 presidential race .

in late 2016 , the initiative to pursue reelection , which was not endorsed by cartes , resulted in a petition drive to bring the matter to a congressional vote ( although about a fifth of the signatures were subsequently alleged to be invalid ) .

in march 2017 , cartes had successfully convinced both a dissident faction of the largest opposition party in paraguay , the plra , and the frente guasu to support a reelection amendment .

some members of the senate , including pro - cartes senators and senators representing factions of the plra and frente guasu , held a secret vote in favor of the initiative .

this act sparked severe rioting in asunción and the burning of parts of the parliament building .

a young man from the opposition liberal party was shot in the back and killed during police efforts to quell the rioting inside plra headquarters .

from the vatican , pope francis called for violence to be avoided .

in addition , the paraguayan catholic church convened a dialogue .

the u.s. embassy declared that the situation should be handled not in a secret vote but transparently .

eventually , president cartes announced that he would not seek reelection .

the chamber of deputies rejected the bill to amend the constitution on april 26 , 2017 .

in late may 2017 , finance minister santiago peña and the governor of the itapúa department ( the term for a state in paraguay ) announced their intention to run for the ticket of the colorado party when primaries are held in december 2017 ahead of the 2018 general elections .

it appears that president cartes will endorse this ticket if it is victorious in the december 2017 primary ( when all the parties will select their candidates ) .

both former president lugo and president cartes have indicated that they may seek senate seats in the 2018 legislative elections , which is an avenue that former leaders in some nations , such as colombia , have used to retain influence .

the rejection of the referendum to permit reelection leaves questions about the strength and prospects for the cartista wing of the colorado party in the 2018 presidential race , especially as tensions in the colorado party remain and a unified ticket may not emerge .

however , the plra , historically known as the liberal party , also is suffering divisions and appears likely to remain divided going into the 2018 national elections .

in addition , the country is experiencing division outside the realm of formal politics , as rural and urban disparities are revealing strains and occasionally sparking protest and a generation born after the years of the stroessner dictatorship is beginning to become politically active .

paraguay's small but open economy depends heavily on commodities .

its export - oriented agricultural sector accounts for about 20% of the country's gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

traditional exports include soybeans , cotton , and meat .

the economy's susceptibility to the vagaries of weather conditions and fluctuations in world prices for commodities and other variables was evident in 2012 , when economic growth contracted by 1.2% as a result of a severe drought and an outbreak of foot - and - mouth disease harming cattle exports .

in 2013 , partially due to a full recovery from the drought and favorable weather conditions , paraguay's gdp grew by 14.2% , the highest growth rate in latin america .

according to the economic intelligence unit ( eiu ) , the paraguayan economy grew by 4.7% in 2014 , slowed to 3% in 2015 , and accelerated to 4% in 2016 .

eiu also forecasts that growth likely will remain between 3.2% and 4% in coming years , which is strong by regional standards .

in addition to a dominant agricultural sector , paraguay has a struggling industrial or manufacturing sector and a large informal economy .

the slowdown of the economies of brazil , china , and russia has resulted in lower demand for paraguay's exports from these important trade partners .

paraguay has a rich natural resource base , and the current government has plans to tap the country's large , underutilized electricity resources , such as hydropower from two massive dams co - built with brazil and argentina , to develop its industrial sector .

despite paraguay's abundance of renewable energy ( mostly hydro , biofuel , and solar ) , it currently imports oil .

some oil exploration is beginning , with six oil firms reporting plans to drill wells in 2016 , but the low oil price has delayed these efforts .

paraguay remains a relatively poor country , but it has grown more prosperous and resilient .

in 2001 , the poverty rate nationally was about 60% and the indigence rate was 31% .

by 2014 , the world bank found that poverty levels had declined significantly to 22.6% .

the world bank characterizes paraguay as an upper - middle - income country .

nevertheless , paraguay suffers from high income inequality and highly concentrated land distribution , leaving rural areas the most poverty - stricken .

the cartes government is open to foreign investment and has sought to modernize and improve the nation's failing infrastructure .

as part of paraguay's efforts to attract more outside investment and diversify its trade , the country has pursued full membership in the free - trade - oriented pacific alliance originally formed by colombia , chile , mexico , and peru .

as part of president cartes's approach to expand economic opportunities and increase international trade , he won favorable terms in a new trade deal between paraguay and taiwan on july 12 , 2017 .

the deal , which some analysts maintain is one of the most favorable ever struck by taiwan with another country , was signed during a visit by president cartes to celebrate 60 years of bilateral ties between paraguay and taiwan .

paraguay and the united states signed a trade and investment agreement in january 2017 , which has been under review by the paraguayan congress .

trade in counterfeit goods and smuggling remain prevalent in paraguay's weakly governed border regions , particularly the tri - border area ( tba ) where brazil , argentina , and paraguay meet .

some see the tba as a potential source of funding for terrorist groups , such as the lebanon - based islamic group hezbollah .

notably , paraguay has made some progress in combating corruption .

its ranking in transparency international's 2015 corruption perceptions index improved by 20 places above its ranking in 2014 , and in the index ranking for 2016 , paraguay is tied with honduras in the position of 123 out of 176 .

as in much of latin america , there is a growing intolerance of corruption .

anti - corruption protests have emerged , led by university students , farmers , and trade unionists in response to scandals related to nepotistic practices and mismanagement .

in 2016 , the paraguayan attorney general opened a case against former president franco ( 2012-2013 ) concerning allegations of money laundering and illicit enrichment .

climate issues and the vagaries of commodity markets likely will remain variables for the paraguayan economy in the future .

in december 2014 and january 2015 , severe flooding , at least in part caused by the weather phenomenon known as el niño , displaced 40,000 people in asunción .

in both 2016 and 2017 , severe wind storms and reported tornadoes continue to plague various parts of the country .

paraguay traditionally has had friendly relations with the united states , and the united states has supported the consolidation of paraguay's democracy and its continued modernization and economic reforms .

for its part , the paraguayan government has cooperated closely with the united states on counterterrorism and counternarcotics efforts .

although the cartes administration has encountered fervent opposition at times — such as during recent , atypical political violence in response to the effort to push through presidential reelection — it generally has promoted policies to encourage foreign investment and promote greater economic stability while countering corruption and seeking to increase transparency .

historically , paraguay has boasted the lowest tax burden in the region .

many analysts maintain that due to highly concentrated property ownership , continued struggle over land reform , and protests that include land invasions by landless peasants , political stability remains uncertain .

according to the international monetary fund , the paraguayan economy is projected to grow by 4.3% in 2017 ; if so , it would be a standout in south america .

economic policies that have encouraged investment are not likely to change significantly whether a colorado party ticket or an opposition party candidate wins in the april 2018 presidential race .

