some members of congress have expressed interest in the rules governing patentable subject matter for many years .

the term "patentable subject matter" refers to the requirement of section 101 of the patent act of 1952 that an invention must consist of a "process , machine , manufacture , or composition of matter" in order to be patented .

most recently , the leahy - smith america invents act ( aia ) of 2011 stipulated that "no patent may issue on a claim directed to or encompassing a human organism. .

the aia also limited the availability of patents claiming tax avoidance strategies .

the courts and the u.s. patent and trademark office ( uspto ) have historically understood the language of section 101 to allow an expansive range of patentable subject matter .

however , the courts have long held that several implicit exceptions exist to the four categories of patentable subject matter set out in section 101 .

in particular , laws of nature , natural phenomena , and abstract ideas have been held to be unpatentable .

for many years , section 101 was arguably a coarse filter that was rarely used to invalidate an issued patent or reject an application pending at the uspto .

this situation changed over the past decade due to a series of decisions issued by the supreme court of the united states .

four supreme court opinions have issued since 2010 addressing patentable subject matter .

in each instance the court concluded that the invention before it was unpatentable under section 101 .

since the supreme court issued its decisions , section 101 has been more frequently invoked to invalidate issued patents and reject pending patent applications at the uspto .

further , numerous patents granted by the uspto under earlier standards would likely be held invalid if they were subject to scrutiny by the agency or the courts .

views differ on whether the recent prominence of section 101 in the u.s. patent system has been desirable .

concerned observers have declared the u.s. patent system to be in a "state of crisis" due to "confusing" legal standards established by the supreme court .

the former chief judge of the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit , the tribunal with exclusive jurisdiction over patent appeals , reportedly described the supreme court decisions as creating "total chaos" and marking "a very harmful and completely unnecessary departure from a sensible patent policy. .

other observers believe that these decisions may lead to patents of appropriate scope , curb abusive patent litigation , and encourage patent lawyers to draft and procure higher quality patents .

this report reviews the current law governing patentable subject matter and recent proposals for legislative reform .

it begins by providing a basic overview of the patent system and introducing the principles of patentable subject matter .

it then considers the leading supreme court decisions construing section 101 of the patent act .

the report then considers the implications of these decisions within the information technology and life sciences industries .

the report closes with a review of legislative reform options .

individuals and enterprises must prepare and submit applications to the uspto if they wish to obtain patent protection .

uspto officials , known as examiners , assess whether the application merits the award of a patent .

under the patent act of 1952 , a patent application must include a specification that so completely describes the invention that skilled artisans are able to practice it without undue experimentation .

the patent act also requires that applicants draft at least one claim that particularly points out and distinctly claims the subject matter that they regard as their invention .

the patent acquisition process is commonly known as "prosecution. .

while reviewing a submitted application , the examiner will determine whether the claimed invention fulfills certain substantive standards set by the patent statute .

two of the most important patentability criteria are novelty and nonobviousness .

to be judged novel , the claimed invention must not be fully anticipated by a prior patent , publication , or other knowledge within the public domain .

the sum of these earlier materials is termed the "prior art. .

to meet the standard of nonobviousness , an invention must not have been readily within the ordinary skills of a competent artisan based upon the teachings of the prior art .

the invention must also be useful , a requirement that is satisfied if the invention is operable and provides a tangible benefit .

even if these requirements of novelty , nonobviousness , and utility are met , an invention is not patentable unless it falls within at least one category of patentable subject matter .

section 101 of the patent act provides whoever invents or discovers any new and useful process , machine , manufacture , or composition of matter , or any new and useful improvement thereof , may obtain a patent therefor , subject to the conditions and requirements of this title .

the statute defines the term "process" to mean a "process , art , or method , and includes a new use of a known process , machine , manufacture , composition of matter , or material. .

process patents claim a series of steps that may be performed to achieve a specific result .

process patents typically relate to methods of manufacture or use .

a process patent may claim a method of making a product , for example , or a method of using a chemical compound to treat a disease .

the other three categories of patentable subject matter pertain to products .

the supreme court has held that the term "machine" includes "every mechanical device or combination of mechanical powers and devices to perform some function and produce a certain effect or result. .

the court has construed to term "manufacture" to mean "the production of articles for use from raw or prepared materials by giving to these materials new forms , qualities , properties , or combinations , whether by hand - labor or by machinery. .

the term "composition of matter" has been held to mean "all compositions of two or more substances and ... all composite articles , whether they be the results of chemical union , or of mechanical mixture , or whether they be gases , fluids , powders or solids. .

although the wording of section 101 is quite broad , courts and the uspto have nonetheless established certain limits upon the sorts of processes that may be patented .

in particular , laws of nature , natural phenomena , and abstract ideas have been judged not to be patentable .

the supreme court has described these sorts of inventions as the "basic tools of scientific and technological work" that should be "free to all men and reserved exclusively to none. .

as explained by supreme court justice stephen breyer , this rule "reflects a basic judgment that protection in such cases , despite its potentially positive incentive effects , would too severely interfere with , or discourage , development and the further spread of future knowledge itself. .

if the uspto determines that a patent application satisfies section 101 and the other requirements for patenting , it will allow the application to issue as a granted patent .

the patent proprietor then obtains the right to exclude others from making , using , selling , offering to sell or importing into the united states the claimed invention .

the term of the patent is ordinarily set at twenty years from the date the patent application was filed .

patent title therefore provides inventors with limited periods of exclusivity in which they may practice their inventions , or license others to do so .

the grant of a patent permits inventors to receive a return on the expenditure of resources leading to the discovery , often by charging a higher price than would prevail in a competitive market .

a patent proprietor bears responsibility for monitoring its competitors to determine whether they are using the patented invention .

patent owners who wish to compel others to observe their intellectual property rights must usually commence litigation in the federal courts .

although issued patents enjoy a presumption of validity , accused infringers may assert that a patent is invalid or unenforceable on a number of grounds .

the federal circuit possesses national jurisdiction over most patent appeals .

the supreme court retains discretionary authority to review cases decided by the federal circuit .

until its recent spate of decisions , the last time the court addressed the law of patentable subject matter was nearly four decades ago .

in its 1980 decision in diamond v. chakrabarty , the court held that a genetically engineered microorganism could be patented .

similarly , in its 1981 opinion diamond v. diehr , the court ruled that a process for curing artificial rubber through the use of a computer and a mathematical formula was patentable .

these two decisions arguably set the stage for a period where the range of patentable subject matter was quite broad , both for information technologies and the life sciences .

since they issued , the lower courts and uspto arguably made only occasional use of section 101 to invalidate issued patents or reject pending patent applications .

the supreme court revisited the law of patentable subject matter in a series of four decisions issued from 2010 through 2014 .

in each instance , the court held each invention it considered to be unpatentable under section 101 .

as one commentator asserts: "no one can reasonably deny that the supreme court's decisions narrowing patent eligibility have had a significant impact on the patent system. .

this report discusses each decision in the order of issuance .

the supreme court decisions in bilski , mayo v. prometheus , myriad , and alice present the current law of the land with respect to whether a particular invention is eligible for patenting .

several key themes may be gleaned from these four opinions .

first , the courts and uspto conduct a two - part test developed from the case law .

that test asks ( 1 ) whether the claim recites a law of nature , natural phenomenon , or abstract idea ; and ( 2 ) if so , whether the claim includes additional , inventive elements that indicate the claim applies one of the three excluded subject matters , rather than being a fundamental concept per se .

with regard to this second step , the court will analyze a patent claim to determine if it preempts a field of activity .

if a claim covers every practical application of a fundamental concept , then it cannot be patented under section 101 .

in addition , the court does not consider a claim's recitation of routine , nominal hardware — such as a general - purpose computer — to ameliorate concerns over section 101 eligibility .

finally , although the machine - or - transformation test does not exclusively govern the patent eligibility of processes , it remains a useful guidepost within the decisionmaking process .

section 101 determinations have proven amenable to resolution early within the process of litigation , often at the pleading stage or a prompt summary judgment motion .

in addition , the courts have often not required a formal construction of the patent's claims in order to resolve section 101 challenges .

statistical analyses suggest that when these motions are raised , the moving party enjoys a good probability of invalidating the challenged claims .

in particular , one empirical study concluded as of june 19 , 2016 ( i.e .

alice 's two - year mark ) , courts have examined 568 challenged patents brought under §101 motions citing alice , resulting in 190 valid patents and 378 patents invalidated with an average invalidation rate of 66.5% .

specifically , the federal circuit upheld 3 patents and invalidated 34 patents — an average invalidation rate of 91.9% .

the [uspto] has rejected over 36,000 published patent applications under alice , where over 5,000 such applications were abandoned .

notably , these statistics do not suggest that approximately two - thirds of all issued patents do not comply with section 101 .

rather , they indicate that when attorneys assert that a particular patent claim is invalid in view of the existing law of patentable subject matter or a nonfrivolous argument for modifying existing law , they have a good chance of success .

such motions are not routinely brought with regard to such claimed subject matter as chemicals , consumer devices , electronics , medical devices , pharmaceuticals , tools , vehicles , and any number of other technologies .

however , these statistics may be read to suggest that recent supreme court interest in patentable subject matter has animated a patent validity doctrine with implications for both information technologies and the life sciences .

this report briefly considers these two fields next .

congress possesses several apparent options with respect to the law of patentable subject matter .

if the current situation is deemed acceptable , then no action need be taken .

congress could otherwise alter the law of patentable subject matter through legislation .

as of the date this report was published , no bill has been introduced before congress addressing the law of patentable subject since the enactment of the leahy - smith america invents act in 2011 .

however , at least three different industry associations have suggested modifications to section 101 .

two of these organizations , the american intellectual property law association ( aipla ) , a voluntary bar association , and the intellectual property owners association ( ipo ) , a trade association for proprietors of patents and other intellectual property rights , have generated highly similar proposals .

the aipla proposal would replace the existing section 101 with the following language: 35 u.s.c .

§ 101 — inventions patentable ( a ) eligible subject matter . — whoever invents or discovers any useful process , machine , manufacture , composition of matter , or any useful improvement thereof , shall be entitled to a patent therefor , subject only to the conditions and requirements set forth in this title .

 ( b ) sole exceptions to subject matter eligibility . — a claimed invention is ineligible under subsection ( a ) only if the claimed invention as a whole exists in nature independent of and prior to any human activity , or can be performed solely in the human mind .

 ( c ) sole eligibility standard . — the eligibility of a claimed invention under subsections ( a ) and ( b ) shall be determined without regard to the requirements or conditions of sections 102 , 103 , and 112 of this title , the manner in which the claimed invention was made or discovered , or whether the claimed invention includes an inventive concept .

the ipo proposal reads almost identically .

a third organization , the american bar association ( aba ) section of intellectual property law , has offered a related proposal .

the aba proposal would amend section 101 to read § 101 .

conditions for patentability: eligible subject matter .

 ( a ) eligible subject matter .

 - whoever invents or discovers any useful process , machine , manufacture , or composition of matter , or any useful improvement thereof , shall be entitled to obtain a patent on such invention or discovery , absent a finding that one or more conditions or requirements under this title have not been met .

 ( b ) exception .

 - a claim for a useful process , machine , manufacture , or composition of matter , or any useful improvement thereof , may be denied eligibility under this section 101 on the ground that the scope of the exclusive rights under such a claim would preempt the use by others of all practical applications of a law of nature , natural phenomenon , or abstract idea .

patent eligibility under this section shall not be negated when a practical application of a law of nature , natural phenomenon , or abstract idea is the subject matter of the claims upon consideration of those claims as a whole , whereby each and every limitation of the claims shall be fully considered and none ignored .

eligibility under this section 101 shall not be negated based on considerations of patentability as defined in sections 102 , 103 and 112 , including whether the claims in whole or in part define an inventive concept .

the aipla asserts that section 101 was intended to act as an "enabling provision" rather than "provide the standard for whether a particular technical advance should receive patent protection. .

similarly , the aba section on intellectual property asserts that recent supreme court decisions "have injected ambiguity into the eligibility determination by requiring courts and the [uspto] to apply criteria such as 'well known,' 'routine,' 'conventional or obvious,' factors that were previously relevant only to novelty and obviousness , in order to ignore limitations and render a claim patent ineligible and in effect have turned the gateway function of patent eligibility into a patentability test better left to the other statutory provisions.... " for its part , the ipo explains that the supreme court's analysis "is contrary to [c]ongressional intent , too restrictive , technologically incorrect , unsound from a policy standpoint , and bad law. .

not everyone agrees that legislative reform is necessary .

one commentator finds no evidence that more restrictive patent eligibility rules "have affected innovation or investment in any meaningful way. .

in his view , the proposed amendments would "essentially do away with any limits to software patenting. .

another observer believes that these proposals would "eliminate any real constraint on subject matter eligibility. .

he also observes that the aipla proposal would also change the current statutory phrase "may obtain a patent subject to the conditions and requirements of this title" to "shall be entitled to a patent only subject to the conditions and requirements set forth in this title. .

in his view , this language would have the perhaps unintended effect of eliminating other common law patentability standards , including the so - called "obviousness - type double patenting" rule .

patents in the fields of software and life sciences have proven controversial for decades .

recent supreme court interest in the topic of patentable subject matter , which has made patenting in these fields more difficult , has led to a heated debate .

many knowledgeable observers believe that section 101 helps ensure an appropriate balance between the innovative contributions of inventors and the scope of the rights that they receive .

however , other experts express concern that the lack of availability of patent rights will decrease innovation and investment in the united states .

collectively , these debates may promote further inquiry into the sorts of inventions that may be appropriately patented .

