amtrak — officially , the national railroad passenger corporation — is the nation's primary provider of intercity passenger rail service .

amtrak is structured as a private company , but virtually all its shares are held by the u.s. department of transportation ( dot ) .

amtrak was created by congress in 1970 to preserve a basic level of intercity passenger rail service , while relieving private railroad companies of the obligation to provide money - losing passenger service .

although created as a for - profit corporation , amtrak has never made a profit ; in this it resembles both the passenger rail experience of the private - sector companies that preceded it and of intercity passenger rail operators in many other countries .

during the 47 years from 1971 to 2017 , federal assistance to amtrak amounted to approximately $81 billion in constant 2017 dollars ( see appendix , table a - 1 ) .

amtrak's approximately 20,000 employees operate trains and maintain its infrastructure .

it carries around 31 million passengers annually , providing slightly less than 1% of total u.s. intercity passenger miles traveled by common carrier ( see table 1 ) .

the company operates approximately 44 routes over 21,300 miles of track .

most of that track is owned by freight rail companies ; amtrak owns about 625 route miles .

the primary section it owns — most of the northeast corridor ( nec ) — includes some of the most heavily used segments of track in the nation .

amtrak also operates corridor routes ( covering distances under 750 miles ) and long - distance routes ( over 750 miles in length ) .

most of its corridor routes are financially supported by states they serve .

amtrak also operates commuter service under contract with state and local commuter authorities in various parts of the country .

amtrak's expenses exceed its revenues each year .

in fy2016 , amtrak's revenues totaled $3.2 billion , against expenses of $4.3 billion , for a net loss of $1.1 billion ( see table 2 ) .

that loss was covered by federal grants made to amtrak by dot .

in recent years , congress has typically divided amtrak's grant into two categories: operating and capital grants .

roughly , the operating grant could be thought of as relating to amtrak's annual cash loss , and the capital grant as relating to the depreciation of amtrak's assets , as well as an amount for amtrak debt repayments .

amtrak's federal funding is primarily provided within the dot's appropriation .

the administration requests funding for amtrak each year as part of its dot budget request .

amtrak also submits a separate appropriation request directly to congress each year ; typically , that request is larger than the administration request .

table 3 shows the difference in the requests that were submitted for fy2016 .

congress changed the structure of federal grants to amtrak in the passenger rail reform and investment act of 2015 ( title xi of the fixing america's surface transportation ( fast ) act ; p.l .

114-94 ) .

previously , congress had divided amtrak funding into two pots , one for capital expenditures and one for operating costs .

starting in fy2017 , the grants are divided between funding for amtrak's nec service ( which is operationally self - sufficient but has billions of dollars in capital needs ) and the rest of amtrak's network ( the national network , which has modest capital needs but runs an operating deficit of several hundred million dollars ) .

the change is intended to increase transparency of the costs of amtrak's two major lines of business and eliminate cross - subsidization between them ; operating profits from the nec and state access payments for use of the nec will be reinvested in that corridor , and passenger revenue , state payments , and federal grants for the national network will be used for that account .

amtrak owned no infrastructure at the time of its creation .

it was structured as a contracting agency , and amtrak trains were operated by private railroads over tracks they owned .

several years later , as congress was dealing with the bankruptcy of the penn central railroad , congress decided to give amtrak much of the trackage owned by the penn central in the 450-mile corridor running from washington , dc , north through philadelphia and new york city to boston , along with shorter lines serving harrisburg , pa , and springfield , ma .

the line running from washington to boston , known as the northeast corridor ( nec ) , traverses 8 states and hosts 2,200 daily trains carrying over 800,000 passengers ( mostly on commuter trains ) .

the line includes more than 200 bridges , tunnels dating to the 1870s , and electric traction systems relying on 1930s - era components .

while amtrak owns the vast majority of the right - of - way and track , there are sections owned by state governments and commuter rail agencies .

in addition to amtrak , eight commuter rail agencies operate on the nec , as well as four freight railroads .

the nec is amtrak's flagship corridor , with its fastest service .

the premium - fare acela service attains speeds of up to 125 miles per hour on the southern section between washington , dc , and new york city , and up to 150 mph on the northern section between new york city and boston .

but those high speeds are possible only in limited stretches: the average speed of the acela service is around 70 to 80 miles per hour .

travel time improvements on the nec likely would be valuable .

a 2008 analysis by the dot inspector general estimated that reducing the new york - washington travel time from nearly three to two and a half hours and the new york - boston travel time from over three and a half to three hours would result in an average of $500 million in annual benefits ( in 2006 dollars ) .

most of that was estimated to come from air passengers shifting to the train as its travel times shrank .

the impact might be less now , as amtrak's share of the combined air / rail market in the northeast has increased since that report was written .

the california high - speed rail authority proposes to build a dedicated rail line between sacramento and san diego that will allow trains to reach speeds of up to 220 mph .

the first phase of the project will link san francisco and los angeles , with trains covering the 520-mile distance in as little as 2 hours and 40 minutes .

a recent change to the first phase would also provide service between san francisco and the central valley city of merced .

the authority expects to open service on the portion of the route in 2025 , with the first phase completed by 2029 .

the authority will need to select an operating company to run the trains , which may or may not be amtrak .

