the rural education achievement program ( reap ) is authorized by part b of title v of the elementary and secondary education act of 1965 ( esea ) , as amended by the every student succeeds act ( essa , p.l .

114-95 ) in 2015 .

congress created this program to address the unique needs of rural schools that disadvantage them relative to non - rural schools .

to compensate for the challenges facing rural schools , reap awards two types of formula grants .

the small , rural school achievement ( srsa ) program provides funds to rural local educational agencies ( leas ) that serve small numbers of students .

the rural and low - income school ( rlis ) program provides funds to rural leas that serve high concentrations of low - income students , regardless of the lea's size .

funds appropriated for reap are divided equally between the srsa and rlis programs .

the essa reauthorization of the reap statute made major changes to the program by 1. updating the locale codes used for determining the eligibility of leas , 2. clarifying that leas within educational service agencies are to be considered for srsa eligibility , 3. extending to rlis the alternative state certification option for meeting the rural criterion that already existed for srsa , and 4. giving leas the option to choose which program to receive funds under if eligible for both srsa and rlis .

this report discusses the challenges facing rural schools and the manner in which reap attempts to address these challenges .

congress created reap to meet many of the challenges facing rural schools .

according to the statute , the purpose of reap is to address "the unique needs of rural school districts that frequently ( 1 ) lack the personnel and resources needed to compete effectively for federal competitive grants ; and ( 2 ) receive formula grant allocations in amounts too small to be effective in meeting their intended purposes. .

reap authorizes two rural education programs under esea title v - b .

subpart 1 authorizes the srsa program , which focuses on leas with less than 600 students .

subpart 2 authorizes the rlis program , which focuses on larger rural leas with relatively high poverty rates ( at least 20% of children from families below the poverty line ) .

recipients of grants from these programs may use their funds to support a fairly broad set of educational programs and activities authorized by several esea programs .

essa authorized reap at $169,840,000 for the fiscal years 2017 through 2020 , to be distributed equally between subparts 1 and 2 .

however , in the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l .

115-31 ) congress appropriated $175,840,000 for reap .

table 1 shows the history of appropriations for the program .

changes made by the essa amendments may present implementation issues .

one possible area concerns the impact of dual eligibility on the awarding of grants .

essa provided new authority allowing an lea eligible under both the srsa and rlis programs to choose the program from which they prefer to receive funds .

this could greatly complicate grant administration at both the federal and state levels .

the new law requires the secretary to establish a date by which leas must declare their choice ; however , this may be a difficult decision to make by a certain date because estimated grant amounts will change due to the number and characteristics of other participating leas .

specifically , the ratable reduction and hold harmless provisions in srsa will be greatly impacted by the number of leas that choose this program .

similarly , rlis amounts will depend largely on the popularity of this choice .

currently , srsa awards are much larger than rlis awards .

in fy2016 , the average per pupil grant amount was $78 for srsa , compared to $23 for rlis .

however , that could change substantially if a large number of former rlis recipients decided to take srsa funds .

even though it appears that most dual - eligible leas were formerly not in the rlis program , there still may be a significant impact due to the essa changes .

perhaps most importantly , the changes appear to force a choice based upon limited information .

this is likely to create some uncertainty for leas and administrative complications for ed and state officials .

