congress has created numerous administrative agencies to implement and enforce delegated regulatory authority .

federal statutes define the scope and reach of agencies' power , granting them discretion to , for example , promulgate regulations , conduct adjudications , issue licenses , and impose sanctions for violations of the law .

the administrative procedure act ( apa ) confers upon the judiciary an important role in policing these statutory boundaries , directing federal courts to "set aside agency action" that is "not in accordance with law" or "in excess of statutory jurisdiction , authority , or limitations. .

courts will thus invalidate an action that exceeds an agency's statutory authorization or otherwise violates the law .

of course , in exercising its statutory authorities , an agency necessarily must determine what the various statutes that govern its actions mean .

this includes statutes the agency specifically is charged with administering as well as laws that apply broadly to all or most agencies .

as this report explains , when a court reviews an agency's interpretation of a statute it is charged with administering , the court will generally apply the two - step framework outlined by the supreme court in chevron u.s.a. , inc. v. natural resources defense council .

pursuant to that rubric , at step one , courts examine "whether congress has directly spoken to the precise question at issue. .

if so , "that is the end of the matter" and courts must enforce the "unambiguously expressed intent of congress. .

in the case of statutory silence or ambiguity , however , step two requires courts to defer to a reasonable agency interpretation of the statutory text , even if the court would have otherwise reached a contrary conclusion .

this report discusses the chevron decision , explains the circumstances in which the chevron doctrine applies , explores how courts apply the two steps of chevron , and highlights some criticisms of the doctrine , with an eye towards the potential future of chevron deference .

the chevron case itself arose out of a dispute over the proper interpretation of the clean air act ( caa ) .

the contested statutory provision required certain states to create permitting programs for "new or modified major stationary sources" that emitted air pollutants .

in 1981 , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) promulgated a regulation that defined "stationary source," as used in that statute , to include all pollution - emitting activities within a single "industrial grouping," and thus let states "bubble," or group together , all emitting sources in a single plant for the purposes of assessing emissions .

this allowed a facility to construct new pollution - emitting structures so long as the facility as a whole — that is , the "stationary source" — did not increase its emissions .

the natural resources defense council ( nrdc ) filed a petition for judicial review , arguing that this definition of "stationary source" violated the caa .

the nrdc claimed that the text of the caa required the epa "to use a dual definition — if either a component of a plant , or the plant as a whole , emits over 100 tons of pollutant , it is a major stationary source. .

a unanimous supreme court disagreed and upheld the regulation , determining that the epa's definition was "a permissible construction of the statute. .

the court explained that when a court reviews an agency's interpretation of a statute it administers , it faces two questions: first , always , is the question whether congress has directly spoken to the precise question at issue .

if the intent of congress is clear , that is the end of the matter ; for the court , as well as the agency , must give effect to the unambiguously expressed intent of congress .

if , however , the court determines congress has not directly addressed the precise question at issue , the court does not simply impose its own construction on the statute , as would be necessary in the absence of an administrative interpretation .

rather , if the statute is silent or ambiguous with respect to the specific issue , the question for the court is whether the agency's answer is based on a permissible construction of the statute .

applying this two - step inquiry to review the challenged epa regulation , the court first considered the text and structure of the caa , along with the legislative history regarding the definition of "stationary source. .

the text of the statute did not "compel any given interpretation of the term 'source,'" and did not reveal congress's "actual intent. .

the justices concluded that the statutory text was broad , granting the epa significant "power to regulate particular sources in order to effectuate the policies of the act. .

the legislative history of the caa was similarly "unilluminating. .

however , the ambiguous legislative history was "consistent with the view that the epa should have broad discretion in implementing the policies of" the caa .

ultimately , the court decided that the epa had "advanced a reasonable explanation" for determining that its definition of "source" advanced the policy concerns that had motivated the caa's enactment , and upheld this "permissible construction. .

the court gave three related reasons for deferring to the epa: congressional delegation of authority , agency expertise , and political accountability .

first , the court invoked a judicial presumption about legislative intent , which has subsequently become one of the leading justifications for deferring to agencies under chevron : if congress has explicitly left a gap for the agency to fill , there is an express delegation of authority to the agency to elucidate a specific provision of the statute by regulation... .

sometimes the legislative delegation to an agency on a particular question is implicit rather than explicit .

in such a case , a court may not substitute its own construction of a statutory provision for a reasonable interpretation made by the administrator of an agency .

in the view of the court , because the statutory term "source" was ambiguous and could be read either to prohibit or to allow "bubbling," congress had implicitly delegated to the epa the ability to choose any definition that was reasonably permitted by the statutory text .

the statutory ambiguity constituted a limited delegation of interpretive authority from congress , and the agency had acted within that delegation .

second , the court cited the greater institutional competence of agencies , as compared to courts , to resolve the "policy battle" being waged by the litigants .

the court reasoned that , with its superior subject matter expertise , the epa was better able to make policy choices that accommodated "manifestly competing interests" within a "technical and complex" regulatory scheme .

finally , the opinion of the court also rested implicitly on concerns about the constitutional separation of powers .

while judges should not be in the business of "reconcil[ing] competing political interests," the court stated , it was "entirely appropriate for this political branch of the government to make such policy choices — resolving the competing interests which congress itself either inadvertently did not resolve , or intentionally left to be resolved by the agency charged with the administration of the statute in light of everyday realities. .

an important threshold question for a court reviewing an agency's interpretation of a statute is whether chevron deference should apply at all .

as an initial matter , the chevron framework of review is limited to agencies' interpretations of statutes they administer .

even when an agency is interpreting a statute that it administers , however , the supreme court has prescribed important limits on the types of agency statutory interpretations that qualify for chevron deference .

one crucial inquiry , sometimes referred to as chevron "step zero," is whether congress has delegated authority to the agency to speak with the force of law .

this analysis often turns on the formality of the administrative procedures used in rendering a statutory interpretation .

the court has indicated that an agency's determination of the scope of its jurisdictional authority is entitled to chevron deference in appropriate circumstances .

another situation where the court has occasionally declined to follow chevron occurs when an agency's interpretation implicates a question of major "economic and political significance. .

however , this "major questions" doctrine has been invoked in a somewhat ad hoc manner , leaving unclear exactly how this consideration fits into the chevron framework .

importantly , even if the chevron framework of review does not apply , a court might still give some weight to an agency's interpretation of a statute .

in the 2000 case of united states v. mead corp. , the court explained that even when chevron deference was inapplicable to an agency's interpretation , it might still merit some weight under the court's pre - chevron decision in skidmore v. swift & co .

under skidmore , when an agency leverages its expertise to interpret a "highly detailed" "regulatory scheme," a court may accord the agency's interpretation "a respect proportional to its 'power to persuade.' .

in other words , a court applying  skidmore  deference accords an agency's interpretation of a statute an amount of respect or weight that correlates with the strength of the agency's reasoning .

finally , when an agency interprets legal requirements that apply broadly across agencies , it is not operating pursuant to delegated interpretive authority to resolve ambiguities or relying on its particular expertise in implementing a statute , and the agency's interpretation is not afforded deference by a reviewing court .

for instance , courts will review de novo , or without any deference at all , procedural provisions of the apa , the freedom of information act , and the constitution .

after a court has determined that chevron applies to a particular agency's interpretation of a statute , the first inquiry in the two - step chevron framework presents a question of statutory construction for the court .

step one requires a court to determine whether congress "directly addressed the precise question at issue. .

a court proceeds to step two only if a statute is "silent or ambiguous with respect to the specific issue. .

if the statute is unambiguous , a court must "give effect" to that congressional intent without deferring to the agency .

the supreme court stated in chevron that a court should conduct the step one analysis by "employing traditional tools of statutory construction. .

this "traditional tools" instruction , however , left open for debate the tools that should be employed during chevron 's first step .

there are different theories of statutory interpretation , and each interpretive school has a different view of which tools courts should appropriately deploy when they seek to discern statutory meaning .

generally , however , most courts begin by considering the text of the statute .

to give meaning to this text , judges typically seek to determine the "natural reading" or "ordinary understanding" of disputed words .

they often refer to dictionaries to find this ordinary meaning .

a contested statutory term can be further clarified by reference to the statutory context , looking to that specific provision as a whole , or by examining how the term is employed in related statutes .

courts may also turn to a set of presumptions , or interpretive canons , about how people usually read meaning into text .

other tools of statutory construction , focused on determining legislative intent , are somewhat more controversial but are still frequently deployed in step one analyses .

accordingly , courts often refer to statutory purpose .

they also regularly cite legislative history at chevron step one .

similarly , to help determine congressional intent , courts have looked to past agency practice as well as agency interpretations that were advanced prior to the dispute before the court .

finally , judges may sometimes invoke normative or substantive canons of statutory interpretation , distinct from the textual canons mentioned above .

courts and scholars debate not only which methods of statutory construction constitute the "traditional tools" embraced in chevron 's step one , but also when application of those tools may render a statute sufficiently clear to conclude that congress has "directly addressed the precise question at issue. .

it is an open question whether chevron 's first step presents a normal question of statutory interpretation , in which the court should look for ambiguity or clarity as it would any other time it interprets a statute , or whether instead a determination that a statute is unambiguous for the purposes of chevron step one requires some higher level of clarity .

different judges may undertake a more or less searching inquiry , deploying different tools of statutory interpretation and , perhaps as a result , reaching different conclusions regarding whether to proceed to chevron step two .

some decisions have implied that if a court needs to resort to a greater number of tools in the search for a clear meaning , this in itself suggests that a statute is ambiguous .

confusion about the level of statutory ambiguity required to trigger chevron 's step two is compounded by supreme court decisions that seemingly blur the line between the two steps .

the court has sometimes held only that an agency's interpretation is "reasonable" or "permitted" without expressing an opinion on whether the statute is sufficiently clear to indicate that congress in fact unambiguously addressed the specific question before the court .

if a court determines at step one that the statute is ambiguous or silent on the particular issue in question , the chevron framework next requires consideration of whether the agency's construction of the statute is "permissible. .

under chevron 's step - two analysis , if congress has delegated authority to an agency to fill in the gaps of a statute , courts will give "controlling weight" to reasonable agency interpretations of a statutory ambiguity .

accordingly , at chevron 's second step , courts may not substitute their own interpretation of a statutory provision for an agency construction that is reasonable .

chevron deference thus sometimes requires a court to sanction an interpretation that departs from what the court considers the best reading of a statute , so long as the agency's interpretation is "rationally related to the goals of the statute. .

commentators have noted that , at least in the federal courts of appeals , agency interpretations are more likely to prevail when a case is resolved at chevron 's second step than when a court decides an issue at step one , or declines to apply the chevron framework at all .

the court's decision in chevron is a foundational case for understanding the modern administrative state .

it is one of the most cited cases by federal courts in administrative law disputes , and supplies a background principle of deference to statutory ambiguity against which congress may legislate .

indeed , some scholars have noted that a certain amount of ambiguity in a statute is likely inevitable .

consequently , chevron is sometimes characterized as placing resolution of statutory ambiguities in politically accountable agencies , rather than unelected article iii courts .

a number of commentators have nonetheless criticized the doctrine of chevron deference in the years since the court's opinion , although recent skepticism from various justices has arguably brought increased attention to their concerns .

justice thomas , for instance , has questioned the doctrine on separation of powers grounds .

at bottom , justice thomas objects to " chevron 's fiction that ambiguity in a statutory term is best construed as an implicit delegation of power to an administrative agency to determine the bounds of the law. .

he argues that judicial deference to ambiguous agency statutory interpretations contradicts the constitution's vestment of judicial power in article iii courts , which requires the judiciary , rather than the executive , to "say what the law is. .

in addition , for justice thomas , to the extent that agencies are not truly interpreting statutory ambiguities , but rather formulating policy under the chevron deference framework , "[s]tatutory ambiguity thus becomes an implicit delegation of rule - making authority , [allowing the agency] to formulate legally binding rules to fill in gaps based on policy judgments made by the agency rather than congress. .

but , for justice thomas , granting agencies power to speak with the force of law with respect to matters on which "congress did not actually have an intent" violates article i by permitting the executive branch to exercise legislative power .

likewise , recently appointed justice neil gorsuch criticized the doctrine while he was a judge on the court of appeals for the tenth circuit .

for example , then - judge gorsuch argued in a concurring opinion that deferring to agency interpretations under chevron was an "abdication of the judicial duty" to say what the law is .

this shift of responsibility , for judge gorsuch , raises due process and equal protection concerns .

in particular , he argued that under the chevron framework , regulated parties do not receive fair notice of what the law requires .

additionally , rather than effectuating "the fairest reading of the law that a detached magistrate can muster," politicized agency decisionmakers enjoy discretion to determine legal requirements "based merely on the shift of political winds. .

further , judge gorsuch questioned whether silence or ambiguity in a statute truly reflects congressional intent to delegate interpretive authority to federal agencies , and argued that this theory contradicts the apa's mandate to courts to interpret the law .

finally , judge gorsuch noted that , at least in some instances , the application of chevron deference might constitute an unconstitutional delegation of legislative authority to the executive branch .

other judges sitting on the federal courts of appeals have raised similar objections to chevron deference .

at least one has echoed the separation of powers concerns voiced by justices gorsuch and thomas ; another has lamented that chevron 's broad scope encourages agencies to aggressively pursue policy goals "unless ... clearly forbidden ," rather than fairly determining the best interpretation of a statute's meaning .

and numerous scholars have also questioned the doctrine , critiquing , among other things , its purported historical foundations , theoretical basis , and inconsistent application by the court .

further , scholars have criticized the apparent tools provided in chevron to determine the meaning of a statute , the court's test for when chevron applies , as well as confusion regarding the mechanics and purpose of the doctrine's framework stemming from chevron 's "unsystematic origin. .

finally , scholars have debated the merits of each of chevron 's initial justifications , including the presence of an implied delegation of interpretive authority from congress to an agency , the role of agency expertise , and the importance of political accountability .

these concerns aside , the doctrine as a whole nevertheless is firmly established at the supreme court .

most importantly , the majority of supreme court justices appear comfortable applying the doctrine .

nonetheless , appellate judges and commentators have noted that the supreme court has recently limited the doctrine's reach and applied chevron 's second step fairly stringently .

given the doubts about the constitutionality of chevron deference of at least two justices , the competing tests for determining when chevron applies to judicial review of agency action , and the uncertainty about whether an agency interpretation concerns a "major question" that does not merit agency deference , future disagreements about the scope of the doctrine are quite possible .

achieving consensus on the doctrine's applicability may prove difficult in certain cases , at least with respect to those areas where the appropriateness of chevron has not been conclusively decided by the supreme court .

further , just as the court has limited the reach of the doctrine in the past , such as by requiring certain procedures to apply the chevron framework or declining to apply chevron to certain issues , the scope of these "doctrinal safety valves" may be expanded in future cases .

chevron is a judicially created doctrine that rests , in part , upon an assumption made by courts about congressional intent: that where a statute is silent or ambiguous , congress would have wanted an agency , rather than a court , to fill in the gap .

accordingly , congress can determine whether a court will apply chevron review to an agency interpretation .

when it drafts a statute delegating authority to an agency , it may "speak in plain terms when it wishes to circumscribe , and in capacious terms when it wishes to enlarge , agency discretion. .

thus , congress can legislate with chevron as a background presumption , using ambiguity to delegate interpretive authority to agencies or writing clearly to withhold that authority .

alternatively , if it deemed such action appropriate , congress could also act more directly to control how courts will review agency action .

congress has the authority to shape the standards used by courts to review agency actions .

perhaps most notably , congress has outlined the standards that should generally govern judicial review of agency decisions in the apa .

although chevron 's place within the apa framework is a matter of dispute , it is within congress's power to modify or displace entirely the chevron framework by amending the apa to impose a different standard of review .

as a more limited approach to working outside of chevron , congress also has the power to prescribe different judicial review standards in the specific statutes that grant agencies the authority to act .

congress took such a step when it enacted the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act in 2010 .

a provision of the act instructs courts that , when they review "any determinations made by the comptroller [of the currency] regarding preemption of a state law," they should "assess the validity of such determinations" by reference to a series of factors outlined in the supreme court's opinion in skidmore v. swift & co .

this skidmore standard is considered less deferential to agencies than the chevron framework of review , and courts so far have recognized this legislative choice as significant .

however , given the extent to which the chevron doctrine is unsettled , it is unclear exactly how much of the chevron framework of review rests on presumptions about congressional intent .

therefore , it remains difficult to determine exactly how or to what extent congress , if it deemed such action warranted , could intervene to displace that presumption .

