most of the provisions in the water infrastructure improvements for the nation act ( wiin act ; p.l .

114-322 ) , enacted on december 16 , 2016 , relate to the u.s. army corps of engineers .

however , the wiin act also includes a subtitle ( subtitle j , §§4001-4013 ) with the potential to affect western water infrastructure owned by the bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ; an agency in the department of the interior ) .

three sections in subtitle j ( §4007 , §4009 , and §4011 ) made alterations that would apply throughout reclamation's service area , the 17 states west of the mississippi river .

the remaining sections of subtitle j include provisions specific to the central valley project ( cvp ) , a multipurpose water - conveyance system in california operated by reclamation .

most of subtitle j's provisions were derived from bills that received consideration in the 112 th , 113 th , and 114 th congresses .

due to the scarcity of water in the west and the importance of federal water infrastructure to the region , western water issues are regularly of interest to many lawmakers .

some parts of subtitle j were controversial , thus increasing the likelihood that it would receive attention in the 115 th congress .

in addition to oversight , there may be ongoing debate as to the meaning and significance of individual provisions in the act .

observers are expected to closely monitor implementation of its new authorities , as well as any potential litigation .

of particular interest will be the wiin act's application to the operations of the cvp and federal support for the construction of new surface water supply projects .

some may also propose adding to or repealing parts of subtitle j .

legislation considered in the 115 th congress ( eg , h.r .

23 ) has proposed to build on and , in some cases , replace key parts of the wiin act .

this report discusses selected provisions that were enacted under subtitle j of the wiin act .

it provides background information and context related to selected drought - and water - related provisions , summarizes the changes authorized in the wiin act , and discusses issues and questions that may be of interest to congress .

for more background on california water issues , see crs report r40979 , california drought: hydrological and regulatory water supply issues , by betsy a. cody , peter folger , and cynthia brown , and crs report r44456 , central valley project operations: background and legislation , by charles v. stern and pervaze a. sheikh .

a number of provisions in the bill addressed drought in california and the operations of the central valley project .

those provisions that received the most attention during consideration of the wiin act are discussed below .

in addition to the california / cvp provisions of the bill , three sections address reclamation operations and programs more generally .

those sections are discussed below .

the subtitle's savings clauses and sunset dates are key to understanding its potential impacts and limitations .

the application of those provisions is discussed below .

subtitle j of the wiin act likely will continue to receive congressional attention .

in its oversight capacity , congress may be interested in the trump administration's implementation of subtitle j , with particular focus on whether the interpretation of these provisions is in accordance with congressional intent in passing the wiin act .

of particular interest may be the wiin act's application to the operations of the cvp and federal support for the construction of new surface water storage projects , among other things .

in addition to overseeing the implementation of the bill's provisions , congress also may consider their amendment , extension , or repeal .

according to reclamation , the relatively wet hydrology that followed enactment of the wiin act has largely limited opportunities to implement some of the act's operational authorities since the bill's passage .

at the same time , some federal operational changes pursuant to the wiin act reportedly were proposed but deemed incompatible with state requirements .

however , some changes authorized under the act have been implemented .

for example , section 4004 consultation authorities have been used to allow for increased communication and transparency for some operational decisions , resulting in reduced or rescheduled pumping restrictions on some occasions .

additionally , in 2018 the wiin act's allowance for relaxed restrictions on inflow - to - export ratios ( section 4001 ) were used to transfer water , resulting in additional exports of 50,000-60,000 af , and section 4003 has been used to increase export pumping levels by 5,500 acre - feet during a temporary storm event in march 2018 .

attention has focused on extending these and other water supply authorities under the wiin act , most of which are set to expire in december 2021 .

extension of the wiin act is supported by a bipartisan coalition of some california lawmakers who believe the act provides the proper balance of support for water users and the environment .

however , some other members of congress , as well as some environmental groups , oppose extending certain authorities under the act on the grounds that an extension will facilitate high levels of delta pumping and other projects that could leave less water for fish and damage the environment .

congress has appropriated funding authorized for reclamation ( both for the cvp and for other projects ) under the wiin act .

crs estimates that from fy2017 to fy2019 , congress appropriated approximately $576 million for reclamation projects and programs authorized under the wiin act .

some of these authorities have met their appropriations ceilings ; thus , they may be proposed for extension or amendment .

table 2 , below , provides additional information on appropriations received to date under several wiin act subtitle j authorities .

