there are two tax provisions that subsidize the child and dependent care expenses of working parents: the child and dependent care tax credit ( cdctc ) and the exclusion for employer - sponsored child and dependent care .

this report provides a general overview of these two tax benefits , focusing on eligibility requirements and benefit calculation .

the report also includes some summary data on these benefits which highlight some of the characteristics of claimants .

the child and dependent care tax credit is a nonrefundable tax credit that reduces a taxpayer's federal income tax liability based on child and dependent care expenses incurred so the taxpayer can work or look for work .

since the credit ( sometimes referred to as the child care credit or the cdctc ) is nonrefundable , the amount of the credit cannot exceed a taxpayer's federal income tax liability .

taxpayers with little or no federal income tax liability — including many low - income taxpayers — generally receive little if any benefit from nonrefundable credits like the cdctc .

in addition to the cdctc , workers can exclude from their wages up to $5,000 of employer - sponsored child and dependent care benefits .

since the value of these benefits is excluded from wages , it is not subject to income or payroll taxes .

employer - sponsored child and dependent care benefits can be provided in various forms , including direct payments by an employer to a child care or adult day care provider , on - site child or dependent care offered by an employer , employer reimbursement of employee child care costs , and flexible spending accounts ( fsas ) that allow employees to set aside a portion of their salary on a pretax basis ( i.e. , under a "cafeteria plan" ) to be used for qualifying expenses .

the eligibility rules and definitions of the exclusion are similar to those of the credit .

however , there is one key difference .

specifically , the $5,000 limit applies irrespective of the number of qualifying individuals .

for example , a family with one qualifying child or two qualifying children can both set aside a maximum $5,000 on a pretax basis for child care .

with the child and dependent care credit there are separate limits based on the number of qualifying individuals ( $3,000 for one qualifying individual , $6,000 for two or more qualifying individuals ) .

in addition , married taxpayers who file their returns as married filing separately are eligible to benefit from this exclusion , while they are ineligible for the credit .

the aggregate data for the child and dependent care credit indicate several key aspects of this tax benefit .

income l evel of cdctc c laimants: middle - and upper - middle - income taxpayers claim the majority of tax credit dollars .

average c redit a mount: at most income levels the average credit amount is between $500 and $600 .

lower - income taxpayers receive less than the average amount .

average c redit a mount o ver t ime: over the past 30 years , the average real ( i.e. , adjusted for inflation ) credit amount per taxpayer has steadily declined and lost about one - third of its value .

types of q ualifying i ndividuals c laimed for the c redit: while the credit is available for the care expenses of nonchild dependents ( disabled family members or elderly parents ) , the credit is used almost exclusively for the care of children under 13 years old .

percentage of t axpayers with c hildren that c laim the cdctc: while the credit is claimed almost exclusively for the care of children , on average 13% of taxpayers with children claim the credit .

this participation rate is significantly lower for lower - income taxpayers .

administrative data from the irs on the exclusion of employer - sponsored child and dependent care — comparable to the data on cdctc — are unavailable .

however , survey data from the bureau of labor statistics indicate that about 41% of employees have access to child and dependent care flexible spending accounts , while 11% have access to employer - sponsored childcare .

 ( access means that these accounts are available to workers for their use .

however , actual use of these accounts may be lower than these access rates. ) .

the survey also found that availability of these benefits differed based on a variety of factors including the average wage paid to the employee and size of employer , as summarized in table 5 .

overall , the data indicate that these benefits are more widely available to more highly compensated employees at larger establishments .

prior to enactment of p.l .

115-97 , taxpayers could subtract from their adjusted gross income ( agi ) the standard deduction or sum of their itemized deductions ( whichever is greater ) and the appropriate number of personal exemptions for themselves , their spouse ( if married ) , and their dependents .

for 2017 , the personal exemption amount was $4,050 per person .

under p.l .

115-97 , the personal exemption amount was reduced to zero from 2018 through the end of 2025 .

while the personal exemption is not in effect from 2018 through 2025 , the definition of dependent for the exemption was retained and other provisions in the tax code still refer to this definition .

a dependent is either ( 1 ) a qualifying child or ( 2 ) a qualifying relative .

there are several tests to determine whether an individual is a taxpayer's qualifying child or relative , outlined in table a - 1 .

