infantry brigade combat teams ( ibcts ) constitute the army's "light" ground forces and are an important part of the nation's ability to rapidly project forces overseas .

the wars in iraq and afghanistan , as well as current thinking as to where and how future conflicts would be fought , suggest ibcts are limited operationally by their lack of assigned transport and reconnaissance vehicles as well as firepower against hardened targets and armored vehicles .

to address these limitations , the army is undertaking three programs: the ground mobility vehicle ( gmv ) / infantry squad vehicle ( isv ) , formerly known as the ultra - light combat vehicle ( ulcv ) ; the light reconnaissance vehicle ( lrv ) ; and the mobile protected firepower ( mpf ) programs .

these programs would be based on vehicles that are commercially available .

this is in order to reduce costs and the time it takes to field combat vehicles associated with traditional developmental efforts .

congress may be concerned with the effectiveness of ground forces over the full spectrum of military operations .

a number of past unsuccessful army acquisition programs have served to heighten congressional oversight of army programs , including nondevelopmental programs such as those currently being proposed for ibcts .

in addition to these primary concerns , how these new programs affect deployability and sustainability of ibcts as well as affordability could be potential oversight issues for congress .

brigade combat teams ( bcts ) are the basic combined - arms formations of the army .

they are permanent , stand - alone , self - sufficient , and standardized tactical forces consisting of between 3,900 to 4,100 soldiers .

there are three types of bcts: armored brigade combat teams ( abcts ) ; stryker brigade combat teams ( sbcts ) ; and infantry brigade combat teams ( ibcts ) .

bcts are found both in the active component and the u.s. army national guard ( usarng ) .

in february 2017 the army announced it would establish six security force assistance brigades ( sfabs ) — five in the active component and one in the army national guard ( arng ) .

sfabs are to be capable of conducting security force assistance ( sfa ) operations at the tactical ( brigade and below ) level .

while not combat brigades per se , the army plans for sfabs to be expanded , if the need arises , into fully operational abcts or ibcts capable of conducting major combat operations .

the army describes ibct critical capability gaps as the ibct lacks the ability to decisively close with and destroy the enemy under restricted terrains such as mountains , littorals , jungles , subterranean areas , and urban areas to minimize excessive physical burdens imposed by organic material systems .

the ibct lacks the ability to maneuver and survive in close combat against hardened enemy fortifications , light armored vehicles , and dismounted personnel .

ibcts lack the support of a mobile protected firepower capability to apply immediate , lethal , long - range direct fires in the engagement of hardened enemy bunkers , light armored vehicles , and dismounted personnel in machine gun and sniper positions ; with all - terrain mobility and scalable armor protection ; capable of conducting operations in all environments .

in its current configuration , army officials note that ibcts "can get there fast with low logistics demand , and they can work in severely restricted terrain , but they lack mobility and protected firepower" to "enter a foreign territory , immediately overcome armed opposition and hold an area that enables further troops to enter , like an airfield. .

the army's concept of operation for these vehicles is to increase ground tactical mobility in the ibct ; allow infantry squads and rifle companies to quickly move extended distances over difficult terrain to seize assault objectives ; allow rapid deployment into contested areas while providing high mobility and flexibility upon arrival ; and limit the impact on strategic mobility of the ibct .

in this regard , the gmv / isv is intended to provide mobility to the rifle squad and company ; the lrv to provide protection to the moving force by means of scouts , sensors , and a variety of medium - caliber weapons ; and the mpf to provide the overall ibct the capability to more effectively engage and destroy fortifications , bunkers , buildings , and light to medium armored vehicles .

the gmv / isv , lrv , and mpf are briefly described in the following sections based on each individual vehicle's requirements .

the following sections provide brief programmatic overviews of the vehicles .

figure 4 depicts the department of defense ( dod ) systems acquisition framework , which illustrates the various phases of systems development and acquisitions and is applicable to the procurement of these three systems .

as previously noted , the army did not submit a fy2020 budget request for lrv funding .

absent any formal announcement , it is unknown if the army has decided to cancel this effort , initiate a new effort , or if it is putting this effort on hold to free up funding for other priorities .

another potential issue is if this effort has been cancelled , how the army will address the operational need for reconnaissance in the ibcts that the lrv was intended to satisfy .

as previously noted , in february 2017 the army announced it would establish six security force assistance brigades ( sfabs ) — five in the active component and one in the army national guard ( arng ) .

while not combat brigades per se , the army plans for sfabs to be expanded , if the need arises , into fully operational abcts or ibcts capable of conducting major combat operations .

if the army plans to expand some of its sfabs into ibcts it could have an impact on the number of isvs , lrvs , and mpf systems needed to fully equip these units .

while these numbers would likely be modest , it might be of interest to congress to know how many additional vehicles would be required .

since they would not be part of the sfab's organic equipment and only needed in the event of army expansion , how and when will these vehicles be procured and how will they be maintained so that they would be available when needed ? .

apart from fielding gmvs to airborne ibcts , little is known about the army's overall fielding plan for these vehicles .

would active ibcts receive these vehicles first , followed by national guard ibcts , or would both components receive the vehicles concurrently ? .

when would these vehicles begin arriving at units , and when is the overall fielding anticipated to conclude ? .

does the army plan to field these vehicles to prepositioned stocks in addition to units ? .

what are some of the challenges associated with fielding three different vehicles with different production and delivery dates ? .

