during the 2016 presidential campaign , then - candidate donald trump proposed a series of ethics measures .

these included extending "cooling off" periods on lobbying the government after government service ; "instituting a five - year ban on lobbying by former members of congress and their staffs" ; expanding the definition of a lobbyist to cover former government officials who engage in strategic consulting ; and issuing a "lifetime ban against senior executive branch officials lobbying on behalf of a foreign government. .

on january 28 , 2017 , president trump issued executive order ( e.o. ) .

13770 addressing aspects of his campaign proposal on ethics and lobbying .

e.o .

13770 created an ethics pledge for executive branch appointees , provided for the administration and enforcement of the pledge , and revoked president barack obama's executive order ethics pledge that covered his administration ( e.o .

13490 ) .

president trump's executive order shares some features with president obama's executive order and a previous executive order issued by president bill clinton .

since the basis of the ethics pledges is to regulate public and executive branch interactions , this report focuses on the main features of the ethics pledges — lobbying , ethics in government , and the "revolving door" — to explore the basis and current practices for these interactions .

the report begins with an overview of the relationship between the public and the executive branch , including the use of laws , executive orders , and other guidance and administration policy to regulate interactions .

a brief summary of executive orders is then provided , including a side - by - side analysis of ethics pledges from the clinton , obama , and trump administrations .

this analysis is followed by observations of the similarities and differences among the three ethics pledges .

finally , options for change are evaluated .

the right of citizens to petition the government has long been considered a protected and fundamental aspect of the citizen - government dynamic .

today , interactions between the private citizens and the executive branch take many forms .

some interactions fit the traditional petition model , in which private citizens or lobbyists contact and request information or action from congress or the executive branch .

other interactions are more complicated and can involve private citizens becoming government employees or government employees leaving the government to take private sector jobs in the area they covered for the government .

also called the "revolving door," these movements can take on many forms , including former federal employees lobbying for a domestic or foreign client or engaging in policy work , or individuals entering government to engage in regulatory activity .

some have argued that the revolving door can lead to undue influence by the private sector over governmental activities or vice - versa .

others have argued that government employees need to be restricted with regard to such activities to ensure their "neutral competence" and that they represent the interests of the government above all else .

proponents of the revolving door , however , observe that the promise of future private - sector employment could potentially improve the quality of candidates applying for government jobs .

they argue that direct connections to government officials are important , but a close relationship is not necessarily what drives lobbying .

some believe that government employees contemplating a move to the private sector will be friendly to industry interests at the expense of the public interest .

on the other hand , studies have shown that regulators instead may engage in more aggressive actions against industry and do not favor industry , regardless of their job prospects .

another factor observers raise is that the flow of personnel between the public and private sectors may increase the knowledge base of both sectors .

regulating interactions between the public and the government may be carried out through law , executive order , administration policy — including regulations issued by the office of government ethics ( oge ) — or a combination of all three .

administration policy has generally sought to require disclosure of activities or place restrictions on current or former government employees rather than ban certain activities or contacts .

for example , in 2009 the obama administration issued a memorandum outlining rules for executive branch employees' contact with lobbyists about american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) funds .

this guidance did not restrict a lobbyist's ability to contact the government , but it did require agency employees to log conversations with lobbyists and the agencies to post those logs on an agency website .

in most cases , laws , executive orders , and other administration guidance generally aim to regulate the relationship between governmental and nongovernmental actors .

since the ethics in government act of 1978 was enacted , three presidents have issued an executive order creating an ethics pledge for administration appointees .

they are president clinton ( 1993 ) , president obama ( 2009 ) , and president trump ( 2017 ) .

this section provides a brief summary of each ethics pledge .

should congress wish to consider writing into law elements included in the pledges , several options are potentially available .

these include codifying ethics pledge provisions ; amending revolving door restrictions ; amending the lobbying disclosure act ( lda ) , the foreign agents registration act ( fara ) , or both ; or taking no immediate action .

these options each have advantages and disadvantages for the future relationships between lobbyists and governmental decisionmakers .

crs takes no position on any of the options identified in this report .

should congress want to make all or part of the executive branch ethics pledges permanent , it could choose to codify the additional restrictions placed on executive branch appointees by president clinton's , president obama's , or president trump's ethics pledges .

this might include codifying additional revolving door restrictions as discussed above ; incorporating individual provisions ( eg , a lobbying gift ban or restrictions on trade negotiations by former appointees ) ; or adding specific definitions , waivers , or disclosure concepts to federal law .

codifying either the entire ethics pledge ( s ) or individual sections would have the effect of making those changes permanent , and not subject to being revoked by a future executive order .

this could allow for permanent changes to existing ethics and conflict - of - interest provisions .

should action to incorporate ethics - pledge revolving - door restrictions be desired , several options might exist .

these could include extending the "cooling - off" period to two years or more , placing a blanket ban on taking certain positions for compensation , and placing a ban on taking certain types of nongovernmental positions .

as mentioned above under " the revolving door ," current statutory "cooling off" periods for executive branch officials range from a lifetime ban on "switching sides" ; to a two - year period for "very senior" officials , and a one - year period for "senior" officials , for certain activities ; and a one - year restriction on all "senior" or "very senior" employees representing a foreign government or political party .

one option might be to extend the cooling - off period to two years or more .

this would match language in all three ethics pledges .

extending the cooling - off period for former appointees to two years , however , could possibly be seen as an unreasonable restriction on postemployment .

alternatively , congress could reduce or eliminate the cooling - off period .

having a shorter cooling - off period , or eliminating it altogether , might arguably increase the talent pool available both inside and outside the government .

instead of , or in addition to , addressing cooling - off periods , congress could enact a blanket restriction on the acceptance of certain types of outside employment for the length of an administration .

for example , an individual appointed by the president might be prohibited from accepting certain outside employment until the end of the president's administration or until the next intervening election ( i.e. , the president's bid for reelection ) .

such a policy might encourage executive branch appointees to serve for the length of the president's term before seeking outside employment .

several disadvantages to creating such postemployment restrictions on appointees potentially exist .

first , if the restriction covered only the acceptance of private compensation , fees , or other remuneration , it is possible that an appointee could leave the administration to take an uncompensated position with any private entity .

these positions might be advisory in nature and could carry the promise of future compensation after the end of the former appointee's restricted time .

if the goal of congress is to restrict former appointees from becoming registered lobbyists under the lda or fara , congress could amend the lda or fara to institute provisions similar to executive branch lobbying restrictions found in president obama's and president trump's ethics pledges .

under the lda , lobbyists must file quarterly disclosure reports with information on their activities and covered officials contacted .

similar requirements exist under fara for individuals who are representing a foreign principal .

additionally , the lda , as amended by the honest leadership and open government act of 2007 , requires federally registered lobbyists to file semiannual reports on certain campaign and presidential library contributions .

the disclosure requirements might be further amended to cover program - specific disbursement information .

congress might determine that the current lobbying registration and disclosure provisions , and executive orders , are adequate .

instead of amending the lda or fara , or issuing additional or amending existing executive orders , congress or the president could continue to utilize existing law , or the president could issue executive orders to restrict the activities of current or former administration officials .

changes within the statutory mission of the implanting officials might be made on an as - needed basis through changes to lda guidance documents issued by the clerk of the house and secretary of the senate , fara guidance issued by the department of justice , through executive order , or through the issuance of memoranda by the administration .

to provide a comparison of the executive order ethics pledges signed by president clinton , president obama , and president trump , table a - 1 provides a side - by - side analysis of the three ethics pledges , including who was covered , the restrictions placed on covered employees , and the administration and enforcement provisions .

in evaluating the three ethics pledges , similar categories were observed .

these serve as the main headers of table a - 1 .

these include who is covered by the ethics pledge ; definitions ; wavier provisions ; administration ; enforcement ; and other general provisions , if any .

