seeking to provide a fair and effective mechanism for members of the public to challenge suspect patents , congress has expressed interest in administrative review proceedings at the u.s. patent and trademark office ( uspto ) for more than four decades .

most recently , the leahy - smith america invents act ( aia ) introduced three new avenues for patent challenges: a "transitional program for covered business methods," post - grant review , and inter partes review .

each of these proceedings allows the uspto to revisit — and possibly cancel — a patent the agency had previously allowed .

the third of these proceedings , commonly known as iprs , has proven both the most widely used and the most controversial .

in brief , ipr proceedings allow individuals to petition uspto to assert that a granted patent is invalid in view of earlier patents or printed publications .

a petitioner must demonstrate that there is a "reasonable likelihood" that he would prevail for the ipr to begin .

should the uspto's patent trial and appeal board ( ptab ) grant the petition , it will preside over the ipr and ordinarily reach a final determination , which may be appealed to the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit ( federal circuit ) .

if the contested patent survives the ipr , the petitioner may not challenge it in later civil actions or other administrative proceedings based upon issues that were "raised or reasonably could have been raised" during the ipr .

the unexpected popularity of ipr proceedings may suggest that congress met its objectives in providing an expedient and cost - effective means for challenging patents that the uspto may have issued erroneously .

these proceedings potentially harness the technical expertise of the uspto , improve patent quality , are less costly than litigation , and can confirm the validity of patents that meet the statutory standards .

iprs have been described as the "new normal," with some believing that the principal "patent battleground" is shifting away from the federal courts into the ptab .

further , the high affirmance rate of ipr appeals at the federal circuit suggests to many that the ptab is performing well .

other concerned observers have been far less sanguine about iprs .

members of the patent community view iprs as being "patent owner - unfriendly" and having led to "swift and numerous losses of patent rights. .

former federal circuit chief judge randall rader went further , reportedly referring to the ptab as a patent - killing "death squad. .

some believe that iprs have significantly eroded the confidence of innovative industry in the u.s. patent system .

in 2017 , the u.s. chamber of commerce concluded that the strength of the u.s. patent system had dropped from 1 st in the world to 10 th place , a shift that was attributed in part to the advent of ipr proceedings .

this report surveys the patent landscape with respect to iprs .

it begins by providing a basic overview of the patent system and the different sorts of patent challenge proceedings available at the uspto , including iprs .

the report then considers recent legislative proposals to modify the law pertaining to iprs .

it then considers additional issues pertaining to iprs identified by stakeholders .

the report closes with concluding remarks .

individuals and firms must prepare and submit applications to the uspto if they seek to obtain patent protection .

uspto officials , known as examiners , then assess whether the application merits the award of a patent .

under the patent act of 1952 , a patent application must include a specification that so completely describes the invention that skilled artisans are able to practice it without undue experimentation .

the patent act also requires that applicants draft at least one claim that particularly points out and distinctly claims the subject matter that they regard as their invention .

the patent acquisition process is commonly known as "prosecution. .

while reviewing a submitted application , the examiner will determine whether the claimed invention fulfills certain substantive standards set by the patent statute .

two of the most important patentability criteria are novelty and nonobviousness .

to be judged novel , the claimed invention must not be fully anticipated by a prior patent , publication , or other knowledge within the public domain .

the sum of these earlier materials is termed the "prior art. .

to meet the standard of nonobviousness , an invention must not have been readily within the ordinary skills of a competent artisan based upon the teachings of the prior art .

if the uspto allows the application to issue as a granted patent , the owner or owners of the patent obtain the right to exclude others from making , using , selling , offering to sell , or importing into the united states the claimed invention .

the term of the patent is ordinarily set at 20 years from the date the patent application was filed .

patent title therefore provides inventors with limited periods of exclusivity in which they may practice their inventions , or license others to do so .

the grant of a patent permits inventors to receive a return on the expenditure of resources leading to the discovery , often by charging a higher price than would prevail in a competitive market .

a patent proprietor bears responsibility for monitoring its competitors to determine whether they are using the patented invention .

patent owners who seek to compel others to observe their intellectual property rights must usually commence litigation in the federal courts .

although issued patents enjoy a presumption of validity , accused infringers may assert that a patent is invalid or unenforceable on a number of grounds .

the federal circuit possesses national jurisdiction over most patent appeals .

the u.s. supreme court retains discretionary authority to review cases decided by the federal circuit .

once the uspto formally issues a patent , the agency's involvement with that legal instrument ordinarily comes to a close .

however , the uspto may be called upon to reconsider its initial decision to approve a patent application through several administrative review proceedings .

most of these proceedings are revocation proceedings — that is to say , they are primarily used by individuals who seek to challenge the validity of an issued patent .

they include reexamination , inter partes review , post - grant review , and covered business method review .

after more than a half - decade of experience with iprs , some stakeholders have called for modifications to the rules governing iprs .

legislation introduced on june 21 , 2017 , the support technology and research for our nation's growth and economic resilience ( stronger ) patents act of 2017 , proposes to make several of these changes .

s. 1390 was read twice and referred to the committee on the judiciary on june 21 , 2017 .

with reference to the stronger patents act of 2017 and other sources , this report reviews the principal areas of discussion and debate next .

patents derive their value from the rights they confer to exploit proprietary technologies .

the increased focus on intellectual property in our information - based , knowledge - driven economy has arguably caused industry to raise its expectations with respect to the quality , timeliness , and efficiency of the granting of patents .

as the uspto currently employs approximately 8,000 patent examiners with varying degrees of experience , legal training , and technical education , maintaining consistency in patent grant determinations presents a challenging task for uspto management .

by recruiting members of the public to act as "private patent examiners," post - grant proceedings allow the uspto to confirm its earlier determinations regarding that subset of patents that prove to be of marketplace significance .

in this respect , it should be noted that the validity of only a relatively small subset of issued patents is ever called into question .

for example , one commentator estimated that about 5% of issued patents are litigated or licensed .

post - grant proceedings may therefore direct the attention of the uspto to those patents that industry believes to be of particular significance and arguable validity .

in addition , an administrative process for reassessing patentability determinations in a reliable , cost - effective , and timely manner could potentially allow members of the public to make commercial decisions with more certainty over the impact of patent rights .

reduction of litigation costs could also channel resources that innovative firms currently spend on defending their patent rights in the courts into further research and development .

the perception of a high percentage of invalidity rulings at the ptab may be due in part to the fact that , over the past decade , the supreme court has revisited a number of the requirements for patenting and made them more difficult to satisfy .

patents granted under earlier , more lenient requirements remain subject to the new , more stringent standards and may therefore be invalid .

this trend may also be due to petitioners , at the outset , pursuing "low - hanging fruit" — that is to say , weak patents that have been asserted via licensing demands or litigation .

another reason for the perception of a high invalidation percentage is that "petitioners are choosing which patents to challenge fairly well. .

although iprs are significantly less expensive than litigation , they remain a costly venture .

the average cost for one party to participate in an ipr has been estimated at approximately $200,000 .

indeed , the cost of challenging an issued patent from the uspto is usually much greater than the cost of obtaining one in the first place .

further , the possible penalty of a loss — being barred from challenging the validity of the claims in the future — could prove consequential .

most petitioners may therefore be cautious and selective in choosing patents to challenge via an ipr .

commentators have also lauded the ptab for its expertise and thoroughness .

each ptab member is an experienced patent practitioner .

further , the uspto attempts to have at least one administrative patent judge on the panel with relevant technical expertise .

in contrast , most federal district judges and jurors have not received a technical patent - related education and possess little , if any , experience in the patent law .

as explained by one practitioner , if "you read ptab decisions in iprs , you'll find that they're typically very thorough and well - reasoned , much better reasoned than district court opinions. .

on the other hand , critics of iprs assert that "congress erected a heavily slanted administrative regime that invalidates patents by design , even when those same patents would be upheld by district court. .

these features reportedly include a more capacious claim construction , which renders patents more susceptible to a validity attack ; a lower burden of proof upon the patent challenger than would be the case in district court litigation ; and the absence of a jury and a "disinterested , life - appointed judge. .

they also note that the one - year deadline for completing an ipr may render patent proprietors "ill - prepared for the speed of the fight," in contrast to the challenger who may "methodically prepare a petition and set up a strategy for the proceedings" in advance .

in addition , some patents have been subject to multiple , serial ipr petitions on different grounds of patent validity .

some patent owners have been subject to dozens of ipr petitions since 2012 .

this possibility , which increases the cost and length of participation , may be exacerbated because current law permits one individual to file multiple ipr petitions against a single patent .

statistics with respect to iprs also suggest that most patents in these proceedings have been subject to contemporaneous litigation .

in one recent study , three legal academics recently identified each of the 24,162 patent cases filed between september 16 , 2011 , and june 30 , 2015 .

as they explain: during this time , a total of 14,218 patents were either challenged in an ipr or cbm petition , asserted in litigation , or both .

a subset of 13,557 patents [was] involved in litigation alone ; 298 patents were involved in a uspto proceeding alone ; and 1,968 patents were involved in both .

accordingly , about 12.7% of litigated patents are also being challenged in the ptab , and about 86.8% of ipr - or cbm - challenged patents are also being litigated in the federal courts .

these statistics suggest that "ptab - only cases are relatively rare.... " one could infer from this account that rather than serving as a low - cost litigation substitute , iprs now form an additional , parallel track that potentially increases the expense and complexity of patent enforcement .

other observers have discerned that the ptab grants few motions to amend claims ; indeed , some assert that despite "the statutory approval of amending claims in iprs , in reality , patent owners' ability to amend claims has been virtually nonexistent so far. .

the relatively tight statutory deadlines to complete an ipr , as well as an unexpected demand for these proceedings , have been cited as contributing to the ptab's reluctance to allow amended claims in view of newly cited prior art .

congress intended iprs to improve patent quality .

but , for some , iprs appear to do so by invalidating individual patents altogether , rather than by allowing inventors to obtain appropriate claim scope in view of the prior art on a case - by - case basis .

critics of iprs further observe that , due to the absence of a standing requirement , anyone may file an ipr petition .

according to some observers , experience "from only the first few years of ipr proceedings shows that they are frequently utilized by larger competitors to weaken smaller , more innovative ones , as well as by vultures seeking to extract nuisance settlements. .

in addition , the "absence of a discrete set of potential petitioners" reportedly "makes it difficult for inventors and potential investors to adjust their behavior to avoid a potential ipr , as they might do to avoid litigation. .

some observers believe that the creation of iprs has had a significant deleterious impact upon the innovation environment of the united states .

for some , these proceedings can increase the cost and uncertainty associated with patent ownership , "measurably diminishing their utility as a durable asset on which new businesses , new industries — and indeed , the entire american economy — all depend. .

lack of predictability and stability of patent rights might also discourage the injection of venture capital into start - ups and high - technology products .

iprs may work especially to the detriment of individual inventors and small firms that lack the resources enjoyed by incumbents .

critics and supporters of iprs alike tend to agree that these proceedings have emerged as the most prominent component of the entire aia .

detractors assert that iprs have had a negative impact upon the u.s. patent system and innovation environment , while proponents believe that they have largely met the congressional goal of developing an effective mechanism for challenging suspect patents .

as congress potentially revisits ipr reform proposals , five years of experience with these proceedings may prove helpful to policymakers weighing these competing views .

