businesses that are incorporated in foreign countries and conduct a large portion of their operations outside of the territorial jurisdiction of the united states may nevertheless cause injury to u.s. persons .

for example , a foreign company might manufacture in its home country a machine that another company later distributes in the united states , ultimately resulting in an injury to a u.s. consumer .

as a further example , a foreign subsidiary of a u.s. corporation might make a product that allegedly causes the death of u.s. persons traveling in a foreign country , but that subsidiary might otherwise have no significant connection to the united states .

although foreign companies may engage in actions or omissions that injure u.s. persons — or even foreign plaintiffs — such injured persons may face various procedural challenges in obtaining judicial relief from a foreign company defendant in u.s. courts .

one potential obstacle to such civil lawsuits is the doctrine of personal jurisdiction .

the supreme court has long interpreted the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment to limit the power of state courts to render judgments affecting the personal rights of defendants who do not reside within the state's territory .

and the federal rules of civil procedure give federal district courts power to assert personal jurisdiction over a defendant to the same extent that a state court in which the federal district court is located may assert that power , meaning the same limits on personal jurisdiction generally apply to federal courts .

in this vein , the court has , for instance , held that a new york company that sells a car to a new york resident is not subject to a products - liability lawsuit in oklahoma solely because the car was involved in an accident there .

questions over personal jurisdiction are among the most frequent constitutional issues resolved by lower federal courts , and are the basis for a dismissal of complaint in a considerable number of cases lodged in both federal and state court .

this report broadly traces the evolution of the doctrine of personal jurisdiction through more than a century of supreme court rulings .

in particular , it highlights recent developments in the doctrine , which have generally given a more limited view of when a court can exercise personal jurisdiction over a given defendant .

the report concludes with a brief discussion of the debate over the court's most recent rulings in this area of law , and addresses one possible action congress might take to address any concerns with the court's recent decisions on personal jurisdiction: authorizing federal courts to exercise nationwide personal jurisdiction over foreign companies that have minimum contacts with the united states as a whole rather than with an individual state .

in 1877 , the supreme court decided an important case addressing the constitutional limits on state courts' exercise of personal jurisdiction over nonresident defendants .

in pennoyer v. neff , the court indicated that , absent a defendant's consent , a state court's jurisdiction generally extends only to persons or property within its territory .

the court grounded this "physical presence" approach in principles of federalism: each state of the union is a coequal and independent sovereign in the federal system , and thus possesses exclusive authority over persons and property within its domain .

although the court's decision in pennoyer addressed personal jurisdiction over natural persons , the court's early jurisprudence following the 1877 case established that state courts could potentially exercise jurisdiction over foreign corporations doing business in the state based on the legal fiction that those corporations had implicitly consented to personal jurisdiction , or could be deemed "present" within the state , based on their in - state activities .

the pennoyer court's "physical presence" test established the constitutional foundation for strict limits on state courts' authority to exercise in personam jurisdiction over a nonresident defendant — that is , to render judgments concerning that defendant's personal rights and obligations .

thus , for example , service upon a defendant by publishing notice of the lawsuit in a newspaper circulating in the forum state was insufficient to confer jurisdiction on a court to adjudicate the personal liability of a defendant who had left the state and did not intend to return .

nevertheless , even in the absence of a nonresident defendant's physical presence or consent , courts could still attain jurisdiction over the defendant indirectly through the attachment ( i.e. , seizure ) of the defendant's property interests within the forum and the provision of notice to the defendant .

in particular , a state court could exercise in rem jurisdiction over a nonresident defendant's property interest in the state in order to adjudicate all of the rights or claims in a piece of property .

it could also exercise quasi in rem jurisdiction over a nonresident defendant by adjudicating a plaintiff's claim to the property in relation to the defendant or to satisfy the claims of its own citizens against the defendant personally .

however , judgments resting upon the exercise of in rem or quasi in rem jurisdiction would not personally bind the defendant to an extent greater than the value of the property .

although pennoyer 's physical presence test informed the supreme court's jurisprudence related to jurisdiction for several decades , a significant expansion of the u.s. economy in the mid - 20 th century altered that focus .

as commerce and travel among the states and between the states and foreign countries increased , corporations expanded the geographical scope of their activities .

a more interconnected , global economy meant that a corporation's activities had greater potential to cause harm in distant jurisdictions , but also meant that businesses could more easily defend lawsuits arising from that harm in distant fora .

faced with these new realities , the court reconsidered the nature of the due process limitations on the jurisdiction of state courts over nonresident individuals and corporations that conducted activities in the states .

in the 1945 case international shoe co. v. washington , the court explained its rejection of a strict adherence to the physical presence test , holding that a state could authorize its courts to subject an out - of - state entity to in personam jurisdiction , consistent with due process , and thus require it to defend a lawsuit , if that entity had "certain minimum contacts" with the forum state "such that the maintenance of the suit does not offend traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice. .

the court rested its holding in part on the notion that an entity conducting activities in a state benefits from the protections of state law , and thus should have to respond to legal complaints arising out of its actions in the forum even if it is not "physically present" in the state .

thus , the supreme court's opinions in international shoe and subsequent cases have established a more flexible two - part test for determining when exercise of personal jurisdiction over each nonresident defendant sued by a plaintiff comports with due process: ( 1 ) the defendant has established minimum contacts with the forum state that demonstrate an intent to avail itself of the benefits and protections of state law ; and ( 2 ) it is reasonable to require the defendant to defend the lawsuit in the forum .

nevertheless , as noted , the court has confirmed that several traditional bases for the exercise of judicial power over a nonresident defendant for claims against him continue to enjoy a presumption of constitutionality without requiring an independent inquiry into the contacts among the defendant , the forum , and the litigation .

specifically , the traditional bases for jurisdiction include if: ( 1 ) the defendant is domiciled in the forum state ( eg , a defendant who is a natural person intends to establish a permanent home in the forum or a corporation intends to establish a permanent headquarters ) ; ( 2 ) the defendant has consented to jurisdiction ; or ( 3 ) a defendant who is a natural person is served with process while he is physically present — even temporarily — within the forum .

the court has also indicated that a state court may adjudicate the personal status of a plaintiff in relation to the defendant ( eg , marital status ) without considering whether personal jurisdiction over the defendant is constitutionally valid .

over the years , the supreme court has offered three main justifications for the constitutional constraints on a court's assertion of personal jurisdiction over nonresident persons and corporations .

first , each state's status as a "co - equal sovereign" in a federal system of government implies at least some limits on the power of its courts to render judgments affecting the rights of entities outside of that state's boundaries .

second , constitutional limits on personal jurisdiction attempt to address concerns about the unfairness of subjecting defendants to litigation in a distant or inconvenient forum .

finally , constitutional limits on the exercise of personal jurisdiction recognize that the due process clause protects defendants from being deprived of life , liberty , or property by a tribunal without lawful power .

recent supreme court rulings have limited the circumstances in which u.s. courts may exercise personal jurisdiction over certain corporate defendants .

in particular , the cases have limited the availability of u.s. courts as forums for lawsuits against foreign companies for claims arising from their conduct overseas .

these decisions have required substantial contacts between the foreign defendant , the u.s. forum , and the litigation .

for example , a plurality of the court held in a 2011 case that a foreign company that manufactures a machine in a foreign country cannot be subject to the specific jurisdiction of a state court based on its mere expectation that the products it ships to an independent u.s. distributor might be distributed in the forum state .

instead , according to the plurality , the defendant must have directly targeted the individual state with its goods , thereby "purposefully availing" itself of the privilege of conducting in - state business .

in addition to narrowing the scope of activities that may constitute minimum contacts between the defendant and the forum sufficient for a court's exercise of specific jurisdiction , the court has significantly limited the types of activities or affiliations of the defendant in the forum state sufficient for general jurisdiction , holding that those contacts must be so substantial as to render the defendant "essentially at home" in the forum state .

the court has clarified that , absent exceptional circumstances , a corporate defendant is "at home" when it is incorporated in the forum state or maintains its principal place of business there .

for example , the court held in bnsf railway co. v. tyrrell that montana courts could not exercise general jurisdiction over a railroad company that had over 2,000 miles of track and more than 2,000 employees in the state because the company was not incorporated or headquartered in montana and the overall activity of the company in montana was not "so substantial" as compared to its activities throughout all of the jurisdictions in which it conducted business so as to render the corporation "at home" in the state .

the supreme court's recent expansion of the personal jurisdiction defense has led to considerable debate , with several commentators criticizing the decision as being too solicitous toward corporate defendants .

on the other hand , other commentators have defended the recent change in the court's decisions , asserting that it will bring more clarity and cohesion to the doctrine of personal jurisdiction and reduce unfairness to defendants .

if congress disagrees with the court's recent jurisprudence that has generally made it more difficult for plaintiffs to sue foreign companies in u.s. courts and obtain judicial relief for their injuries , it might consider legislative options to address such concerns .

one action that congress might take to address any concerns with the court's recent decisions on personal jurisdiction is to functionally override the federal rules of civil procedure and authorize federal courts to exercise nationwide personal jurisdiction over certain defendants , such as foreign companies , that have , in the aggregate , minimum contacts with the united states as a whole rather than with an individual state .

congress could then amend federal statutes addressing venue ( i.e. , the district or county where a lawsuit may be brought ) to address any concerns with fairness to foreign defendants .

currently , the venue statute ( 28 u.s.c .

§ 1391 ) provides as a fallback venue "any judicial district in which any defendant is subject to the court's personal jurisdiction with respect to such action. .

presumably , congress would need to amend this provision if it wanted to authorize nationwide personal jurisdiction ; otherwise , venue would lie in any federal judicial district .

of course , any legislation authorizing nationwide personal jurisdiction would still have to comport with the demands of constitutional due process .

the supreme court has specifically declined to address whether the due process clause of the fifth amendment may limit the federal courts' exercise of personal jurisdiction .

authorizing federal courts to exercise nationwide personal jurisdiction over foreign defendants who have , in the aggregate , substantial contacts with the united states might satisfy the court's due process - related concern that a u.s. tribunal possess lawful power over a defendant .

however , such a proposal may still raise concerns about unfairness to foreign defendants that may result from requiring them to defend a lawsuit in a distant forum , particularly when the lawsuit does not arise out of the defendant's activity in the united states .

such fairness concerns may be particularly important in light of suggestions from the supreme court that the courts should consider several specific factors when evaluating the reasonableness of subjecting a foreign defendant to suit , including the burden on the foreign defendant , the policies of other nations , and the potential effect of such lawsuits on international relations between the united states and its trading partners .

in this regard , the court's personal jurisdiction jurisprudence that generally limits the powers of states may provide insight into the limits on congress's power to expand the personal jurisdiction of federal courts .

