o ver the last several years , there has been growing concern among the public and lawmakers in the united states about rising drug overdose deaths , many of which involved opioids .

congress has responded to the issue through legislative activity and funding , while the administration has sought to reduce supply and demand of illicit drugs through enforcement , prevention , and treatment .

this report does not provide a comprehensive overview of opioid abuse as a public health or criminal justice issue .

instead , it answers common questions that have arisen due to rising drug overdose deaths in the nation and the ensuing federal response .

this section answers questions on the nature of opioid abuse in the united states .

these questions provide background on the drugs that are abused , the associated harm to the population , and the extent of opioid abuse .

heroin , fentanyl , and controlled prescription drugs have been ranked as the most significant drug threats to the united states .

while the reported availability of controlled prescription drugs , which include opioids , has declined over the last several years , the reported availability of heroin has increased substantially .

further , there has been a rise in the availability of illicit fentanyl pressed into counterfeit prescription opioid pills .

this section discusses the efforts of federal agencies under the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , the department of justice ( doj ) , and the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) to combat opioid abuse .

while many federal departments / agencies are involved in these efforts , this section focuses on those agencies that include drug prevention , treatment , or enforcement as a primary mission .

it also includes grant - issuing agencies that specifically target drug abuse .

the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) , part of doj , is the primary federal agency involved in drug enforcement , including diversion control efforts for prescription opioids .

the substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) , part of hhs , is the primary federal agency supporting drug treatment and prevention .

the federal government also has several programs ( many of which are grant programs ) that may be used , or are specifically designed , to address opioid abuse .

these range from law enforcement assistance in combatting drug trafficking to assistance for states in developing a coordinated response to address opioid abuse .

these programs span across several departments and agencies including , but not limited to , doj , hhs , and ondcp .

this section does not address other federal agencies that support — but are not focused on — drug enforcement , treatment , or prevention .

for example , u.s. customs and border protection , part of the department of homeland security , concentrates on customs , immigration , border security , and agricultural protection .

while drug control is a part of what it does ( through drug interdiction at the border ) , it is not a central focus of the agency's mission .

other agencies across the federal government also take part in drug control activities , but they are beyond the scope of this report .

states have enacted laws that increase access to naloxone ( an opioid overdose reversal drug ) , provide immunity from prosecution for those who seek assistance related to an overdose , enhance prescription drug monitoring programs , and broaden access to substance abuse treatment , among other things .

over the last few years , several state governors have declared the opioid problem to be a "state of emergency" or "public health emergency. .

doing so has allowed governors to take swift , coordinated action to combat it .

in massachusetts , for example , then - governor deval patrick utilized his emergency power to allow first responders to carry and administer naloxone , in addition to other actions .

states are also developing opioid - related education initiatives .

for example , in december 2014 ohio enacted a law that required the health curriculum of each ohio school district to include instruction in prescription opioid abuse prevention .

in june 2017 , governor wolf of pennsylvania announced support for a bill that would establish a mandatory school - based substance abuse prevention and intervention program for all students in every grade from kindergarten through grade 12 .

state officials have been involved in a number of national initiatives including the drafting of coordinated policies and recommendations from the national governors association ( nga ) , reports on state legislation to increase access to treatment for opioid overdose from the national association of state alcohol and drug abuse directors ( nasadad ) , and participation in the president's commission on combating drug addiction and the opioid crisis .

across the country , states have adapted elements of their criminal justice responses — including police , court , and correctional responses — in a variety of ways due to the opioid epidemic .

while this section does not provide a state - by - state analysis , it highlights several examples of how states' justice systems have responded to the opioid crisis .

many states are increasing law enforcement officer access to naloxone , an opioid overdose reversal drug .

officers receive training on how to identify an overdose and administer naloxone , and they carry the drug so they can respond immediately and effectively to an overdose .

as of december 2016 , over 1,200 police departments in 38 states had officers that carry naloxone .

in addition , most states that have expanded access to naloxone have also provided immunity to those who possess , dispense , or administer the drug .

generally , immunity entails legal protections ( for civilians ) from arrest or prosecution and / or civil lawsuits for those who prescribe or dispense naloxone in good faith .

another criminal justice adaptation is the enactment of what are known as "good samaritan" laws to encourage individuals to seek medical attention ( for themselves or others ) related to an overdose without fear of arrest or prosecution .

in general , these laws prevent criminal prosecution for illegal possession of a controlled substance under specified circumstances .

while these laws vary by state as to what offenses and violations are covered , as of june 2017 , 40 states and the district of columbia have some form of good samaritan overdose immunity law .

most states have drug diversion or drug court programs for criminal defendants and offenders with substance abuse issues , including opioid abuse .

some states view drug courts as a tool to address rising opioid abuse and have moved to further expand drug court options in the wake of the opioid epidemic .

in august 2016 , representatives from several states that have been confronted with high opioid overdose death rates convened for the regional judicial opioid summit .

part of these states' action plans to address opioid abuse was to expand drug courts and other court diversion and sentencing options that provide substance - abuse treatment and alternatives to incarceration .

further , in april 2017 nga announced that eight states would participate in a "learning lab" to develop best practices for dealing with opioid abuse treatment for justice - involved populations — including the expansion of opioid addiction treatment in drug courts .

in recent years , several states have also enacted legislation increasing access to medication - assisted treatment for drug - addicted offenders who are incarcerated or have recently been released .

