in the past , congress has regularly acted to extend expired or expiring temporary tax provisions .

collectively , these temporary tax provisions are often referred to as "tax extenders. .

of the 33 temporary tax provisions that expired at the end of 2016 , 13 were business - related tax provisions .

all 13 business tax provisions that expired at the end of 2016 have been included in recent tax extenders legislation , although one was extended through 2021 , leaving 12 that expired at the end of 2017 .

the business tax extenders are diverse in purpose , providing various types of tax relief to businesses in different industries .

most recently , congress extended expiring tax provisions in the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( bba18 ; p.l .

115-123 ) .

this law retroactively extended temporary tax provisions that had expired at the end of 2016 through 2017 .

this report briefly summarizes and discusses the economic impact of the 12 business - related tax provisions that expired at the end of 2017 .

all but one of the business provisions that expired at the end of 2016 was extended in the bba18 .

the one business - related tax provision that expired at the end of 2016 that was not extended in the bba18 was a provision relating to the allocation of qualified zone academy bonds ; zone academy bonds were eliminated in the tax legislation enacted in december 2018 ( p.l .

115-97 ) .

the tax legislation also ended the domestic production activity deduction in general for tax years beginning after december 31 , 2017 , but a special provision extending the deduction in general to puerto rico for the last year ( 2017 ) of the domestic production activity deduction was included .

one provision that expired in 2016 , the temporary increase in the limit on cover over of rum excise taxes to puerto rico and the virgin islands , was extended through 2021 in the bba18 .

there are several options for congress to consider regarding temporary provisions .

provisions that expired at the end of 2017 could be extended .

the extension could be retroactive .

the extensions also could be short - term , long - term , or permanent .

another option would be to allow expired provisions to remain expired .

the amount of revenue that would be lost by temporarily extending business tax provisions that expired at the end of 2017 is generally small ( see table 1 ) .

for each provision included in this report , the one - year extension in the bba18 was estimated to reduce revenues by less than $300 million over the 10-year ( 2018 through 2027 ) budget window .

another option would be to extend expired provisions and make them permanent .

the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) estimated the effects of making 10 of the provisions permanent .

the list excluded the extension of the production activities deduction for puerto rico ( given that the production activities deduction is repealed in general going forward ) and the lower tax rate for timber gains , which would no longer be relevant given the lower corporate tax rate .

it also excluded the increase in the rum cover over .

according to jct , making the 10 business provisions that expired at the end of 2016 and were extended through 2017 permanent would reduce federal revenues by an estimated $7.6 billion over the 10-year ( 2018 through 2027 ) budget window .

extending the rum cover over for an additional six years would add about $4 billion based on the one - year revenue cost .

the cost of assets that provide services over a period of time , such as machines or buildings , is deducted over a period of years as depreciation .

the schedule of depreciation deductions depends on the life of the asset and the distribution of deductions over that life .

straight - line depreciation is used for structures , where equal amounts are deducted in each year .

for equipment , deductions are accelerated with larger amounts deducted in earlier years .

equipment is most commonly depreciated over 5 years or 7 years , but some short - lived assets are depreciated over 3 years and some longer - lived assets are depreciated over 10 , 15 , or 20 years .

nonresidential structures are depreciated over 39 years .

aside from the desire for economic stimulus , traditional economic theories suggest that tax depreciation should match as closely as possible economic ( physical ) depreciation of assets .

the depreciation provisions discussed below all allow earlier deductions for depreciation , which are valuable because of the time value of money .

expensing provisions allow a firm to deduct the cost of an asset the year it is placed in service .

investment in certain assets ( largely equipment with shorter lives ) was eligible for bonus depreciation that allowed half of cost to be expensed ( deducted immediately ) in 2017 , including some of the assets discussed below that are depreciated over 7 years or 5 years .

this bonus depreciation was originally scheduled to begin phasing out in 2018 .

legislation enacted in december 2017 ( p.l .

115-97 ) would allow 100% expensing of equipment for several years going forward .

the presence of bonus depreciation or expensing would make some temporary provisions more important ( such as the benefits for motorsports complexes , which would otherwise become ineligible ) and some less important ( such as shortening lives for racehorses or indian reservation property , or expensing for films and television ) , which would have received the benefit regardless .

qualified railroad track maintenance expenditures paid or incurred in a taxable year by eligible taxpayers qualify for a 50% business tax credit .

the credit is limited to $3,500 times the number of miles of railroad track owned or leased by an eligible taxpayer .

qualified railroad track maintenance expenditures are amounts , which may be either repairs or capitalized costs , spent to maintain railroad track ( including roadbed , bridges , and related track structures ) owned or leased as of january 1 , 2005 , by a class ii or class iii ( regional or local ) railroad .

eligible taxpayers are smaller ( class ii or class iii ) railroads and any person who transports property using these rail facilities or furnishes property or services to such a person .

the taxpayer's basis in railroad track is reduced by the amount of the credit allowed ( so that any deduction of cost or depreciation is only on the cost net of the credit ) .

the credit cannot be carried back to years before 2005 .

the credit is allowed against the alternative minimum tax .

the amount eligible is the gross expenditures , not taking into account reductions such as discounts or loan forgiveness .

the provision was enacted in the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-357 ) .

the provision relating to discounts was added by the tax relief and health care act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-432 ) .

the credit was allowed against the alternative minimum tax by the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-343 ) .

this provision substantially lowers the cost of track maintenance for the qualifying short line ( regional and local ) railroads , with tax credits covering half the costs for those firms and individuals with sufficient tax liability .

class ii and iii railroads account for 31% of the nation's rail miles .

these regional railroads are particularly important in providing transportation of agricultural products .

although no rationale was provided when the credit was introduced , sponsors of earlier free - standing legislation and industry advocates indicated that the purpose was to encourage the rehabilitation , rather than the abandonment , of short - line railroads .

these railroads were spun off in the deregulation of railroads in the early 1980s .

advocates also indicated that this service is threatened by heavier 286,000-pound cars that must be used to connect with longer rail lines .

they also suggested that preserving these local lines will reduce local truck traffic .

there was also some indication that a tax credit was thought to be more likely to be achieved than grants .

the arguments stated by industry advocates and sponsors of the legislation are also echoed in assessments by the federal railroad administration ( fra ) , which indicated the need for rehabilitation and improvement , especially to deal with heavier cars .

the fra also suggested that these firms have limited access to bank loans .

in general , special subsidies to industries and activities tend to lead to inefficient investment allocation , since in a competitive economy businesses should earn enough to maintain their capital .

nevertheless it may be judged or considered desirable to subsidize rail transportation to reduce the congestion and pollution of highway traffic .

at the same time , a tax credit may be less suited to remedy the problem than a direct grant because firms without sufficient tax liability cannot use the credit .

the section 199 domestic production activities deduction reduces tax rates on certain types of economic activity , primarily domestic manufacturing activities .

qualified domestic manufacturing activities qualify for a deduction equal to 9% of the lesser of taxable income derived from qualified production activities or taxable income .

the effect of the deduction is to reduce the effective tax rate on income from qualified activities by 3.15 percentage points , from 35% to 31.85% .

before 2018 , the section 199 domestic production activities deduction was a permanent part of the internal revenue code ( irc ) .

section 199 has been repealed , going forward , by the 2017 tax legislation ( p.l .

115-97 ) , so future extensions are unlikely .

when the section 199 deduction was enacted as part of the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-357 ) , the term "united states," as used for the purposes of determining eligible domestic activities , included the 50 states and the district of columbia , but not u.s. possessions or territories .

in 2006 , as part of the tax relief and healthcare act ( p.l .

109-432 ) , special rules that allowed puerto rico to be considered a part of the united states for the purposes of the section 199 domestic production activities deduction were temporarily enacted .

this temporary provision has recently been extended as part of "tax extenders" legislation .

the u.s. tax code generally treats u.s. possessions as foreign countries , and puerto rico maintains an independent tax system .

there are , however , many special rules interconnecting the puerto rican and u.s. tax systems .

before 1996 , domestic corporations with business operations in the u.s. possessions could generally eliminate their u.s. tax liability on foreign - source income from operations in the possessions using the possessions tax credit .

from 1996 through 2005 , the puerto rico economic activity credit was available for domestic corporations with activities in puerto rico .

following the expiration of the possessions tax credit and puerto rico economic activity credit , companies with operations in puerto rico may find it more advantageous to structure as a controlled foreign corporation ( cfc ) , thus benefitting from the option to defer u.s. tax on active income from those operations .

allowing the section 199 production activities deduction to be claimed on manufacturing activities in puerto rico can be viewed as an effort to provide similar tax treatment to income from manufacturing activities taking place in puerto rico and from the rest of the united states .

absent this provision , u.s. - based manufacturers with operations in puerto rico , operating in flow - through form ( eg , a branch or partnership ) , would face a higher effective tax rate on manufacturing activities in puerto rico than other domestic manufacturing activities .

allowing the section 199 deduction for activities in puerto rico essentially extends a tax benefit designed for domestic corporations to a possession that is generally treated as a foreign country for tax purposes .

this raises the question of why this tax benefit has been provided to puerto rico but no other u.s. possessions .

concerns have also been raised that extending section 199 to puerto rico would create an incentive for u.s. companies operating in puerto rico to adopt a bifurcated structure , with certain activities being undertaken by a cfc and with other activities , specifically those that qualify for section 199 , being undertaken in a flow - through structure .

since other domestic businesses do not have this organizational flexibility , this would provide greater potential benefits to manufacturers with operations in puerto rico .

this could be the intent of the policy , if extending section 199 to businesses in puerto rico is intended , in part , to encourage additional manufacturing activity in puerto rico .

for general information on the section 199 deduction , see crs report r41988 , the section 199 production activities deduction: background and analysis , by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs in focus if10688 , key issues in tax reform: the section 199 deduction , by [author name scrubbed] .

the indian employment tax credit is an incremental credit claimed by employers for qualified wages and health insurance costs .

the credit is designed to encourage hiring of certain individuals — enrolled members of an indian tribe and their spouses .

there are restrictions limiting the benefit to services performed within an indian reservation for individuals living on or near the reservation .

the indian employment credit is 20% of the excess of qualified wages and health insurance costs over base - year expenses , paid by an employer .

the credit is allowed for the first $20,000 in qualified wages and health insurance costs .

the base year is 1993 , such that the incentive is incremental to 1993 wages and health insurance costs ( the base year has not been changed since the credit was enacted ) .

the credit is not available for wages paid to an employee whose total wages exceed $30,000 , as adjusted for inflation ( $45,000 in 2015 and 2016 ) .

the employer must reduce their deduction for wages by the amount of the credit .

the indian employment credit was first enacted in 1993 , as part of the omnibus reconciliation act of 1993 ( p.l .

103-66 ) .

it was initially scheduled to expire at the end of 2003 , but has been regularly extended , often retroactively .

past extensions of the indian employment credit have extended the termination date without updating the base year .

some have proposed updating the base year , in an effort to ( 1 ) eliminate the need for taxpayers to maintain tax records dating back to 1993 , and ( 2 ) restore the incremental design of the credit .

extending the indian employment credit might encourage additional hiring of indian tribe members and their spouses .

while the indian employment credit may not increase overall employment on or near indian reservations , it might increase employment among tribe members .

taxpayers that employ miners in underground mines located in the united states may be able to claim a tax credit for mine rescue team training expenses .

the credit amount is limited to the lesser of ( 1 ) 20% of training program costs per employee ( including wages paid to the employee while in training ) ; or ( 2 ) $10,000 .

for a taxpayer to claim the credit for training provided to an employee , the employee must be a full - time miner who is eligible to serve as a mine rescue team member .

the mine rescue team training credit was enacted in the tax relief and health care act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-432 ) .

it was initially scheduled to be effective for 2006 , 2007 , and 2008 .

it was temporarily extended in the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-343 ) and has subsequently been extended as part of "tax extenders" legislation .

the mine rescue team training credit was enacted at the end of 2006 , following the high - profile mining accident at sago mine .

there was an uptick in coal mining fatalities in 2006 — 47 fatalities were reported ( 12 were a result of the sago mine disaster ) .

from 2007 through 2016 , coal mining fatalities averaged 21 per year .

during this period , fatalities were highest in 2010 , reflecting the upper big branch mine disaster , where there were 29 fatalities .

in the year with the lowest number of fatalities , 2016 , there were 8 .

coal mining fatalities have trended down over time .

in recent years , some of this might be explained by a decline in coal production and the decline in the number of coal miners .

the fatality rate , however , has also declined over time .

a credit for mine rescue team training can encourage mine operators and employers to invest in additional training .

the credit can also reduce the cost of complying with federal regulations regarding mine rescue team training .

federal regulations are the government's primary policy instrument governing coal mine safety , with tax incentives playing a small role .

for taxable years beginning in 2016 , qualified timber gains of c corporations are subject to an alternative maximum tax rate of 23.8% .

if net capital gains are less than timber gains , the 23.8% rate applies to net capital gains .

a qualified timber gain is the net gain from the sale of cutting standing timber , disposing of timber with a retained economic interest , or the outright sale of timber .

the special rate applies only to timber that has been held for more than 15 years .

typically , for c corporations , net capital gains are taxed at the same rate as ordinary income , with the maximum rate being 35% .

under the individual income tax , the maximum rate on net capital gains is 20% , with certain capital gains subject to an additional 3.8% tax .

this provision was enacted for one year as part of the protecting americans from tax hikes ( path ) act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

taxpayers other than c corporations have long been able to treat gains from the cutting of timber or sale of standing timber as capital gains , so long as the timber was held for more than one year .

the special rate enacted for 2016 extends this treatment to c corporations meeting a 15-year holding period requirement .

congress acted in the past to provide "greater equivalence to the capital gain tax treatment of timber gain" between companies operating under different organizational forms .

a 15% alternative tax rate for c corporation's qualified timber gains ( or , if less , net capital gains ) for timber that had been held more than 15 years was temporarily enacted in 2008 , but was not extended .

proponents of the provision argue that timber sales should be treated as capital gains , but that the tax rate applied to timber gains earned by c corporations should be the same as the tax rate applied to timber gains earned by s corporations or other pass - through entities .

those opposed to the special rate argue that providing capital gains treatment to timber gains of c corporations allows this form of income to be lightly taxed , especially after accounting for other tax provisions that reduce effective corporate tax rates .

the 2017 tax legislation ( p.l .

115-97 ) reduced the corporate rate to 21% going forward , so this provision will no longer be a benefit even if extended in the future .

