federal financial regulation encompasses vastly diverse markets , participants , and regulators .

as a result , regulators' goals , powers , and methods differ between regulators and sometimes within each regulator's jurisdiction .

this report provides background on the financial regulatory structure in order to help congress evaluate specific policy proposals to change financial regulation .

historically , financial regulation in the united states has coevolved with a changing financial system , in which major changes are made in response to crises .

for example , in response to the financial turmoil beginning in 2007 , the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act in 2010 ( dodd - frank act ; p.l .

111-203 ) was the last act to make significant changes to the financial regulatory structure ( see appendix a ) .

congress continues to debate proposals to modify parts of the regulatory system established by the dodd - frank act .

in the 115 th congress , proposals to change the regulatory structure include the financial choice act of 2017 ( h.r .

10 ) , which would modify and rename the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) and the federal insurance office ( fio ) , change the relationship between the financial stability oversight council ( fsoc ) and the regulators , eliminate the office of financial research ( ofr , which supports fsoc ) , and make other changes to how financial regulators promulgate rules and are funded .

this report attempts to set out the basic frameworks and principles underlying u.s. financial regulation and to give some historical context for the development of that system .

the first section briefly discusses the various modes of financial regulation .

the next section identifies the major federal regulators and the types of institutions they supervise ( see table 1 ) .

it then provides a brief overview of each federal financial regulatory agency .

finally , the report discusses other entities that play a role in financial regulation — interagency bodies , state regulators , and international standards .

for information on how the regulators are structured and funded , see crs report r43391 , independence of federal financial regulators: structure , funding , and other issues , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

the financial system matches the available funds of savers and investors with borrowers and others seeking to raise funds in exchange for future payouts .

financial firms link individual savers and borrowers together .

financial firms can operate as intermediaries that issue obligations to savers an d use those funds to make loans or investments for the firm's profits .

financial firms can also operate as agents playing a custodial role , investing the funds of savers on their behalf in segregated accounts .

the products , instruments , and markets used to facilitate this matching are myriad , and they are controlled and overseen by a complex system of regulators .

to help understand how the financial regulators have been organized , financial activities can be separated into distinct markets: banking — accepting deposits and making loans ; insurance — collecting premiums from and making payouts to policyholders triggered by a predetermined event ; securities — issuing contracts that pledge to make payments from the issuer to the holder , and trading those contracts on markets .

contracts take the form of debt ( a borrower and creditor relationship ) and equity ( an ownership relationship ) .

one special class of securities is derivatives , which are financial contracts whose value is based on an underlying commodity , financial indicator , or financial instrument ; and financial market infrastructure — the "plumbing" of the financial system , such as trade data dissemination , payment , clearing , and settlement systems , that underlies transactions .

a distinction can be made between formal and functional definitions of these activities .

formal activities are those , as defined by regulation , exclusively permissible for entities based on their charter or license .

by contrast , functional definitions acknowledge that from an economic perspective , activities performed by types of different entities can be quite similar .

this tension between formal and functional activities is one reason why the government accountability office ( gao ) , and others , has called the u.s. regulatory system fragmented , with gaps in authority , overlapping authority , and duplicative authority .

for example , "shadow banking" refers to activities , such as lending and deposit taking , that are economically similar to those performed by formal banks , but occur in the securities markets .

the activities described above are functional definitions .

however , because this report focuses on regulators , it mostly concentrates on formal definitions .

financial regulation has evolved over time , with new authority usually added in response to failures or breakdowns in financial markets and authority trimmed back during financial booms .

because of this piecemeal evolution , powers , goals , tools , and approaches vary from market to market .

nevertheless , there are some common overarching themes across markets and regulators , which are highlighted in this section .

the following provides a brief overview of what financial regulators do , specifically answering four questions: 1 .

what powers do regulators have ? .

2 .

what policy goals are regulators trying to accomplish ? .

3 .

through what means are those goals accomplished ? .

4. who or what is being regulated ? .

 table 1 sets out the current federal financial regulatory structure .

regulators can be categorized into the three main areas of finance — banking ( depository ) , securities , and insurance ( where state , rather than federal , regulators play a dominant role ) .

there are also targeted regulators for specific financial activities ( consumer protection ) and markets ( agricultural finance and housing finance ) .

the table does not include interagency - coordinating bodies , standard - setting bodies , international organizations , or state regulators , which are described later in the report .

appendix a describes changes to this table since the 2008 financial crisis .

financial firms may be subject to more than one regulator because they may engage in multiple financial activities , as illustrated in figure 1 .

for example , a firm may be overseen by an institution regulator and by an activity regulator when it engages in a regulated activity and a market regulator when it participates in a regulated market .

the complexity of the figure illustrates the diverse roles and responsibilities assigned to various regulators .

furthermore , financial firms may form holding companies with separate legal subsidiaries that allow subsidiaries within the same holding company to engage in more activities than is permissible within any one subsidiary .

because of charter - based regulation , certain financial activities must be segregated in separate legal subsidiaries .

however , as a result of the gramm - leach - bliley act in 1999 ( glba ; p.l .

106-102 ) and other regulatory and policy changes that preceded it , these different legal subsidiaries may be contained within the same financial holding companies ( i.e. , conglomerates that are permitted to engage in a broad array of financially related activities ) .

for example , a banking subsidiary is limited to permissible activities related to the "business of banking," but is allowed to affiliate with another subsidiary that engages in activities that are "financial in nature. .

as a result , each subsidiary is assigned a primary regulator , and firms with multiple subsidiaries may have multiple institution regulators .

if the holding company is a bank holding company or thrift holding company ( with at least one banking or thrift subsidiary , respectively ) , then the holding company is regulated by the fed .

figure 2 shows a stylized example of a special type of bank holding company , known as a financial holding company .

this financial holding company would be regulated by the fed at the holding company level .

its national bank would be regulated by the occ , its securities subsidiary would be regulated by the sec , and its loan company might be regulated by the cfpb .

these are only the primary regulators for each box in figure 2 ; as noted above , it might have other market or activity regulators as well , based on its lines of business .

insurance companies , unlike banks and securities firms , have been chartered and regulated solely by the states for the past 150 years .

there are no federal regulators of insurance akin to those for securities or banks , such as the sec or the occ , respectively .

the limited federal role stems from both supreme court decisions and congressional action .

in the 1868 case paul v. virginia , the court found that insurance was not considered interstate commerce , and thus not subject to federal regulation .

this decision was effectively reversed in the 1944 decision u.s. v. south - eastern underwriters association .

in 1945 , congress passed the mccarran - ferguson act ( 15 u.s.c .

§1011 et seq. ) .

specifically preserving the states' authority to regulate and tax insurance and also granting a federal antitrust exemption to the insurance industry for "the business of insurance. .

each state government has a department or other entity charged with licensing and regulating insurance companies and those individuals and companies selling insurance products .

states regulate the solvency of the companies and the content of insurance products as well as the market conduct of companies .

although each state sets its own laws and regulations for insurance , the national association of insurance commissioners ( naic ) acts as a coordinating body that sets national standards through model laws and regulations .

models adopted by the naic , however , must be enacted by the states before having legal effect , which can be a lengthy and uncertain process .

the states have also developed a coordinated system of guaranty funds , designed to protect policyholders in the event of insurer insolvency .

although the federal government's role in regulating insurance is relatively limited compared with its role in banking and securities , its role has increased over time .

various court cases interpreting mccarran - ferguson's antitrust exemption have narrowed the definition of the business of insurance , whereas congress has expanded the federal role in glba and the dodd - frank act through federal oversight .

for example , the federal reserve has regulatory authority over bank holding companies with insurance operations as well as insurers designated as systemically important by fsoc .

in addition , the dodd - frank act created the fio to monitor the insurance industry and represent the united states in international fora relating to insurance .

various federal laws have also exempted aspects of state insurance regulation , such as state insurer licensing laws for a small category of insurers in the liability risk retention act of 1986 ( 15 u.s.c .

§§3901 et seq. ) .

and state insurance producer licensing laws in the national association of registered agents and brokers reform act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-1 , title ii ) .

in addition to insurance , there are state regulators for banking and securities markets .

state regulation also plays a role in nonbank consumer financial protection , although that role has diminished as the federal role has expanded .

as noted above , banking is a dual system in which institutions choose to charter at the state or federal level .

a majority of community banks are state chartered .

there are more than four times as many state - chartered as there are nationally chartered commercial banks , but state - chartered commercial banks had less than one - half as many assets as nationally chartered banks at the end of 2016 .

for thrifts , nationally chartered thrifts make up less than half of all thrifts , but have 65% of thrift assets .

although state - chartered banks have state regulators as their primary regulators , federal regulators still play a regulatory role .

most depositories have fdic deposit insurance ; to qualify , they must meet federal safety and soundness standards , such as prompt corrective action ratios .

in addition , many state banks ( and a few state thrifts ) are members of the fed , which gives the fed supervisory authority over them .

state banks that are not members of the federal reserve system are supervised by the fdic .

however , even nonmember fed banks must meet the fed's reserve requirements .

in securities markets , "the federal securities acts expressly allow for concurrent state regulation under blue sky laws .

the state securities acts have traditionally been limited to disclosure and qualification with regard to securities distributions .

typically , the state securities acts have general antifraud provisions to further these ends. .

blue sky laws are intended to protect investors against fraud .

registration is another area where states play a role .

in general , investment advisers who are granted exemptions from sec registration based on size are overseen by state regulators .

broker - dealers , by contrast , are typically subject to both state and federal regulation .

the national securities markets improvement act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-290 , 110 stat .

3416 ) invalidated state securities law in a number of other areas ( including capital , margin , bonding , and custody requirements ) to reduce the overlap between state and federal securities regulation .

states also play a role in enforcement by taking enforcement actions against financial institutions and market participants .

this role is large in states with a large financial industry , such as new york .

federal regulation plays a central role in determining the scope of state regulation because of federal preemption laws ( that apply federal statute to state - chartered institutions ) and state "wild card" laws ( that allow state - chartered institutions to automatically receive powers granted to federal - chartered institutions ) .

for example , firms , products , and professionals that have registered with the sec are not required to register at the state level .

financial regulation must also take into account the global nature of financial markets .

more specifically , u.s. regulators must account for foreign financial firms operating in the united states and foreign regulators must account for u.s. firms operating in their jurisdictions .

sometimes regulators grant each other equivalency ( i.e. , leaving regulation to the home country ) when firms wish to operate abroad , and other times foreign firms are subjected to domestic regulation .

if financial activity migrates to jurisdictions with laxer regulatory standards , it could undermine the effectiveness of regulation in jurisdictions with higher standards .

to ensure consensus and consistency across jurisdictions , u.s. regulators and the treasury department participate in international fora with foreign regulators to set broad international regulatory standards or principles that members voluntarily pledge to follow .

given the size and significance of the u.s. financial system , u.s. policymakers are generally viewed as playing a substantial role in setting these standards .

although these standards are not legally binding , u.s. regulators generally implement rulemaking or congress passes legislation to incorporate them .

there are multiple international standard - setting bodies , including one corresponding to each of the three main areas of financial regulation: the basel committee on banking supervision for banking regulation , the international organization of securities commissions ( iosco ) for securities and derivatives regulation , and the international association of insurance supervisors ( iais ) for insurance regulation .

in addition , the g - 20 , an international body consisting of the united states , the european union , and 18 other economies , spearheaded international coordination of regulatory reform after the financial crisis .

it created the financial stability board ( fsb ) , consisting of the finance ministers and financial regulators from the g - 20 countries , four official international financial institutions , and six international standard - setting bodies ( including those listed above ) , to formulate agreements to implement regulatory reform .

there is significant overlap between the fsb's regulatory reform agenda and the dodd - frank act .

the relationship between these various entities is diagrammed in figure 4 .

appendix a .

changes to regulatory structure since 2008 the dodd - frank act of 2010 created four new federal entities related to financial regulation — the financial stability oversight council ( fsoc ) , office of financial research ( ofr ) , federal insurance office ( fio ) , and consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) .

ofr and fio are offices within the treasury department , and are not regulators .

the dodd - frank act granted new authority to the cfpb and transferred existing authority to it from other regulators , as shown in figure a - 1 ( represented by the arrows ) .

 ( with the exception of the ots , the agencies shown in the figure retained all authority unrelated to consumer protection , as well as some authority related to consumer protection. ) .

the section above entitled " consumer financial protection bureau " has more detail on the authority granted to the cfpb and areas where the cfpb was not granted authority .

in addition , the dodd - frank act eliminated the office of thrift supervision ( ots ) and transferred its authority to the banking regulators , as shown in figure a - 2 .

the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 ( hera ) created the federal housing finance agency ( fhfa ) and eliminated the office of federal housing enterprise oversight ( ofheo ) and federal housing finance board ( fhfb ) .

as shown in figure a - 3 , hera granted the fhfa new authority , the existing authority of the two eliminated agencies ( shown in orange ) , and transferred limited existing authority from the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) .

appendix b .

experts lis .

