a rticle iii of the constitution establishes the judicial branch of the federal government .

notably , it empowers federal courts to hear "cases" and "controversies. .

additionally , the constitution creates a federal judiciary with significant independence , providing federal judges with life tenure and prohibiting diminutions of judges' salaries .

in presiding over cases and controversies , federal courts possess significant power over the citizenry's life , liberty , and property , and that power can be exercised in a manner that could be in tension with the interests of the legislative branch .

one way congress potentially can temper the judiciary's influence is by regulating federal court jurisdiction .

the exceptions clause in article iii grants congress the power to make "exceptions" and "regulations" to the supreme court's appellate jurisdiction .

and more generally , with the power to create lower federal courts , congress possesses the power to eliminate the jurisdiction of the lower courts .

congress sometimes exercises this power by "stripping" federal courts of jurisdiction to hear a class of cases .

indeed , congress has even eliminated a court's jurisdiction to review a particular case in the midst of litigation .

more generally , congress may influence judicial outcomes by amending the substantive law underlying particular litigation of interest to the legislature .

these practices have , at times , raised separation - of - powers concerns about whether the legislative branch is impermissibly interfering with the judicial power to resolve cases and controversies independently .

long ago in marbury v. madison , the supreme court announced that the constitution , by granting the judicial branch the power to decide "cases" and "controversies," necessarily grants the judiciary the power to "say what the law is. .

sometimes butting up against this principle is the understanding that "congress has the power ( within limits ) to tell the courts what classes of cases they may decide," as well as to enact legislation that may have an effect on pending cases being adjudicated by the federal courts .

but the limits of congress's power to legislate may be tested when congress enacts measures that target individualized concerns and small subsets of individuals , as opposed to legislating for the country as a whole and the general welfare .

this report examines a series of supreme court rulings that have considered separation - of - powers - based limitations on the exceptions clause , congressional jurisdiction stripping , and the ability of congress to amend laws with the purpose of directly impacting pending litigation .

the court's jurisprudence in this area largely begins with the reconstruction - era case united states v. klein , and culminates in the court's 2018 ruling , patchak v. zinke .

in klein , the supreme court generally held that congress may not , by limiting appellate jurisdiction , dictate a "rule of decision" that undermines the independence of the judiciary .

but in the 2016 opinion , bank markazi v. peterson — the court's penultimate ruling interpreting klein — the court seemed to minimize the import of klein , noting that while congress cannot invade the judicial role by dictating how courts rule in a particular case , congress is permitted to amend the substantive law in a manner that may alter the outcome of pending litigation .

the patchak litigation highlighted the potential for tension between the judiciary's and legislature's powers when congress removes a class of cases from federal jurisdiction in a way that functionally shapes the outcome of pending litigation .

in particular , patchak raised questions about the constitutionality of a law that stripped the courts of jurisdiction to hear disputes over a specific parcel of land , when litigation concerning the disputed land was pending in federal court at the time the law was enacted .

though poised to clarify the limits of klein when it granted the petition for certiorari in patchak , ultimately , the supreme court issued a fractured 4-2-3 opinion , adding relatively little clarity to this complex area of the law .

although all nine justices agreed that congress cannot expressly dictate the outcome of a particular case , a majority of justices could not agree on when a facially neutral law that functionally ends pending litigation in the favor of one party violates article iii .

accordingly , this report concludes by analyzing the potential implications of patchak and by providing general guidance for crafting jurisdiction - stripping legislation and measures designed to impact pending litigation .

the constitution does not mention "separation of powers. .

but it is generally considered inherent in the constitution's tripartite division of federal power to the executive , legislative , and judicial branches that each branch of government has discrete powers that no other branch can invade .

additionally , the founders envisioned a separation of the three branches of government as an "essential precaution in favor of liberty. .

furthermore , the framers viewed the need to separate the legislative and judicial powers as a "sharp necessity. .

in the days before the constitution , the framers had observed that many states did not separate the judiciary from the legislature and , as a result , the adjudication of individual rights was subject to a "tyranny of shifting majorities. .

consequently , in designing an independent judiciary , the framers , at least in part , were reacting to a common practice in the colonies , and then the states , of "legislative correction of judgments," in which legislative bodies would set aside judgments through legislation .

still , the framers recognized that separation of the three branches of government would not be perfect or complete .

this concession is evinced in the powers granted to congress in article iii of the constitution .

for example , article iii's exceptions clause , which allows congress to make exceptions to the supreme court's appellate jurisdiction , traditionally has been viewed as authorizing congress to remove a class of cases from federal jurisdiction .

and because article iii grants congress the power to establish inferior federal courts , those inferior courts have only the jurisdiction that congress affirmatively grants by statute .

additionally , congress's power to regulate federal court jurisdiction and to enact substantive laws that the judiciary must then apply , in practice , allows congress to control the work of the courts .

this principle extends to laws that retroactively change legal rights , as the supreme court has long recognized that courts generally must apply retroactive laws to pending cases , even when the law was different at the litigation's outset .

thus , congress "can always revise the judgments of article iii courts in one sense: when a new law makes clear that it is retroactive , an appellate court must apply that law in reviewing judgments still on appeal that were rendered before the law was enacted , and must alter the outcome accordingly. .

similarly , congress can lawfully influence litigation by enacting legislation that necessarily impacts the effect , going forward , of injunctions issued by a federal court .

thus , the tension in article iii , which creates an independent federal judiciary but also subjects the judicial branch , at times , to legislative control , generates difficult questions related to separation of powers , and the court has had to determine when congress's powers impermissibly invade the powers of the judiciary .

despite the recent trend to limit the scope of klein , the 1871 case remains good law and its progeny provides some useful guideposts for congress in fashioning jurisdiction - stripping legislation and measures that target pending litigation .

based on the language of klein , congress cannot "prescribe a rule for the decision of a cause in a particular way. .

cases interpreting klein appear to interpret this passage to mean that congress cannot impede the judiciary's power to decide cases independently , for example , by telling a court how it should rule in a specific case or how to apply the law to the facts in a given case .

in this vein , congress cannot interfere with the finality of judgments by requiring courts to reopen finally decided lawsuits .

still , congress may influence how the judiciary resolves lawsuits without violating the separation of powers .

congress can do this by regulating a court's jurisdiction or by enacting substantive measures that the judiciary must apply to resolve a legal dispute .

for instance , congress may create or amend a law that retroactively applies to lawsuits that began before the new law was enacted .

moreover , the new substantive law can target a specific case or set of cases that are relevant to a small subset of the population .

additionally , legislation can be designed in a manner that ensures victory for a particular party , so long as the reviewing court may still independently apply the new law to the facts of the case .

this principle applies even if the new law largely predetermines the outcome for a pending lawsuit .

legislation designed to ensure a particular judicial outcome may be accomplished , for example , by enacting a procedural rule , such as eliminating a defense like res judicata .

patchak does relatively little to clarify with any precision the outward bounds of congress's ability to enact legislation that amends the substantive law underlying particular litigation without impeding the judiciary's power to decide cases independently .

by rejecting patchak's views that the gun lake act unconstitutionally directs a verdict for a particular party by commanding a pending case to be promptly dismissed , a majority of the court averred that congress is authorized to limit the reviewability for a class of pending cases , whether through a jurisdiction - stripping statute or a statute that restores the government's immunity to suit .

and patchak suggests that this principle appears to remain true even if when congress legislates in such a way that the government will necessarily prevail in the only lawsuit that the legislation affects .

a wrinkle that complicates how to determine patchak 's ultimate influence on the separation - of - power - based limitations on congress's power over courts , however , is the supreme court's inability to garner a majority opinion .

in patchak , all the justices appear to agree that congress cannot say "in smith v. jones , smith wins. .

however , there is no majority view as to when a facially neutral law that functionally ends pending litigation in the favor of one party amounts to a separation - of - powers violation .

four justices concluded more broadly that a facially neutral law that strips the courts of jurisdiction did not raise an article iii concern , even when the natural result of the law was to ensure that the government would win the only pending case the law would implicate .

two other justices concurred in the judgment on the narrow ground that the particular language congress used in the gun lake act was geared toward restoring the government's sovereign immunity .

justice sotomayor's concurring opinion suggests that she agrees with the general principles outlined by the dissent that congress cannot direct the outcome of a single pending case under the guise of stripping a court of jurisdiction .

however , until such a law comes before the court under a klein challenge , it is unclear whether the dissent's general view of klein or that of the plurality will command a majority of the court .

