in precedent stretching back to the chinese exclusion case of 1889 , the supreme court has held that congress possesses "plenary power" to regulate immigration .

this power , according to the court , is the most complete that congress possesses .

it allows congress to make laws concerning aliens that would be unconstitutional if applied to citizens .

and while the immigration power has proven less than absolute when directed at aliens already physically present within the united states , the supreme court has interpreted the power to apply with most force to the admission and exclusion of nonresident aliens abroad .

the court has upheld or shown approval of laws excluding aliens on the basis of ethnicity , gender and legitimacy , and political belief .

outside of the immigration context , in contrast , laws that discriminate on such bases are almost always struck down as unconstitutional .

to date , the only established limitation on congress's power to exclude aliens concerns lawful permanent residents ( lprs ) : they , unlike nonresident aliens , generally cannot be denied entry without a fair hearing as to their admissibility .

the plenary power doctrine has long drawn scholarly criticism .

some legal commentators contend that the doctrine lacks a coherent rationale , and that it is an anachronism belonging to an earlier era of constitutional law predating the development of modern individual rights jurisprudence .

more than 125 years after its initial recognition of the plenary power doctrine , however , the supreme court has continued to rely on it in immigration cases .

some commentators have argued that the court is in the process of narrowing the parameters of the doctrine's applicability , although they find support for this argument mainly in cases outside of the exclusion context .

the constitution does not mention immigration .

it does not expressly confer upon any of the three branches of government the power to control how citizens of other countries enter , live , and remain in the united states .

parts of the constitution address related subjects .

the supreme court has sometimes relied upon congress's enumerated powers over naturalization and foreign commerce , and to a lesser extent upon the executive's implied article ii foreign affairs power , as sources of federal immigration power .

significantly , however , the court has also consistently attributed the immigration power to the federal government's inherent sovereign authority to control its borders and its relations with foreign nations .

this inherent sovereign power , according to the court , gives congress essentially unfettered authority to restrict the entry of nonresident aliens .

the court has determined that the executive branch , by extension , possesses unusually broad authority to enforce laws pertaining to alien entry , and to do so under a level of judicial review much more limited than that which would apply outside of the exclusion context .

the scope of the federal government's power to exclude aliens is at the forefront of litigation concerning two successive executive orders ( the second revising and replacing the first ) issued by president donald trump that , in their revised form , seek to deny entry temporarily to foreign nationals from six predominantly muslim countries and to all refugees , subject to limited waiver .

a series of lower court decisions largely enjoined implementation of the orders .

in particular , courts ruled that the president's travel restrictions are likely unconstitutional or exceed his statutory authority .

the supreme court granted certiorari to review decisions by the u.s. courts of appeals for the fourth and ninth circuits that upheld nationwide injunctions against the revised executive order .

the supreme court also partially stayed the injunctions , allowing the executive branch to implement the revised order in part pending the outcome of the litigation .

a decision by the court on the merits of these cases , which have come to be known as the "travel ban" litigation , could deliver a major statement about the constitutional and statutory scope of the president's power to exclude aliens .

the litigation has threshold issues , however , such as questions of mootness and standing , that may well prevent the court from reaching the merits , particularly following the issuance of a presidential proclamation superseding and somewhat modifying some of the entry restrictions at issue in the case .

this report provides an overview of the legislative and executive powers to exclude aliens .

first , the report discusses a gatekeeping legal principle that frames those powers: nonresident aliens outside the united states cannot challenge their exclusion from the country .

second , the report analyzes the extent to which the constitutional and statutory rights of u.s. citizens limit the exclusion power under the "facially legitimate and bona fide" test of kleindienst v. mandel .

the report concludes with a case study .

the report applies the principles of the supreme court's immigration jurisprudence to the two primary claims that u.s. persons and entities have pressed against the president's revised executive order in the "travel ban" litigation: ( 1 ) that the revised order violates the establishment clause ; and ( 2 ) that the revised order violates the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) .

as discussed later in the report , case law on the exclusion of aliens has come to focus upon whether the rights of u.s. citizens limit the government's power to exclude .

the case law arrived at this issue , however , only after the supreme court had worked out an essential underlying principle: nonresident aliens outside the united states have no constitutional or statutory rights with respect to entry and therefore no legal grounds to challenge their exclusion .

the supreme court developed this principle in a series of cases between the late 19 th and mid - 20 th centuries about aliens denied admission after arriving by sea .

the law at the time allowed such aliens to challenge the legality of their exclusion by filing a petition for habeas corpus in federal district court .

this procedural right , however , proved hollow .

in every case , the supreme court determined that the federal government's sovereign prerogative to forbid the entry of foreigners foreclosed the aliens' claims .

in one famous case , the court declared itself powerless to review the government's decision to exclude — without any explanation other than that the entry would be "prejudicial" — the german bride of a u.s. world war two veteran .

in another case , the court refused to question the government's undisclosed reasons for denying entry to an essentially stateless alien returning to the united states after a prior period of residence , even though the exclusion relegated the stateless alien to indefinite detention on ellis island .

the supreme court has since relied upon these cases for the proposition that excluded nonresident aliens cannot state legal claims with respect to entry .

the related doctrine of consular nonreviewability precludes judicial review of visa denials .

this doctrine developed in the lower courts and appears to derive from the line of supreme court cases described above .

the consular nonreviewability doctrine , like the rule foreclosing alien claims itself , does not have a clearly enunciated theoretical foundation .

it does have a clear consequence , however: the millions of nonresident aliens denied visas each year at u.s. consulates abroad cannot themselves challenge the visa denial in federal court .

the supreme court has never endorsed the doctrine by name , but the court has twice stated ( without holding ) that nonresident aliens cannot challenge visa denials .

put simply , under the consular nonreviewability doctrine and the related supreme court cases , nonresident aliens located outside the united states cannot challenge their exclusion from the country in federal court .

the rule against alien challenges to denials of entry becomes more convoluted in the context of arriving aliens denied entry at the border , notwithstanding the rule's provenance in cases about such aliens .

arriving alien cases , unlike visa cases , can involve people stranded at the nation's threshold and , accordingly , sometimes present issues that go beyond the denial of entry itself to implicate the government's treatment of persons under its control .

whether the constitution protects arriving aliens from unduly burdensome enforcement measures , such as prolonged detention pending removal , remains a disputed question .

but congress has provided certain statutory protections in this regard .

moreover , arriving aliens have succeeded in obtaining judicial review of statutory claims against detention or interdiction at sea by u.s. authorities .

such review for aliens pressing claims against the denial of visas abroad , in contrast , does not exist .

to be sure , the exclusion power with respect to arriving aliens remains vast , and congress relied on this broad power in 1996 when it created expedited removal procedures for many arriving aliens that limit or foreclose judicial review .

but the exclusion power applies with its maximum force , in practice if not in theory , only to aliens who apply to enter from abroad , because such applications isolate the issue of denial of entry from the treatment issues that physical presence at the border or inside the country sometimes triggers .

it is this core of the exclusion power that the remainder of this report addresses and that the travel ban cases , which concern the exclusion of aliens generally located far from the nation's shores , implicate most directly .

even as applied to aliens abroad , the rule against nonresident alien challenges to denials of entry has a major limitation: the rule only forecloses challenges brought by nonresident aliens themselves .

thus , if a u.s. citizen claims that the exclusion of an alien violated the u.s. citizen ' s rights , the rule against alien challenges does not apply .

cases that invoke this limitation account for the entirety of the supreme court's modern exclusion jurisprudence .

the court has not considered a nonresident alien's own challenge to a denial of entry in decades .

the question about the extent to which u.s. citizens can challenge an alien's exclusion , on the other hand , has occupied the court in three important cases since 1972: kleindienst v. mandel , fiallo v. bell , and the splintered kerry v. din .

under the rule that these cases establish , the government need only articulate a "facially legitimate and bona fide" reason for excluding a nonresident alien or class of aliens in order to prevail against an american citizen's claim that his or her constitutional rights have been violated by the exclusion .

this section of the report discusses the three exclusion cases , an understanding of each of which is fundamental to this area of the supreme court's jurisprudence .

next , the section discusses the cases' implications for the scope of congressional power to exclude aliens and the scope of the concomitant executive power .

the section ends by noting two unresolved issues concerning the executive power: ( 1 ) the extent to which u.s. citizens may challenge an alien's exclusion on statutory grounds ; and ( 2 ) the extent to which the constitution limits the executive's exclusion decisions under broad delegations of congressional power .

president trump set forth what has become known colloquially as the "travel ban" in two iterations of an executive order titled "protecting the nation from foreign terrorist entry into the united states. .

the second order ( eo - 2 ) , issued on march 6 , 2017 , revised and revoked the first ( eo - 1 ) , issued on january 27 , 2017 , after the ninth circuit upheld an injunction against the first order .

the two orders are similar but not identical ; as discussed below , the trump administration narrowed the scope of eo - 2 in response to the ninth circuit decision .

as its primary source of statutory authority , eo - 2 relies upon section 212 ( f ) of the ina , which allows the president to suspend the entry of any class of aliens where such entry would be "detrimental to the interests of the united states. .

eo - 2's stated purpose is to protect the united states from terrorist acts perpetrated by foreign nationals .

eo - 2 imposed temporary bars on the entry of two classes of aliens located outside the united states: ( 1 ) foreign nationals from six countries ( iran , libya , somalia , sudan , syria , and yemen ) , for 90 days following the order ; and ( 2 ) refugees , for 120 days .

these entry restrictions , according to the text of eo - 2 , aim to reduce administrative burdens on executive agencies while they conduct an assessment of current screening procedures for visa applicants and refugees .

the restrictions exempt certain categories of aliens from their scope , including lprs , and are also subject to waiver on a case - by - case basis .

a group of plaintiffs — including states , organizations , and individual u.s. citizens and lprs — contend that eo - 2's true purpose is to exclude muslims from the united states .

the plaintiffs argue that the order therefore violates the establishment clause of the first amendment and exceeds the scope of the president's statutory authority .

they base the contention of anti - muslim animus primarily upon statements that president trump and his advisers made during the 2016 presidential campaign concerning the implementation of a "muslim ban" on travel to the united states .

the u.s. courts of appeals for the fourth and ninth circuits upheld district court injunctions against eo - 2's entry restrictions in their entirety — the fourth circuit on establishment clause grounds and the ninth circuit on statutory grounds .

in contrast , at least one federal district court denied a motion to enjoin eo - 2 after concluding that the order was likely lawful .

the supreme court granted certiorari to hear both the fourth and ninth circuit cases in the 2017 october term .

the supreme court also limited the lower court injunctions to allow the government to apply eo - 2's entry restrictions against aliens who do not have a "bona fide relationship" to a person or entity within the united states .

the court left the injunctions in place with respect to aliens who have such relationships .

importantly ( for the litigation , though not for the underlying issues of immigration law ) , the court also drew attention to the issue whether the temporary entry restrictions would expire before the court could decide the two cases , thereby rendering the cases moot .

a subsequent event has brought the mootness issue even more into the forefront .

on september 24 , 2017 , the president issued a proclamation that modified eo - 2's 90-day entry restrictions on persons from the six listed countries .

the proclamation deleted one country ( sudan ) and added three others ( chad , north korea , and venezuela ) from the list of affected countries ; made the restrictions indefinite ; and also modified the scope of the restrictions for persons from several of the countries .

the proclamation does not appear to alter eo - 2's restrictions on refugee entry .

the day after the president issued the proclamation , the supreme court cancelled the scheduled oral argument in the travel ban cases and ordered the parties to submit briefs on whether the proclamation rendered the cases moot .

thus , it seems that the supreme court will , at the very least , carefully consider whether the claims in the travel ban cases are moot or whether other considerations make a decision on the merits of those claims inappropriate .

the travel ban cases implicate the nucleus of the political branches' immigration power: the power to deny entry to aliens abroad .

the cases against eo - 2 , unlike the first wave of litigation challenging eo - 1 , concern only the exclusion of aliens physically outside the united states .

the cases do not involve aliens at the border or aliens who have entered the country physically .

accordingly , the cases isolate the issue of the scope of the executive's power to deny entry from the issue of what measures the executive may lawfully take to carry out the exclusion of an alien already on american soil .

the cases , in other words , concern a pure exclusion issue , and they could thus set the stage for a landmark statement from the supreme court about the political branches' plenary immigration power .

if the plaintiffs win on the merits of their establishment clause claim , and to a lesser extent on their statutory claims , their victory would represent a judicial check on executive exercise of the exclusion power unlike any in the supreme court's history .

that check could come in the form of a distinction between legislative and executive power — i.e. , that eo - 2 is unlawful because it contravenes the ina — or as a clear holding that u.s. citizens' establishment clause rights limit the exclusion of nonresident aliens .

a victory for the plaintiffs in the latter form would exceed prior supreme court limitations of the plenary power doctrine .

on the other hand , if the government wins on the merits under application of mandel deference , the decision ( depending on its reasoning ) could stand as a reaffirmation of the exceptional extent of the executive's power to deny entry to nonresident aliens .

a third outcome , however , seems equally viable: that the supreme court will not actually decide whether eo - 2 exceeds the scope of the president's statutory or constitutional power .

the court could dismiss the government's appeals in the travel ban cases as moot or reject the plaintiffs' claims for lack of standing rather than decide them on the merits ; or , maybe most in line with its approach in prior exclusion cases , the court could decide the merits of the plaintiffs' claims in a way that does not require it to define the boundaries of the executive's power , such as by rejecting the claims under domestic establishment clause jurisprudence .

in prior exclusion cases concerning the rights of u.s. citizens , the court has preferred such narrow grounds of decision that do not require a defining statement about if and where the plenary power ends .

if the court adopts this approach or does not decide for other reasons the merits of the travel ban cases , the june 26 per curiam decision limiting the executive's power to exclude aliens with "bona fide relationships" to u.s. persons or entities will remain in the case reporters as a unique example of judicial involvement in exclusion decisions .

but because that decision avoids any discussion of the merits of the claims against eo - 2 , it probably will not itself change how courts review u.s. citizen challenges to the exclusion of nonresident aliens abroad in the future .

