t he mission of the department of justice ( doj ) is to "enforce the law and defend the interests of the united states according to the law ; to ensure public safety against threats foreign and domestic ; to provide federal leadership in preventing and controlling crime ; to seek just punishment for those guilty of unlawful behavior ; and to ensure fair and impartial administration of justice for all americans. .

doj was established in 1870 with the attorney general as its leader .

since its creation , doj has added additional agencies , components , offices , boards , and divisions to its organizational structure .

doj , along with the judicial branch , operates the federal criminal justice system .

the department enforces federal criminal and civil laws , including antitrust , civil rights , environmental , and tax laws .

through agencies such as the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) ; the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) ; and the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms , and explosives ( atf ) , it investigates terrorism , organized and violent crime , illegal drugs , and gun and explosives violations , among others .

through the u.s .

marshals service ( usms ) , it protects the federal judiciary , apprehends fugitives , and detains alleged offenders who are not granted pretrial release .

doj investigates and prosecutes individuals accused of violating federal laws , and it represents the u.s. government in court .

doj's bureau of prisons ( bop ) houses individuals accused and convicted of federal crimes .

in addition to its role in administering the federal criminal justice system , the department also provides grants and training to state , local , and tribal law enforcement agencies and judicial and correctional systems .

this report describes actions taken by the administration and congress to provide fy2018 funding for doj .

it also provides an overview of some of the funding proposals put forth by the administration in its fy2018 budget request for doj .

each of doj's accounts are usually funded as a part of the annual commerce , justice , science , and related agencies ( cjs ) appropriations act .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l .

115-31 ) provided a total of $28.962 billion for doj .

the act provided $2.713 billion for the u.s .

marshals , $9.006 billion for the fbi , $2.103 billion for the dea , $1.259 billion for the atf , and $7.142 billion for the bop .

the remaining funding ( approximately $6.739 billion ) was for doj's other offices — such as the u.s .

attorneys offices , the executive office for immigration review , and the attorney general's office — and to support the other functions noted above .

for fy2017 , appropriated funding for ovw was supplemented with a transfer from the cvf .

a total of $482 million in new budget authority is available for ovw , but $326 million comes via a transfer from the cvf .

the trump administration requested $28.205 billion for doj for fy2018 .

the requested amount was 2.6% less than the fy2017 enacted appropriation .

the administration proposed reductions for several doj accounts .

these included a $232 million ( - 2.6% ) reduction for the fbi , which was largely the result of a $187 million ( - 78.3% ) reduction in the construction account , but also a $44 million ( - 0.5% ) reduction in the fbi's salaries and expenses account .

the administration also proposed reductions for the following: state and local law enforcement assistance ( - $340 million , - 26.6% ) , juvenile justice programs ( - $21 million , - 8.3% ) , and community oriented policing services ( - $4 million , - 1.5% ) .

the trump administration's fy2018 budget request proposed transferring $445 million from the cvf to ovw , $73 million from the cvf to the state and local law enforcement assistance account , and $92 million from the cvf to the juvenile justice programs account .

while the administration's fy2018 budget request included several reductions for doj , it also included several proposed increases: the offices of the united states attorneys ( +$22 million , 1.1% ) , the u.s .

marshals service's federal prisoner detention account ( +$82 million , 5.6% ) , the national security division ( +$5 million , +5.2% ) , interagency law enforcement ( +$9 million , +1.7% ) , the bureau of prisons' salaries and expenses account ( +$76 million , +1.1% ) , the drug enforcement administration ( +$61 million , +2.9% ) , the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms , and explosives ( +$15 million , +1.2% ) , and the executive office for immigration review ( +$60 million , +13.9% ) .

the trump administration proposed eliminating 11,523 positions and 3,587 full - time equivalents ( ftes ) across doj .

the reductions were a part of a "workforce rightsizing initiative" ordered by attorney general sessions .

the reductions would have come through attrition and "administrative savings" ( - 2,125 positions and - 2,084 ftes ) , and through eliminating "funded but unfilled" positions and ftes ( - 9,398 positions and - 1,503 ftes ) .

the majority of eliminated positions and ftes would have come from the fbi ( - 2,095 positions and - 1,843 ftes ) , dea ( - 1,350 positions and no ftes ) , usms ( - 612 positions and - 94 ftes ) , bop ( - 6,132 positions and - 846 ftes ) , and general legal activities ( - 587 positions and - 129 ftes ) .

these reductions would have established a new staffing baseline for doj's current services .

h.r .

3354 , an omnibus appropriations measure that the house passed on september 14 , 2017 , would have provided $29.310 billion for doj , 3.5% more than the administration's request and 1.2% more than the fy2017 enacted appropriation .

compared to the fy2017 enacted appropriation , the house - passed bill included an $88 million ( +3.2% ) increase for the usms , a $54 million ( +2.6% ) increase for the dea , and a $36 million+ ( 2.8% ) increase for the atf .

there were also increases for the offices of the u.s .

attorneys ( +$22 million , +1.1% ) and bop ( +$26 million , +0.4% ) related to the fy2017 enacted appropriations .

the bill would have reduced funding overall for the fbi by $139 million ( - 1.6% ) relative to the fy2017 enacted appropriation , but this is due to a $187 million ( - 78.3% ) reduction in the fbi's construction account .

the house bill would have increased funding for the fbi's salaries and expenses account .

the house also declined to adopt the administration's proposal to supplement appropriations from the general fund of the treasury for the office on violence against women , state and local law enforcement assistance , and juvenile justice programs accounts with transfers from the crime victims fund .

the bill reported by the senate committee on appropriations would have provided $29.068 billion for doj , 2.6% more than the administration's request and 0.4% more than the fy2017 enacted appropriation .

the senate committee on appropriations would have funded most doj accounts at or above the fy2017 enacted level .

the committee - reported bill included a $108 million ( +4.0% ) increase for the usms , a $13 million ( +0.6% ) increase for the dea , a $15 million ( +1.2% ) increase for the atf , and a $22 million ( +1.1% ) increase for the offices of the u.s .

attorneys relative to the fy2017 enacted level .

the committee proposed reducing overall funding for the fbi ( - $19 million , - 0.2% ) , though this is the result of an $84 million reduction in the fbi's construction account .

like the house bill , the senate committee - reported bill would have increased funding for the fbi's salaries and expenses account relative to the fy2017 enacted appropriation .

the committee - reported bill would have also reduced funding for the state and local law enforcement assistance account ( - $109 million , - 8.6% ) relative to the fy2017 enacted level .

the senate committee on appropriations largely declined to adopt the administration's proposal to supplement funding for several grant accounts with transfers from the crime victims fund .

however , the committee - reported bill includes a transfer of $379 million from the crime victims fund to the office on violence against women .

for fy2018 , doj received a total of $30.384 billion in funding , which included $30.299 billion in regular appropriations provided in the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( division b , p.l .

115-141 ) and $85 million in emergency - designated funding provided in the further additional supplemental appropriations for disaster relief requirements act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-123 ) .

total fy2018 funding for the department is 4.9% greater than the fy2017 appropriation ( 4.6% greater without emergency - designated funding ) and 7.3% greater than the administration's request ( 7.0% greater without emergency - designated funding ) .

nearly every doj account was funded at a level above the fy2017 enacted appropriation and the administration's request , though there were a few exceptions .

the fy2018 appropriation for the general legal activities account was $2 million less ( - 0.2% ) than the administration's request while the appropriation for the research , evaluation , and statistics account was $21 million less ( - 18.9% ) than the administration's request .

however , the latter was largely the result of funding for the regional information sharing system ( riss ) program being provided under the cops account .

the administration requested funding for riss under the research , evaluation , and statistics account .

for fy2018 , all funding for the office on violence against women ( $492 million ) is provided by a transfer from the cvf .

congress did not adopt the administration's proposal to supplement appropriations from the general fund of the treasury for the state and local law enforcement assistance and juvenile justice programs accounts with transfers from the cvf .

the house and senate committee reports and the joint explanatory statement to accompany the consolidated appropriations act were silent as to the administration's workforce rightsizing initiative .

however , the explanatory statement notes that any cjs agency that "plans a reduction - in - force shall notify the [house and senate appropriations committees] by letter no later than 30 days in advance of the date of any such planned personnel action. .

table 1 summarizes and compares the fy2017 appropriations , the president's fy2018 budget request , and the house - passed , senate committee - reported , and enacted fy2018 appropriations for doj .

the amounts in table 1 reflect only new funding made available at the start of the fiscal year .

therefore , the amounts do not include any rescissions of unobligated or deobligated balances that may be counted as offsets to newly enacted appropriations , nor do they include any scorekeeping adjustments ( eg , the budgetary effects of provisions limiting the availability of the balance in the crime victims fund ) .

the administration's annual budget submission to congress is a reflection of its priorities .

the trump administration has identified national security , violent crime , the opioid epidemic , transnational organized crime , and enforcing immigration laws as priorities for doj .

these priorities coincide with issues that president trump raised during the 2016 presidential campaign and the first few months of his administration , including concerns about "lone wolf" terrorist attacks inspired by foreign terrorist organizations like the islamic state , increasing violent crime in some u.s. cities , and the need for more stringent enforcement of the nation's immigration laws .

the administration formulated its fy2018 budget request assuming fy2017 funding levels that were based on the fy2017 annualized appropriation under the continuing resolutions ( cr , p.l .

114-223 and p.l .

114-254 ) .

this means that requested program increases were considered relative to that cr and not the fy2017 enacted appropriation ( p.l .

115-31 ) .

the administration requested $98 million in program increases for national security efforts at the fbi .

within the $98 million requested by the administration , $41 million was for the fbi's efforts to combat cyber threats , $22 million was for combatting the threat of "going dark" ( i.e. , the inability of law enforcement to access certain data due to advancements in technology ) , $20 million was for addressing threats posed by foreign intelligence and domestic bad actors , $8 million was for additional surveillance of fbi high - priority targets , and $7 million was for the operation and maintenance of the fbi's biometric technology center .

in response , the house committee on appropriations noted in its report that it provided $48 million more than the fy2017 enacted appropriation for the fbi .

the committee explained that the increase was necessary to help the fbi carry out its critical missions , which include supporting work on "confronting threats from foreign intelligence and insiders," and "helping the fbi stop computer intrusions , investigate cybercrime , and improve cybersecurity. .

the committee also stated that funding for the fbi was to support the programs of the fbi's criminal justice information services division , including the biometric technology center .

however , the committee did not state if it chose to fund any of the specific program increases requested by the administration .

the senate committee on appropriations noted in its report that within the funding provided for the fbi , the committee supports the requested program increases for cybersecurity activities .

the committee's report was silent as to whether it supported any of the other program increases requested by the administration .

the explanatory statement states that congress expects the fbi to use the funding provided for fy2018 to enhance its investigative and intelligence efforts related to terrorism , national security , and cyber threats .

while the explanatory statement did not say whether congress funded any of the administration's requested increases , fy2018 funding included a $263 million increase for the fbi's salaries and expenses account ( not including emergency - designated funding ) .

the enacted appropriation was $308 million more than the administration's request .

the trump administration requested approximately $139 million for efforts to reduce violent crime , including the following: $19 million to implement the recommendations of the task force on crime reduction and public safety .

of this amount , $4 million would have been for the atf , $6 million would be for the dea , $4 million would be for the fbi , and $6 million would be for the usms .

$19 million for additional assistant u.s .

attorneys to help prosecute violent crimes .

$7 million for the atf's national integrated ballistic information network ( nibin ) , which allows for the capture and comparison of ballistic evidence to aid in solving violent crimes involving firearms .

$4 million for the atf to support advancements in technology for more accurate and timely firearm registrations .

$9 million for the fbi to support additional personnel to conduct background checks submitted through the national instant criminal background check system ( nics ) .

$70 million for the project safe neighborhoods grant program under the state and local law enforcement assistance account .

$12 million for the usms to replace body armor , radios , fleet vehicles , light armored vehicles , and electronic surveillance equipment , and to support the u.s .

marshals' special operations group's annual selection , specialty and mandatory recertification training , and related equipment .

the house committee on appropriations' report noted that it fully funded the requested increase for the atf's nibin program and additional safety equipment for deputy u.s .

marshals .

the committee also stated that it provided funding for additional resources at the office of the u.s .

attorneys for additional prosecutors to target violent crime and gang activity .

the committee declined to provide $70 million for project safe neighborhoods ( the committee recommended $10 million ) .

as mentioned above , the committee stated that funding for the fbi was to support the programs of the fbi's criminal justice information services division , which includes nics , but the committee did not state whether it provided funding for the program increases requested by the administration .

the committee's report was silent as to whether it provided funding for the other program increases requested by the administration .

the report to accompany s. 1662 was largely silent as to whether the senate committee on appropriations provided funding for the program increases requested by the administration .

for example , the committee stated that its recommended funding supports the atf's efforts to enforce firearms laws and perform regulatory oversight , including through the nibin program , but the report did not state whether the committee funded the administration's requested program increases for the atf .

the senate committee on appropriations noted that it fully funded the request for the fbi's criminal justice information services , including continued improvements to nics .

on the other hand , the committee declined to provide $70 million for project safe neighborhoods ( the committee recommended $7 million ) .

the explanatory statement states that funding for the requested program increases was provided for the atf and the usms .

the explanatory statement also states that congress expects the fbi to adequately address increased demand for background checks for firearms purchases and improve nics performance , including enhancing system availability , determination rates , and e - check services .

the agreement provided $20 million for project safe neighborhoods instead of the $70 million requested by the administration .

the explanatory statement was silent as to funding for additional assistant u.s .

attorneys to prosecute violent crimes and implementing the recommendations of the task force on crime reduction and public safety .

the trump administration requested approximately $40 million at doj for efforts related to the opioid epidemic , including the following: $20 million for the dea to target drug trafficking ; support education and training efforts for pharmaceutical drug manufacturers , wholesalers , pharmacies , and practitioners ; and support prescription drug take - back events .

$9 million for the dea's efforts to fight organizations engaging in the manufacture and distribution of pharmaceutical controlled substances in violation of the controlled substances act .

$9 million for heroin enforcement groups at the dea .

$3 million for the u.s .

attorneys to support a pilot program for special assistant united states attorneys in "hot spots" around the country to provide additional prosecutorial support to federal criminal and civil drug diversion investigations .

funding for this program would be derived from the dea's diversion control fee account .

the house committee on appropriations stated in its report that it provided $15 million under the dea's salaries and expenses account for enhancement of heroin enforcement activities and investigations of transnational criminal organizations involved in drug trafficking .

the committee also would have provided $37 million under the dea's diversion control program for additional diversion investigators and tactical diversion squads , increasing drug take - back efforts , and increasing enforcement and analysis of new synthetic substances .

within this amount , $10 million was for the proposed u.s .

attorneys' "hot spots" pilot program .

the report from the senate committee on appropriations is largely silent as to whether the committee provided any of the program increases requested by the administration for efforts related to the opioid epidemic .

however , the committee noted that while it strongly supports efforts to fight heroin and illegal opioid abuse , it does not approve of funding from the dea's diversion control program being used for the proposed "hot spots" pilot program .

the committee believed that the responsibilities of the pilot program are outside of the dea's mission and that prosecution for overprescribing and illegal diversion of opioids should be handled by the office of the u.s .

attorneys .

in its report , the committee directed doj to use no less than $3 million of the funding provided for the office of the u.s .

attorneys to conduct criminal and civil prosecutions into the illegal prescribing and dispensing of opioids .

the explanatory statement states that additional funding was being provided for the dea to "expand opioid and heroin enforcement efforts , including supporting existing heroin enforcement teams and establishing new ones ; invest in the fentanyl signature profiling program and law enforcement safety ; and accelerate efforts to dismantle transnational criminal organizations and cartels. .

the explanatory statement , by reference , also incorporates the senate committee on appropriations' language regarding the proposed "hot spots" pilot program .

congress chose to provide additional direct support to the u.s .

attorneys offices to combat opioid abuse .

the trump administration requested approximately $19 million to target transnational organized crime ( toc ) , including the following: $6 million in additional ocdetf funding to support investigations and prosecutions that target high - priority toc , ocdetf's heroin response strategy , and short - term deployment of federal law enforcement personnel to address violent crime .

$7 million for the fbi to support ongoing investigations of toc .

$7 million for the dea to investigate transnational criminal organizations responsible for trafficking large quantities of drugs into the country .

the house committee on appropriations stated in its report that it provided $15 million under the dea's salaries and expenses account for enhancement of heroin enforcement activities and investigations of transnational criminal organizations involved in drug trafficking .

the committee also explained that funds are included under ocdeft to support interagency task forces that target high - level drug trafficking organizations through coordinated , multijurisdictional investigations .

the report from the senate committee on appropriations was silent as to whether the committee provided funding for any of the program increases requested by the administration .

as mentioned above , the agreement provided additional funding to the dea to help it "dismantle transnational criminal organizations and cartels. .

the explanatory statement also stated that additional ocdeft funding was included to "enhance investigations and prosecutions of major drug trafficking organizations with a focus on reducing the availability of opioids. .

the explanatory statement was silent as to whether there was any additional funding for the fbi to specifically support investigations of toc .

for fy2018 , the trump administration requested an additional $145 million for enforcing immigration laws , including the following: $75 million for additional eoir immigration judges and support staff .

$9 million for additional deputy u.s .

marshals to provide court security and timely detainee processing .

$50 million for additional housing , medical , and transportation costs for the usms due to an increased detainee population resulting from expanded immigration law enforcement .

$7 million for additional assistant u.s .

attorneys to help prosecute offenses that are a result of expanded immigration law enforcement .

$2 million for the civil division for additional personnel to defend challenges to the immigration laws , regulations , and policies .

$2 million for the environment and national resources division to help acquire real property along the southwest border to be used to secure the border between the united states and mexico .

the house committee on appropriations noted in its report that it provided $4 million more than the amount requested for eoir .

the total amount provided would have supported 449 immigration judge teams , 65 more than the number of teams funded for fy2017 .

the committee noted that it fully funded the requested enhancements for immigration enforcement at the offices of the u.s .

attorneys .

the committee also provided the additional funding requested for the u.s .

marshals to support border security and immigration law enforcement .

the report was silent as to whether the committee provided the additional funding requested for the civil and environmental and natural resources divisions .

the senate committee on appropriations was silent in its report as to whether it specifically provided funding for additional immigration judges , but it did fund the eoir account at the level requested by the administration .

the report was silent as to whether the committee provided funding for any of the other program increases the administration requested for immigration law enforcement .

the explanatory statement directs doj to hire and deploy at least 100 additional immigration judge teams , with the goal of having 484 teams nationwide by 2019 .

the explanatory statement was silent as to whether funding was provided for any of the administration's requested increases .

in addition to the request for additional funding , the administration's budget also proposed legislative language related to immigration enforcement and "sanctuary" jurisdictions that limit law enforcement participation with federal im migration enforcement activities ( section 219 of the general provisions for doj ) .

section 219 would amend section 642 of the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 ( codified at 8 u.s.c .

§1373 ) by specifying , and arguably expanding , the type of information that federal , state , and local law enforcement entities may share with the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

the bar to limitations on information sharing would cover an alien's nationality , citizenship status , immigration status , removability , scheduled release date and time ( for persons in custody ) , home address , work address , and contact information .

while current law bars limitations on information sharing for any individual , section 219 would narrow this prohibition to exclude from the bar on information sharing individuals in custody or suspected of violating u.s. law .

section 219 would have also required nonfederal law enforcement entities or officials to honor any lawful requests by dhs pursuant to its mandate to enforce immigration laws , including requests to detain individuals for up to 48 hours in order for dhs to obtain custody of them .

section 219 would have allowed dhs or doj to condition any grant of federal funds or cooperative agreements related to immigration , national security , law enforcement , and terrorism prevention and protection on the state's or locality's compliance with the provisions that bar limitations on information sharing .

it would have also allowed doj and dhs to require state and local law enforcement agencies to honor dhs requests specified in section 219 as a condition of grant funding .

dhs or doj could have required that such grant and cooperative agreement applicants certify , as prescribed by dhs or doj , that they would comply with such conditions in their applications .

section 219 would also have allowed dhs or doj to enforce the above provisions through any lawful means .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 did not include the proposed section 219 .

