the federal bureaucracy of the present day is the product of more than two centuries of legislative and administrative actions by successive generations of elected and appointed officials .

as such , the diverse organizations and processes of the federal government are a consequence of the influence and decisions of thousands of officials with differing viewpoints about the role of government and diverse policy preferences .

the federal bureaucracy's organizational arrangements are also reflective of ongoing competition between congress and the president to influence the behavior of agencies .

with its size , complexity , and idiosyncratic history , the federal bureaucracy is sometimes perceived as immutable .

notwithstanding this perception , federal organizational structures and processes are under continual congressional and administrative study and alteration in response to changing contexts and priorities .

most changes in organizational arrangements occur deep within departments and agencies , affecting a small number of subunits and not attracting wide notice .

occasionally , broader , more widely known changes , such as a structural reorganization establishing a new department or a redelegation of responsibilities among agencies , are undertaken .

these activities are expected developments in a government that is evolving and adapting in response to changing needs , policy priorities , political contexts , and technology , among other factors .

government reorganization is a process that may be undertaken in pursuit of administrative and political goals .

such activities have been associated with both potential benefits and potential drawbacks , some of which are discussed in a text box near the end of this report .

as used in this report , the term reorganization is used to encompass the "purposeful ( intended ) changes in purpose , functions , procedures , assignments , and relationships in organizations. .

it involves more than just structural rearrangement of organizational units and personnel , and it can occur within agencies as well as among two or more agencies .

government reorganizations can also entail changes in interagency processes or the distribution of resources and functions among agencies .

the government organizations that are the focus of this report are those that exercise significant federal legal authority .

primary constitutional responsibility for the structural organization of the executive branch of the federal government , as well as the creation of the principal components of that branch , rests with congress .

moreover , congress has long sought to promote efficiency , transparency , accountability , public participation , and economy in the operations of the executive departments , agencies , and other governmental entities through specifications of both government - wide and agency - specific processes .

key tools that congress uses to shape the contours of the federal government include authorizing legislation , appropriations legislation , and oversight .

the president has often played a leadership role in reorganization of the executive branch by transmitting proposals and advocating legislative action in public statements and private negotiations .

presidents and their appointed agency heads also have a variety of administrative tools at their disposal for making smaller - scale structural and procedural organizational changes .

each of these governing actors has tried to bridge divides between entities with shared missions , similar functions , or overlapping jurisdiction by establishing interagency coordinative mechanisms of one kind or another .

such mechanisms may be considered tools of reorganization in that they often lead to changes in procedures , assignments , and relationships within and between organizations .

this report begins with discussions of some tools available to congress , the president , and agency leaders for initiation and implementation of executive branch reorganization .

it then discusses interagency coordinative mechanisms that are sometimes used by each of these actors to bridge interorganizational gaps .

the report concludes with general observations regarding federal reorganization efforts .

as noted above , the president has often played a leadership role in reorganization of the executive branch by transmitting proposals and advocating legislative action in public statements and private negotiations .

the president may also direct members of his administration to conduct reorganizations using the authorities discussed below ( " agency tools " ) .

in some instances , presidents have used executive orders to direct the establishment of offices .

in addition , the president can redelegate functions that have been vested in him by congress , as discussed below .

finally , congress has sometimes delegated to the president circumscribed authority to conduct time - and agency - specific reorganization activities .

during the middle of the 20 th century , congress sometimes enacted so - called "presidential reorganization authority," which provided for a fast - track legislative process , led by the president , for certain reorganization activities .

this authority is no longer operative , but it is discussed below nonetheless because it was an important mechanism for reorganization during the period in which it was in effect , and many reorganization plans from that era underpin current organizational arrangements in the executive branch .

in general , department heads have discretion , consistent with existing statutory mandates , to organize and manage the day - to - day operations of the organizations for which they are responsible .

in addition , since the 1950s , the powers , duties , and functions of the component offices of most agencies have been vested in the agency head , who is , in turn , empowered to delegate these powers , duties , and authorities .

furthermore , section 301 of title 5 of the u.s. code provides that the "head of an executive department or military department may prescribe regulations for the government of his department , the conduct of its employees , the distribution and performance of its business. .

these authorities do not , however , supersede or conflict with specific statutory directives , limitations , or organizational arrangements .

federal government observers have identified potential duplication , overlap , and fragmentation of programs as areas of concern in executive branch organization .

these concerns received renewed focus in the gpra modernization act of 2010 .

among other things , this statute established new processes related to setting goals and measuring performance in crosscutting policy areas , reflecting congressional interest in better coordination and cooperation among federal agencies in addressing issues that transcend any one agency's boundaries .

each of the three major governing actors discussed in this report — congress , the president , and agency heads — has tried to bridge the interagency ( and , sometimes , intra - agency ) divide by establishing interagency coordinative mechanisms of one kind or another .

arguably , a mechanism set by statute could be more durable across administrations , while one established by executive order reflects the incumbent president's interest and authority .

an agency head's directive might be used to establish a working group to communicate across within - agency silos that are unique to that agency .

interagency coordinative mechanisms are often used in an effort to establish cooperation among agencies with shared missions , similar functions , or overlapping jurisdiction .

some arrangements provide for collaboration among equals , while others designate a lead agency with authority to direct activities .

in many cases , interagency coordinative mechanisms lead to changes in procedures , assignments , and relationships within and between organizations .

in this way , they are tools of reorganization .

they are particularly noteworthy for their widespread use and generally low profile .

such mechanisms include , for example , interagency working groups , task forces , joint decisionmaking processes , memoranda of understanding ( mous ) , and white house coordinators .

these arrangements sometimes exist informally , but numerous arrangements have also been established formally by public law , executive order , administrative directive , or mou .

among other effects , such formal agreements and directives may be helpful in clarifying relationships among different agencies that have overlapping jurisdiction or shared responsibilities , because such arrangements fall outside the control of any single agency head .

interagency coordinative groups , as well as other mechanisms , can address organizational problems while avoiding some of the potential pitfalls of a structural reorganization .

where effective , for example , such a group might reduce unnecessary policy fragmentation , improve policy formulation and implementation , provide a forum for mitigating misunderstanding and conflict among agencies , reduce unnecessary redundancy , increase efficiency , and facilitate oversight and accountability .

it might also help program implementers to work around vague or imprecise legislative language , or statutory limitations on individual agencies that might hamstring effective or efficient administration of a shared program .

in some circumstances , such arrangements might be used temporarily to facilitate effective implementation of a law with known imperfections until such time as congress develops legislative remedies .

interagency coordinative groups are not always perceived as beneficial , however .

in some cases , a coordinative entity could be perceived as too powerful , if it has substantial authority over others .

such arrangements might undercut existing programs or offices in one or more participating agencies .

the effectiveness of a particular arrangement might be limited by a lack of control over budgetary or other resources .

such limitations might be especially troubling to agencies and congressional committees that lose jurisdiction .

some mechanisms might also be perceived as additional layers of bureaucracy , imposing greater costs and using scarce resources without demonstrating added value .

in some cases , coordinative entities may become self - perpetuating and endure beyond the period during which they are needed or useful .

as noted above , a memorandum of understanding might be used to establish an arrangement among agencies , or it might be a coordinative mechanism in and of itself .

the interagency coordination it establishes could result in a reorganization of procedures , assignments , and relationships between agencies .

such agreements are common among agencies .

where two or more agencies have overlapping or closely related responsibilities , such an agreement might be used to specify the division of responsibility , establish processes or structured protocols for sharing information , and make mutual , lasting commitments for cooperating in a shared policy area .

as noted by an observer of these agreements , they might serve one or more different purposes: ( 1 ) delineating jurisdictional lines , ( 2 ) establishing procedures for information sharing or information production , ( 3 ) agreeing to collaborate in a common mission , ( 4 ) coordinating reviews or approvals where more than one agency has authority to act in a particular substantive area , and ( 5 ) in rarer cases ( and potentially subject to additional procedures under the administrative procedure act ) ... agreeing on substantive policy .

alternatively , agencies might enter into more formal interagency agreements or contracts .

in some instances where interagency mous or contracts shift significant responsibilities for carrying out statutory functions from one agency to another , congressional action might be necessary to authorize or appropriate accompanying shifts in resources .

another kind of interagency mechanism might be used to increase adherence to the president's policy direction .

modern presidents have sometimes tried to coordinate policy development and implementation among departments and agencies from the white house .

to the extent that such efforts shift the locus of authority and decisionmaking from one agency to another , they might be considered reorganization actions .

presidents have , for example , sometimes appointed high - level presidential advisors and given them such a role .

such advisors have been referred to , by the administration in some cases , and by the media , as "czars. .

the precise role and authority of such individuals in the policy development and implementation processes is often difficult for congress and the public to discern .

in some cases , this lack of clarity of role and authority and the perceived lack of accountability to congress have been the source of controversy .

government reorganization is often cast in terms of potential administrative benefits .

for example , whenever congress has delegated general reorganization authority to the president ( see " presidential reorganization authority " above ) , it has clearly stated in the statutory provisions that the objective of reorganization is administrative improvement , and it has often required that reorganization plans submitted by the president articulate the plan's means of achieving such improvements .

administrative goals of reorganization include , for example , improved program effectiveness , greater efficiency , reduced cost , and improved policy integration across related programs .

in addition to these administrative goals , reorganization efforts often have spoken or unspoken political goals and outcomes .

the political nature of reorganization arises from the fact that it redistributes power and resources .

although it may have beneficial outcomes over time , it is axiomatic that a government reorganization is disruptive , at least in the short term , to the functioning of the organizations involved .

implementation of a reorganization plan can affect existing power dynamics , rearrange relationships , create uncertainty , and generally interrupt the flow of work .

government workers in the reorganized agencies will often be the most directly affected , but congressional committees of jurisdiction and outside interest groups are affected as well .

these parties , including policy advocates , usually work toward obtaining the organizational outcome most beneficial to their own particular interests .

such efforts may continue through the implementation phase of the reorganization , where the distribution of power and resources may be decided in finer detail .

government reorganizations have potential benefits and drawbacks , some of which are identified in the text box below .

the vantage point of the observer might influence the degree to which a particular reorganization is viewed as beneficial .

for example , increased independence for a regulatory entity might be seen as beneficial by those who think that regulatory activities are best carried out with insulation from day - to - day political considerations and from the policy preferences of any one administration .

others might view such independence as an unwarranted abridgement of the president's role in controlling and directing the executive branch bureaucracy .

in addition , observers with different perspectives might weight potential benefits and drawbacks differently .

for example , one observer might view potential efficiencies that might be gained from a reorganization to be insufficient to outweigh the disruption of functioning that the associated activities are expected to entail , while another observer might regard anticipated short - term disruption to be a small price to pay for the benefits of what is perceived to be long - overdue updating of an agency's mission and operations .

research suggests that successful governmental reorganizations — statutory or otherwise — are characterized by political consensus on the goals and approaches .

where goals are unarticulated or consensus has not been achieved prior to a reorganization , affected interests may intentionally or unintentionally undermine the success of the new arrangement .

the result of such a situation may be instability leading to further reorganization within a relatively short time .

political consensus concerning new organizational arrangements may be achieved , in part , through negotiation and accommodation among affected interests .

in an effort to achieve such consensus , a reorganization directive or statute might articulate its goals .

identifying these goals could also aid in determining , after implementation , whether or not they have been achieved .

reorganization directives or statutes might also include agreed - upon methods for assessing progress toward those goals .

absent such explicit goals and agreed - upon methods , congress may find it difficult to evaluate the success or failure of a particular reorganization project .

