the iconography of the confederate states in the u.s. civil war is a contested part of american historical memory .

confederate flags , statues , plaques , and similar memorials have been valued historical symbols for some americans , but for others have symbolized oppression and discrimination .

further , confederate symbols have sometimes been associated with violent confrontations and hate crimes in the united states , including in recent years .

recent prominent incidents in which confederate symbols were invoked — in particular , the june 2015 shooting deaths of nine people in a historically black church in charleston , sc , and violence at an august 2017 rally in charlottesville , va — have led to renewed consideration of the presence of confederate symbols in public spaces .

some local and state governments have elected to remove confederate statues , flags , and other symbols from places of public prominence .

congress is considering the role of confederate symbols on federal lands and in federal programs .

while no comprehensive inventory of such symbols exists , numerous federal agencies administer assets or fund activities in which confederate memorials and references to confederate history are present .

the national park service ( nps , within the department of the interior ) , the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , and the department of the army within the department of defense ( dod ) all administer national cemeteries that sometimes display the confederate flag .

many units of the national park system are related to civil war history and contain resources commemorating confederate soldiers or actions .

the army has military installations named in honor of confederate generals , and some navy ships have historically been named after confederate officers or battles .

the u.s. capitol complex contains works commemorating confederate soldiers and officials , including statues in the national statuary hall collection .

various federal agencies such as the general services administration and the department of transportation are connected with sites of confederate commemoration , either on federal properties or through nonfederal activities that receive federal funding .

the presence of confederate symbols on federal lands , and at some nonfederal sites that receive federal funding , may raise multiple questions for congress .

how should differing views on the meaning of these symbols be addressed ? .

which symbols , if any , should be removed from federal sites , and which , if any , should be preserved for their historical or honorary significance ? .

should every tribute to a person who fought for the confederacy be considered a confederate symbol ? .

should federal agencies give additional attention to education and dialogue about the conflicted history of these symbols — including their role in civil war history and in subsequent historical eras — or are current interpretive efforts adequate ? .

how , if at all , should current practices of honoring the confederate dead in national cemeteries be changed ? .

to what extent , if any , should the presence of confederate symbols at nonfederal sites affect federal funding for programs connected to these sites ? .

this report focuses primarily on confederate symbols administered by three federal entities — nps , the va , and dod .

each of these entities manages multiple sites or programs that involve confederate symbols .

the report begins with a discussion of recent legislative proposals , and then discusses the agencies' current policies with respect to confederate symbols , along with issues for congress .

bills in recent congresses have addressed confederate symbols and their relation to federal lands and programs .

the 115 th congress is considering bills with varying provisions on confederate commemorative works , names , and other symbols under federal jurisdiction .

the 114 th congress also considered several legislative proposals , but none were enacted in law .

of the pending proposals in the 115 th congress , some might be relatively straightforward to implement , while others might give rise to questions about implementation .

depending on specific bill provisions , such questions could include what constitutes a confederate symbol , how required agency actions toward confederate symbols would be funded , whether or not a given display of a symbol would qualify as a historical or educational context , and how implementation would be affected by statutory requirements for historic preservation and other existing protections .

nps manages over 70 units of the national park system related to civil war history , some of which contain works commemorating confederate soldiers or actions .

additionally , nps administers 14 national cemeteries that , under agency policy , may display the confederate flag at certain times of year .

the agency also provides education and interpretation related to civil war history and the confederate states .

park gift shops operated by concessioners sometimes sell books or other items that display confederate symbols .

further , nps is connected with historic preservation of some nonfederal confederate memorials through its assistance to nonfederal sites such as national heritage areas , national historic landmarks , and nonfederal properties on the national register of historic places .

in the wake of recent incidents , these aspects of the nps portfolio have come under scrutiny .

according to the department of defense ( dod ) , a servicemember's right of expression should be preserved to the maximum extent possible in accordance with the constitutional and statutory provisions of title 10 of the u.s. code , and consistent with good order and discipline and the national security .

the defense department does not explicitly prohibit the display of the confederate flag .

however , if a commander determines that the display of the confederate flag or confederate symbols is detrimental to the good order and discipline of the unit , then the commander can ban such displays .

currently , the navy is the only military service that has an overall policy concerning the confederate flag .

nstcinst 5000.1f , naval service training command policy statement regarding the confederate battle flag , august 29 , 2017 ( enclosure 7 ) , states the following: 1 .

it is critical that all naval service training command ( nstc ) sailors , marines , and civilians , as well as the general public , trust that nstc is committed to providing an environment of equal opportunity ( eo ) and maintaining an ethnically - diverse workforce .

to promote a positive eo environment , command leaders must avoid associating the navy with symbols that will undermine our message that nstc is dedicated to providing an environment free of discrimination or harassment .

2 .

reasonable minds differ on what the confederate battle flag signifies .

some americans see it as a symbol of racism and hatred , others view it as a symbol of southern pride and heritage , while yet others consider it an outright political message .

when command leaders associate their unit with the confederate battle flag , such as by displaying the confederate battle flag or presenting an award that conspicuously emphasizes the confederate battle flag , they link the navy with the meanings that people associate with that symbol — good and bad .

command leaders should not connect the navy to the confederate battle flag in a way that undermines the navy's message of inclusiveness .

however , not all displays of the confederate battle flag will result in such inferences .

a cased confederate battle flag displayed alongside other civil war artifacts in a navy museum is unlikely to be viewed as a partisan statement by the navy .

command leaders must use good sense in deciding which uses will not undermine our positive eo message .

3 .

while the first amendment does not limit which messages the navy as an organization chooses to convey , it does limit navy regulation of individual expression rights .

therefore , command leaders must preserve the free expression rights of nstc sailors , marines , and civilians to the maximum extent possible in accordance with the constitution and statutory provisions .

that said , no command leader should be indifferent to conduct that , if allowed to proceed unchecked , would destroy the effectiveness of a unit .

command leaders must use calm and prudent judgment when balancing these interests .

some military recruits with confederate flag tattoos have been barred from joining the military on the basis of policies prohibiting certain types of tattoos .

the army , navy , air force , and marine corps all have policies that prohibit tattoos that are injurious to good order and discipline .

there is no explicit prohibition against the confederate flag and symbols in tattoos .

however , the navy does have a general policy regarding the display of the confederate flag ( see above ) .

army regulation ( ar ) 670-1 , ‎ uniform and insignia wear and appearance of army uniforms and insignia , prohibits soldiers from having any extremist , indecent , sexist , or racist tattoos or markings anywhere on their body .

the army has no specific prohibitions concerning the confederate flag or symbols .

naval personnel command ( ‎navpers ) instruction 15665i , general uniform regulations , chapter 2 , grooming standards , article 2201.7 states the following: tattoos / body art / brands located anywhere on the body that are prejudicial to good order , discipline , and morale or are of a nature to bring discredit upon the naval service are prohibited .

for example , tattoos / body art / brands that are obscene, sexually explicit , and or advocate discrimination based on sex , race , religion , ethnic , sexual orientation or national origin are prohibited .

in addition , tattoos / body art / brands that symbolize affiliation with gangs , supremacist or extremist groups , or advocate illegal drug use are prohibited .

marine corps bulletin 1020 , marine corps tattoo policy , states , "tattoos located anywhere on the body that are prejudicial to good order and discipline , or are of a nature to bring discredit upon the naval service , are prohibited .

examples include , but are not limited to , tattoos that are drug - related , gang - related , extremist , obscene or indecent , sexist , or racist. .

there is no specific prohibition for the confederate flag , but some recruits with confederate flag tattoos have reportedly been barred in the past for violating the marine corps' tattoo policy .

air force instruction ( afi ) 36-2903 , dr ess and personal appearance of air force personnel , chapter 3.4.1 , states , "tattoos / brands / body markings anywhere on the body that are obscene , commonly associated with gangs , extremist , and / or supremacist organizations , or that advocate sexual , racial , ethnic , or religious discrimination are prohibited in and out of uniform. .

there is no explicit prohibition against the confederate flag .

for more information , see crs report r44321 , diversity , inclusion , and equal opportunity in the armed services: background and issues for congress .

arlington national cemetery is under the jurisdiction of the u.s. army .

the army policy states in department of the army ( da ) pamphlet 290 – 5 , administration , operation , and maintenance of army cemeteries , that on memorial day , or on the day when confederate memorial day is observed , a small confederate flag of a size not to exceed that of the u.s. flag may be placed on confederate graves at private expense .

individuals or groups desiring to place these flags must agree in writing to absolve the federal government from any responsibility for loss or damage to the flags .

confederate flags must be removed at private expense on the first workday following memorial day or the day observed as confederate memorial day .

on june 6 , 1900 , congress authorized $2,500 for a section of arlington national cemetery to be set aside for the burial of confederate dead .

section 16 was reserved for confederate graves , and among the 482 persons buried there are 46 officers , 351 enlisted men , 58 wives , 15 southern civilians , and 12 unknowns .

to further honor the confederate dead at arlington , the united daughters of the confederacy petitioned to erect a monument that was approved by then - secretary of war william howard taft on march 4 , 1906 , and sculpted by moses ezekiel ( see figure 3 and figure 4 ) .

president woodrow wilson unveiled the memorial on june 4 , 1914 .

currently there are 10 major army installations in southern states named after confederate military leaders and no such installations for the other military departments .

for more information on these installations and the naming policy and procedures for each military department , see crs insight in10756 , confederate names and military installations .

the department of the army has no formal administrative process for renaming military installations .

following the 2015 shooting in charleston , sc , then - army chief of public affairs brigadier general malcolm frost said , "every army installation is named for a soldier who holds a place in our military history .

accordingly , these historic names represent individuals , not causes or ideologies. .

legislation has been introduced in the 115 th congress to rename the bases: h.r .

3658 , honoring real patriots act of 2017 , would require the secretary of defense to rename any military property "that is currently named after any individual who took up arms against the united states during the american civil war or any individual or entity that supported such efforts. .

h.r .

3660 would also direct that the bases be renamed and would prohibit the use of federal funds for maintenance of confederate symbols , including on military installations .

proponents of renaming the bases contend that there are noteworthy national military leaders from other conflicts who demonstrated selfless service and sacrifice , including medal of honor recipients , who would be more appropriate for such an honor .

opponents of renaming these installations cite the bureaucracy of creating a new review process and the difficulty of satisfying the various viewpoints over which names ( if any ) would be selected as subjects of contention .

in sum , congress faces multiple questions and proposals concerning confederate symbols on federal lands and in federally funded programs .

legislation in the 115 th congress would address confederate symbols in different ways .

proposals range from those concerned with individual confederate symbols to those that would broadly affect all confederate symbols on federal lands .

in some cases , questions could arise about how the proposals would be implemented from a logistical and financial standpoint , and how they would interact with existing authorities .

