in october 2017 and more explicitly in january 2018 , the president linked continued u.s. participation in the joint comprehensive plan of action ( jcpoa ) to congressional and allied action to address the deficiencies in the jcpoa that the president identified .

on may 8 , he announced that the united states would cease implementing the jcpoa , using the mechanism of reimposing suspended u.s. sanctions to implement the u.s. pullout .

the may 8 announcement came in advance of a may 12 , 2018 , date when the existing waiver of a key u.s. sanctions law was to expire .

the u.s. withdrawal from the jcpoa will likely have significant implications for u.s. policy in the region .

this report bases its analysis primarily on the text of key documents involved in the issue — the jcpoa itself ; u.n. security council resolution 2231 of july 20 , 2015 , which endorsed the jcpoa ; and the iran nuclear agreement review act ( inara , p.l .

114-17 , of may 22 , 2015 ) .

the jcpoa does not specifically provide for any party to the agreement to "withdraw. .

although european and other diplomats argue that resolution 2231 makes the agreement binding on all parties under the u.n. charter , officials in the obama administration asserted that the jcpoa is a nonbinding political commitment , and trump administration officials continued that assertion .

as president trump noted in his october 2017 and january 2018 statements , he has the authority to cease u.s. implementation of the accord .

he has the authority to reimpose all or some of the u.s. sanctions that were revoked or suspended to implement the deal , to reinstate those sanctions imposed by executive order , and to redesignate for sanctions entities that were "de - listed" from sanctions to implement the jcpoa .

the president's may 8 , 2018 , announcement that the united states would no longer implement the jcpoa indicated that he would exercise all these options to reimpose all u.s. sanctions that were revoked or suspended to implement the jcpoa .

the president apparently does not require the approval of congress for these courses of action .

president trump's may 8 announcement was widely foreshadowed .

on august 1 , 2017 , then - secretary of state tillerson told a press briefing: "the conversation on iran does not begin and end with the jcpoa , the nuclear agreement , and i think if there's one thing i hope i can help people understand it's that agreement dealt with a very small slice of iran's threats , and that was their nuclear program. .

in a speech to the u.n. general assembly on september 19 , 2017 , president trump said we cannot let a murderous regime continue these destabilizing activities while building dangerous missiles , and we cannot abide by an agreement if it provides cover for the eventual construction of a nuclear program .

the iran deal was one of the worst and most one - sided transactions the united states has ever entered into .

frankly , that deal is an embarrassment to the united states , and i don't think you've heard the last of it , believe me .

on october 13 , 2017 , president trump announced a new u.s. strategy on iran , following a six - month policy review .

the president raised the possibility that he might terminate u.s. participation in the jcpoa if certain conditions are not met , stating that by its own terms , the iran deal was supposed to contribute to "regional and international peace and security. .

and yet , while the united states adheres to its commitment under the deal , the iranian regime continues to fuel conflict , terror , and turmoil throughout the middle east and beyond .

importantly , iran is not living up to the spirit of the deal.... that is why i am directing my administration to work closely with congress and our allies to address the deal's many flaws so that the iranian regime can never again threaten the world with nuclear weapons... .

however , in the event we are not able to reach a solution working with congress and our allies then the agreement will be terminated .

it is under continuous review , and our participation can be cancelled by me , as president , at any time .

on january 12 , 2018 , president trump again threatened to withdraw the united states from the jcpoa unless congress and the european allies "fix the terrible flaws of the iran nuclear deal. .

he identified the "fixes" as ( 1 ) a requirement that iran allow immediate inspections at all sites requested by international inspectors ; ( 2 ) ensuring that iran "never even comes close to possessing a nuclear weapon" ; ( 3 ) the elimination of an expiration date for the jcpoa's nuclear restrictions on iran ; and ( 4 ) subjecting iran's development and testing of missiles to "severe sanctions. .

the president also called on u.s. allies to "take stronger steps with us to confront iran's other malign activities," defined as iran's support for terrorist groups , its development of missiles and their supply to iran's allies and proxies , iran's cyber threats , its human rights violations , and its threats to international shipping .

after the january 12 , 2018 , statement , the president replaced tillerson and national security adviser h.r .

mcmaster with officials who have been critics of the jcpoa .

secretary of state mike pompeo , sworn in on april 26 , 2018 , and national security adviser john bolton , who began his appointment on april 9 , 2018 , both , prior to assuming their current posts , argued in favor of military action against iran's nuclear program and for u.s. efforts to change iran's regime .

the may 8 announcement signaled that the administration seeks to encourage further efforts to address its concerns about the jcpoa and broader iran issues , possibly in a revised nuclear agreement .

according to the may 8 statement as we exit the iran deal , we will be working with our allies to find a real , comprehensive , and lasting solution to the iranian nuclear threat .

this will include efforts to eliminate the threat of iran's ballistic missile program , to stop its terrorist activities worldwide , and to block its menacing activity across the middle east.... iran's leaders will naturally say that they refuse to negotiate a new deal .

they refuse , and that's fine .

i'd probably say the same thing if i was in their position .

but the fact is , they are going to want to make a new and lasting deal , one that benefits all of iran and the iranian people .

the trump administration could have use d provisions of the jcpoa itself t o cease implementation of u.s. commitments under the agreement .

it opted not to do so , but instead to cease implementing the jcpoa by reimposing u.s. sanctions ( see below ) .

paragraph 36 of the jcpoa outlines a complex "dispute resolution mechanism" under which any party to the agreement can assert that another party is violating the accord and seek to resolve the issue .

the jcpoa mechanism outlines a process by which iran can resolve such a dispute but provides that , "if the complaining participant deems the issu e to constitute significant non performance , then that participant could treat the unresolved issue as grounds to cease performing its commitments under this jcpoa .... " the dispute resolution mechanism provides for the united states to be able to "snap back" all sanctions .

the united states is a veto - wielding permanent member of the u.n. security council , and the dispute resolution mechanism enables any veto - wielding member to block a u.n. security council resolution that would continue the lifting of u.n. sanctions .

the dispute resolution mechanism generally refers to the ability of any party to complain about potential nonperformance of only those issues that are directly addressed in the jcpoa .

a u.s. accusation of iranian noncompliance , in the absence of supporting evidence from the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) , would undoubtedly raise questions about the use of this mechanism to leave the agreement .

the inara law gives the administration options to cease u.s. implementation of the jcpoa .

however , the may 8 presidential statement on the jcpoa did not invoke inara provisions , but instead was based on presidential authority to reimpose those sanctions that were suspended .

separately from inara , the president has the option to reimpose sanctions by refusing to renew waivers of the various sanctions laws , reissuing executive orders that were revoked , or imposing new sanctions by executive order .

a refusal to certify iranian compliance under inara does not automatically cause the reimposition of any iran sanctions .

on may 8 , president trump announced that he was withdrawing from the jcpoa by using his authority to reimpose all sanctions that were suspended or revoked .

the sanctions , to go fully back into effect by no later than november 6 , 2018 ( 180 days from may 8 ) , are analyzed in significant detail in crs report rs20871 , iran sanctions , by [author name scrubbed] .

the may 8 statement was in advance of the may 12 expiration of the waiver in place for the fy2012 ndaa ( 120-day waiver period ) .

the waivers of the other 3 laws that were waived were scheduled to expire in mid - july 2018 ( 180-day / 6-month waiver periods ) .

prior to the may 8 announcement , the president had renewed the waivers when they have come up for renewal — most recently on january 12 , 2018 .

as part of the process of reimposing all iran sanctions , the administration will be restoring the "specially designated national" ( sdn ) designation to all of the entities that were "de - listed" to implement the jcpoa .

the entities that were de - listed are those that involve iran's civilian economy , such as banks , shipping firms , insurance entities , civilian manufacturers , and energy - related entities .

redesignating such entities resumes the application of some u.s. secondary sanctions to those entities , including provisions of the comprehensive iran sanctions , accountability , and divestment act of 2010 ( cisada , p.l .

111-195 ) or the iran freedom and counter - proliferation act ( ifca , p.l .

112-239 ) , that largely close the u.s. economy to third - country entities that conduct transactions with iran - related sdns .

the entities to be "re - listed" ( at the 180-day mark , which is november 4 , 2018 ) include those that are crucial to iran's economy , such as the central bank of iran , the islamic republic of iran shipping lines ( irisl ) , iran air , and the national iranian oil company ( nioc ) .

the possible implications of the u.s. decision to cease implementing the jcpoa are varied and extensive .

some possible implications are as follows: the european union countries as well as russia , china , and other major iran trading partners might attempt to shield from — or obtain exemptions from — any u.s. penalties for conducting transactions with iran that violate reimposed u.s. sanctions .

the eu might do so through such actions as blocking regulations or the world trade organization complaint process .

eu governments might also seek from the united states exemptions from penalties as noted , should a "critical mass" of major international firms remain in the iran market , it might be possible to sustain the jcpoa without u.s. participation .

it is possible that the jcpoa will collapse without u.s. participation .

major international firms , now that they face the threat of being virtually shut out of the large u.s. market , might exit iran and thereby cause iran's economy to deteriorate sharply .

iranian leaders might argue that iran is no longer benefitting from complying with the jcpoa and then resume those nuclear activities that are restricted under the accord .

iran could , for example , reinstall centrifuges , increase centrifuge production , or produce enriched uranium containing more than the jcpoa - permitted amount of uranium - 235 .

iran could also undertake new undeclared nuclear activities and / or resume its nuclear weapons program .

whether tehran would be able to do so undetected would depend on both the nature of the activities , whether and to what extent iran would disallow iaea monitoring , and the capabilities of various governments' intelligence services .

even if iran were to stop implementing its jcpoa obligations , the government would still be bound by its iaea comprehensive safeguards agreement and the nuclear nonproliferation treaty .

there is potential for iran to react to the u.s. pullout from the jcpoa in ways unrelated to the agreement .

iran could , for example , expand its support to regional armed factions and groups to enhance iran's regional reach .

iran could potentially conduct cyberattacks on u.s. or other targets .

iran could also increase the pace of its missile tests , or the ranges of those missiles , both of which would , according to u.s. officials , be inconsistent with resolution 2231 .

the u.s. pullout from the jcpoa might cause other regional countries , such as saudi arabia , to try to develop nuclear weapons to counter a possible nuclear - armed iran .

north korea , perceiving that the united states does not uphold its commitments , might become reluctant to negotiate a nuclear accord with the united states .

a resumption of iran's jcpoa - restricted nuclear activities could prompt israel or the united states to strike iran's nuclear facilities to prevent iran from having the option of developing a nuclear weapon .

in his may 8 , 2018 , statement , president trump said , "if the regime continues its nuclear aspirations , it will have bigger problems than it has ever had before" — a statement that could potentially be interpreted as including possible military action .

the reimposition of sanctions could cause iranian economic deterioration to the point where substantial unrest erupts .

iran experienced significant public demonstrations , mainly on economic grounds , in late 2017 and early 2018 , and a downturn in iran's economy could cause such unrest to reemerge .

contrary to the forecasts of many experts , there is potential for iran's economy to decline to the point where iran's leaders decide to accept a renegotiation of the jcpoa along the lines president trump has insisted upon .

alternately , severe economic deterioration could prompt iranian officials to negotiate restrictions on iran's missile program , such as a limitation on the ranges of such missiles .

