taiwan , which officially calls itself the republic of china ( roc ) , is an island democracy of 23 million people located across the taiwan strait from mainland china and north of the philippines .

since january 1 , 1979 , the u.s. relationship with taiwan has been unofficial , a consequence of the carter administration's decision to establish diplomatic relations with the people's republic of china ( prc ) and break formal diplomatic ties with self - ruled taiwan , over which the prc claims sovereignty .

at the time , both the prc and the roc insisted that the united states could have diplomatic relations with only one of them .

the taiwan relations act ( tra , p.l .

96-8 ; 22 u.s.c .

3301 et seq .

 ) , enacted on april 10 , 1979 , provides a legal basis for the unofficial u.s. - taiwan relationship .

it also includes commitments related to taiwan's security .

long - standing issues for u.s. policy , including for congress , include how to balance support for taiwan's democracy , prosperity , and security with the u.s. interest in peace and stability across the taiwan strait and the desire for constructive relations with the prc , whose global influence continues to grow .

congress has shown a strong interest in executive branch implementation of the taiwan relations act , including executive branch decisions related to arms sales to taiwan , which are called for by the taiwan relations act , and other security - related support for taiwan .

over the decades since 1979 , many members have pressed the executive branch to ease self - imposed u.s. restrictions on contacts with taiwan officials and representatives , which they consider to be inappropriate for a former treaty ally that has evolved to become a flourishing democracy , the united states' tenth - largest merchandise trading partner , and its second largest customer for foreign military sales .

congress has also shown a strong interest in helping taiwan break out of the international isolation imposed on it by the prc , by , for example , supporting taiwan's efforts to participate in international organizations .

before his inauguration , president donald j. trump had signaled that he might seek a closer relationship with taiwan than his immediate predecessors .

on december 2 , 2016 , then - president - elect trump spoke by telephone with taiwan's president tsai ing - wen , making him the first incoming or incumbent u.s. president known to speak with a taiwan president during the era of unofficial relations .

in a december 11 , 2016 , fox news interview , president - elect trump appeared to question the u.s. "one - china" policy , under which the united states recognizes the prc as "the sole legal government of china" and maintains only unofficial relations with taiwan , while also honoring commitments in the taiwan relations act .

in a february 9 , 2017 , telephone call with prc president xi jinping , however , president trump recommitted the united states to its "one - china" policy .

the united states has a strong interest in the relationship between taiwan and the prc .

with the landslide victory of president tsai and her traditionally china - skeptic democratic progressive party ( dpp ) in taiwan's january 2016 elections , taiwan's relations with the prc entered a new , less stable , era .

mindful of the views of her supporters , tsai has declined to embrace the position that taiwan and mainland china are both parts of "one china," although she has not refuted it either .

the prc has ratcheted up pressure on her to endorse the concept , which her predecessor from the kuomintang ( kmt ) party , ma ying - jeou , had accepted with caveats .

the prc has suspended communications mechanisms across the taiwan strait , established diplomatic relations with three countries that previously recognized taiwan , pressured host countries to force taiwan's unofficial representative offices to change their names , blocked taiwan's participation as an observer at international meetings , stepped up deployments of the prc military near taiwan , reduced the number of mainland chinese tourists visiting taiwan , demanded that other countries return taiwan citizens accused of crimes to the prc , rather than taiwan , and , for the first time , tried a taiwan activist on charges of attempted subversion of the prc state .

after taiwan's most significant diplomatic partner , panama , switched recognition to the prc in june 2017 , president tsai declared , "coercion and threats will not bring the two sides closer .

instead , they will drive our two peoples apart. .

she said that taiwan "will never surrender to such intimidation. .

taiwan was originally settled by austronesian peoples ( also called "aboriginals" ) about 6,000 years ago .

approximately 500,000 of their descendants live on taiwan today .

dutch traders arrived in 1623 and established a settlement on the southwest coast .

the dutch east india company administered most of taiwan until 1661 .

the spanish maintained settlements in northern taiwan from 1626 to 1642 .

migration from the chinese mainland to taiwan continued throughout .

in 1661 , zheng chenggong , also known as koxinga , led a force of more than 25,000 men from the chinese mainland to taiwan .

they expelled the dutch and established a civil administration in opposition to china's qing dynasty rulers .

zheng died in 1662 .

his son continued the struggle against the qing until his death in 1681 .

the qing established control over taiwan in 1683 .

in 1895 , at the end of the first sino - japanese war ( 1894-1895 ) , the qing dynasty ceded taiwan to japan in the treaty of shimonoseki .

taiwan remained a japanese colony for 50 years , until the end of world war ii .

the republic of china , which was founded on january 1 , 1912 on mainland china and led by the kuomintang party ( kmt ) , assumed control of taiwan on october 25 , 1945 , also known as "retrocession day. .

in february 1947 , residents of taiwan staged an uprising against kmt rule .

kmt forces put down the unrest by force , at the cost of as many as 28,000 lives , in what is now known as the february 28 or "2-28" incident .

in december 1949 , after losing a civil war on mainland china to the forces of the communist party of china ( cpc ) , the kmt moved the seat of the roc across the taiwan strait to taipei , taiwan .

an estimated 1.5 million to 2 million chinese fled with the kmt to taiwan .

families whose forebears arrived in taiwan with the kmt in the 1940s are known in taiwan today as "mainlanders. .

ethnic chinese whose forebears lived on the island before the arrival of the kmt are known as "taiwanese. .

on taiwan , the kmt administered decades of authoritarian one - party rule .

in may 1948 , while still based on mainland china , the roc national assembly adopted "temporary provisions effective during the period of national mobilization for suppression of the communist rebellion," suspending many of the freedoms outlined in the roc constitution .

the national assembly imposed martial law on taiwan on may 20 , 1949 .

martial law remained in effect for 38 years , until july 15 , 1987 , when president chiang ching - kuo lifted it in the last year of his life .

the move ended military censorship and the trial of citizens by military courts and opened the way for political liberalization .

taiwan legalized the formation of political parties in 1989 with passage of the law on the organization of civic groups .

the dpp , founded in september 1986 with strong support from native taiwanese , claims credit for a major role in "toppling the kmt's one - party dictatorship. .

the national assembly formally cancelled the "temporary provisions" in 1991 .

taiwan held its first direct election for the legislative yuan , taiwan's parliament , in december 1992 .

it held its first presidential election in 1996 .

chen shui - bian of the dpp was taiwan's first non - kmt president , serving two terms from 2000-2008 .

ma ying - jeou of the kmt served two terms from 2008 to 2016.taiwan presidents are limited to two four - year terms .

in january 2016 elections , the dpp won both the presidency and , for the first time , control of the legislature .

the dpp describes itself as "the party of democracy , freedom , human rights , and a strong taiwanese identity," the latter in contrast to the kmt , with its roots in mainland china .

long after the retreat to taiwan , the kmt continued to vow to re - take mainland china .

in 1971 , however , united nations general assembly resolution 2758 recognized the prc's representatives as "the only legitimate representatives of china to the united nations," and expelled "the representatives of chiang kai - shek," the roc's then - president .

 ( see " the united nations and its specialized agencies ," below. ) .

since canceling the related "temporary provisions" in 1991 , the roc government has claimed "effective jurisdiction" only over taiwan , the archipelagos of penghu , kinmen ( also known as quemoy ) , and mazu ( also known as matsu ) , and a number of smaller islands .

roc sovereignty claims also include disputed islands in the east china sea and south china sea .

nomenclature for taiwan is highly contested .

the government of taiwan officially calls itself the republic of china ( roc ) .

to distinguish the roc from the prc , official government websites in taiwan often use the name , "republic of china ( taiwan ) . .

taiwan's ruling party , the democratic progressive party , consider s the "republic of china" name to have been imposed on taiwan by the kmt , which assumed control of taiwan in 1945 , when the japanese gave up their colonial rule of the island .

a revision of the dpp' s party charter in 1991 called for the establishment of a "republic of taiwan. .

president tsai , however , regularly uses the name , "republic of china. .

the prc maintains that the roc ceased to exist when the prc was established .

beijing refers to the government of taiwan as the "taiwan authorities," and to the president of taiwan as "the leader of the taiwan authorities. .

beijing has effectively blocked taiwan from using the roc name internationally .

in the world trade organization , taiwan is the "separate customs territory of taiwan , penghu , kinmen and matsu," also known as "chinese taipei. .

in many other international fora , taiwan is "chinese taipei. .

u.s. executive branch policy is to use the name "taiwan" instead of "republic of china" or "republic of china on taiwan" ; to refer to taiwan as an "area" or "economy," rather than a "country" ; and to refer to the "taiwan authorities," rather than to the taiwan "government. .

the u.s. congress' most significant legislation related to taiwan , the 1979 taiwan relations act , refers to taiwan's government as , "the governing authorities on taiwan recognized by the united states as the republic of china prior to january 1 , 1979. .

multiple pieces of legislation since then , however , have referred to taiwan as the "republic of china" or the "republic of china on taiwan. .

in recent years , legislation has increasingly referred to taiwan simply as "taiwan. .

the legislative branch is not subject to executive branch rules on how to refer to taiwan .

taiwan's central government consists of the office of the president and five government branches , known as "yuan. .

the president serves as head of state and commander of the armed forces .

descriptions of the five yuan follow .

the executive yuan , headed by a premier appointed by the president , is taiwan's cabinet .

members include the vice premier , ministers , chairpersons of commissions , and ministers without portfolio .

t he legislative yuan is taiwan's unicameral parliament , with 113 members , all elected for four - year - terms with no term limits .

in the january 2016 election , the dpp won 68 seats , ending the kmt's previously unbroken control of the body .

the kmt won 35 seats , the new power party five seats , the people's first party ( pfp ) 3 seats , the non - partisan solidarity union ( npsu ) 1 seat , and an independent candidate who caucuses with the dpp 1 seat .

t he judicial yuan oversees taiwan's judiciary .

t he examination yuan administers taiwan's civil service system , including standards for employment , salaries , and benefits .

t he control yuan , which includes the national audit office , monitors government expenditures and investigates allegations of wrongdoing by public servants or agencies .

an ongoing debate in taiwan about constitutional reform includes discussion of whether taiwan should abolish the examination yuan and the control yuan , whose functions are often portrayed as relatively narrow .

taiwan's top leaders are listed below , with their family names preceding their given names .

president tsai ing - wen , 61 , took office on may 20 , 2016 .

in the january 2016 elections , she won 56% of the vote in a three - way race .

her inauguration marked the third transfer of presidential power from one party to another through a peaceful electoral process since taiwan began holding direct presidential elections in 1996 .

she serves concurrently as chair of the dpp .

president tsai was born in 1956 , trained as a lawyer in taiwan , earned a master's degree in law from cornell university in 1980 and a ph.d. in law from the london school of economics and political science in 1984 , with a specialization in international trade law and competition law .

she served as a law professor at universities in taiwan from 1984 to 2000 .

tsai began her public service career while still teaching law .

from 1992 to 2000 , she served as chief legal advisor to taiwan's negotiating team for its bid to join the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) , the predecessor organization to the world trade organization ( wto ) .

taiwan gained wto membership in 2002 .

from 1994 to 1998 , she also served as senior advisor to taiwan's mainland affairs council , and from 1999 to 2000 as a senior advisor to president lee teng - hui's national security council .

transitioning to full - time government service , tsai served as chair of taiwan's mainland affairs council under president chen shui - bian from 2000 to 2004 .

tsai joined the democratic progressive party ( dpp ) in 2004 and won election to taiwan's parliament , the legislative yuan , where she served from 2004 to 2006 .

she served as vice premier under president chen from 2006-2007 .

tsai first won election to be chair of the dpp from 2008 to 2012 , and regained the chairmanship in 2014 .

she is taiwan's first female president and also , according to her official biography , "the first female head of state in asia who was not born into a political family. .

her family ran an auto repair shop .

public support for tsai appears to have fallen off sharply since her inauguration .

in august 2017 , the taiwanese public opinion foundation's monthly public opinion poll found 29.8% of respondents approved of her leadership , the lowest percentage of her time in office so far .

respondents were particularly critical of her handling of judicial reforms and a major infrastructure development project .

vice president chen chien - jen , 66 , is a noted epidemiologist who received a doctor of science degree in epidemiology and human genetics from johns hopkins university in 1982 .

vice president chen's prior public service includes positions as minister of the national science council ( 2006-2008 ) , minister of health ( 2003-2005 ) , a post he took over at the height of the 2003 severe acute respiratory syndrome ( sars ) outbreak on the island , and vice president of academica sinica , taiwan's most prestigious research institution ( 2011-2016 ) .

in his official biography , chen describes himself as a devout catholic who has had audiences with pope john paul ii , pope benedict xvi , and pope francis .

chen is a political independent .

premier lai ching - te ( william lai ) , 57 , tra ined as a physician and holds a master's degree in public health from harvard university .

often described as a political rival of president tsai , h e served 11 years as a dpp legislator and a subsequent seven years , from 2010 to 2017 , as mayor of the city of tainan before tsai appointed him p remier on september 5 , 2017 .

questioned about the relationship between the two sides of the taiwan strait in his first appearance before the legislative yuan , lai set off a political firestorm by stating , "we are a sovereign independent country .

our name is the republic of china .

the two sides of the strait are not subordinate to each other .

that is the real relationship at present. .

lai is president tsai's second premier .

his predecessor , lin chuan , a political independent , resigned on september 4 , 2017 .

legislative yuan s peaker su jia - chyuan , 60 , is the first non - kmt member to serve as speaker of taiwan's parliament .

he was previously the dpp's secretary - general .

su served earlier in his career as chairman of taiwan's council of agriculture , minister of the interior , and as a legislator from pingtung county for two terms , from 1992 to 1997 .

the united states terminated diplomatic relations with taiwan on january 1 , 1979 , and established diplomatic relations with the prc .

at the time , both taiwan and the prc insisted that countries could only have relations with one of them , not both .

since the break in diplomatic relations , the united states has maintained a highly unusual relationship with taiwan , one that is extensive and vibrant but also officially "unofficial" and low profile .

with no precedent for such a relationship with a security partner and major trading partner , u.s. policymakers have long improvised rules for how the unofficial relationship with taiwan should differ from the official relationships that the united states maintains with diplomatic partners .

those rules , which are not negotiated with beijing , have evolved over time .

in its management of taiwan policy , the executive branch has sought to assure the prc that the united states is upholding its commitments to the prc and is not conferring "officiality" on the u.s. - taiwan relationship .

at the same time , it has sought to demonstrate to taiwan and taiwan's supporters in the united states that it is honoring the taiwan relations act , which includes security commitments related to taiwan .

the executive branch has also sought to portray itself as responsive to calls from members of congress and others for the united states to accord taiwan the dignity and respect that many believe taiwan deserves for its democratic and economic achievements .

a core goal of u.s. policy has been the preservation of peace and stability in the taiwan strait , seeing it as central to the security of asia .

to achieve that goal , the united states has long opposed unilateral changes in the status quo by either the prc or taiwan .

since 1998 , u.s. officials have explicitly stated that the united states does not support taiwan independence , though they do not say that the united states opposes it .

the united states has long had a strong interest in peace and stability in the taiwan strait , heightened by u.s. security commitments related to taiwan contained in the taiwan relations act .

after eight years of relative stability in cross - strait relations during the two presidential terms of the kmt's ma ying - jeou , from may 2008 to may 2016 , tensions are on the rise under president tsai .

the main point of disagreement between the two sides is the long - standing issue of taiwan's sovereignty , and specifically beijing's insistence that president tsai commit to the notion that taiwan and mainland china are parts of "one china," and president tsai's unwillingness to make such a commitment .

beijing has progressively increased pressure on president tsai , starting before she took office , including by seeking to further isolate taiwan internationally .

democracy in taiwan has evolved rapidly since then - president chiang ching - kuo lifted martial law in 1987 .

u.s. officials regularly laud taiwan's democratic achievements .

ait chairman james moriarty , speaking in july 2017 , stated that , "taiwan stands as a beacon of democracy in asia , offering a compelling example not only for asia , but for the world. .

the u.s. - taiwan relationship is sustained , in part , he said , by "the mutual respect for democracy , human rights , and civil liberties. .

in september 2017 , principal deputy assistant secretary of defense for asian and pacific security affairs david helvey described taiwan as , "a model for the region and the world with its market economy and its vibrant , prosperous , free , and orderly democratic society. .

he stated that "shared values are an essential , core component of the u.s. - taiwan relationship. .

the taiwan entry in the state department's country reports on human rights practices for 2016 states that taiwan's authorities "generally respected" freedom of speech and press .

the report noted that , "an independent press , an effective judiciary , and a functioning democratic political system combined to promote freedom of speech and press. .

discussing january 2016 presidential and legislative elections , the state department report stated that , "observers regarded the elections as free and fair , although there were allegations of vote buying by candidates and supporters of both major political parties. .

as a result of those elections , taiwan now has its first female president and women make up a record 38% of the legislature , the legislative yuan .

among the female legislators is taiwan's first immigrant lawmaker , who was born in cambodia .

in the state department's 2017 trafficking in persons report , taiwan maintained its tier one status for the eighth consecutive year .

the rating means that the state department judges taiwan to be fully meeting the trafficking victims protection act's minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking .

the report credited taiwan with "serious and sustained efforts," but noted that "in many cases judges sentenced traffickers to lenient penalties not proportionate to the crimes , weakening deterrence and undercutting efforts of police and prosecutors. .

freedom house , which describes itself as "an independent watchdog organization dedicated to the expansion of freedom and democracy around the world," rated taiwan "free" in its "freedom in the world 2017" rankings .

it was one of 87 polities in the world that freedom house rated "free. .

the organization gave taiwan an aggregate score of 91 points for political rights and civil liberties , with 100 being "most free" and 0 "least free. .

the organization judged china to be "not free," with an aggregate score of 15 .

in its entry on taiwan , freedom house stated , taiwan's vibrant and competitive democratic system has allowed three peaceful transfers of power between rival parties since 2000 , and protections for civil liberties are generally robust .

ongoing concerns include chinese efforts to influence policymaking and some sectors of the economy , foreign migrant workers' vulnerability to exploitation , and disputes over the land and housing rights of both ordinary citizens and taiwan's indigenous people .

taiwan has evolved to become a highly developed , dynamic , and globally competitive economy .

in 2016 , taiwan's gross domestic product ( gdp ) on a purchasing power parity ( ppp ) basis was $1.1 trillion , making it the world's 21 st - largest economy .

its per capita gdp on a ppp basis , a common measurement of living standards , was $48,100 , 15% greater than japan's and about 73% of the u.s. level .

in 2016 , taiwan was the world's 19 th - largest trading economy .

the world economic forum ( wef ) , a switzerland - based non - profit organization , in 2016 ranked taiwan as the 14 th most competitive economy out of 138 economies surveyed , based on an assessment of institutions , policies , and factors that determine the level of productivity of an economy and , in turn , its prosperity .

a 2017 survey by the importers and exporters association of taipei ( ieat ) assessed taiwan to have the 16 th most competitive trading economy out of 54 major countries surveyed , down from ninth in the 2011 survey .

 ( the united states ranked first. ) .

taiwan's gdp growth has been relatively slow in recent years , rising by 0.7% in 2015 and 1.5% in 2016 .

the economist intelligence unit ( eiu ) projects taiwan's real gdp will grow by 2.2% in 2017 ( see figure 2 ) .

taiwan's economy depends on international trade .

taiwan's exports of goods and services in 2016 totaled $331 billion , equivalent to 63% of its nominal gdp .

in 2015 , taiwan's global merchandise exports and imports fell by 10.6% and 16.6% , respectively , and each barely changed in 2016 .

however , during the first seven months of 2017 , taiwan's exports and imports grew by 12.5% and 14.9% respectively ( see figure 3 ) .

taiwan faces a number of economic challenges , including declining competitiveness for many industries , inability to participate in various regional trade agreements , stagnant wages , and lack of job opportunities for some college graduates .

while the island - wide rate of unemployment in taiwan is relatively low at 3.8% ( as of july 2017 ) , the rate for those aged 20-24 is 13% .

many young taiwan professionals have sought better - paying positions elsewhere , including in mainland china .

the taiwan government reports that more than 720,000 taiwan citizens are working outside the island , 58% of them in mainland china .

nearly three - quarters of those workers have college degrees or higher .

taiwan's share of global merchandise exports fell from a peak of 2.5% in 1993 to 1.6% in 2016 .

taiwan officials attribute this trend in part to the proliferation of bilateral and regional trade agreements ( rtas ) , especially among other major asia - pacific economies .

taiwan is currently not a party to these rtas , in large part because beijing pressures other countries not to sign trade deals with taiwan .

taiwanese officials have expressed concern that taiwan's exclusion from rtas could harm the long - term competitiveness of many taiwan industries , which could reduce trade flows and diminish economic growth .

taiwan has reportedly sought free trade agreements ( ftas ) and / or bilateral investment agreements ( bias ) with several countries , including the united states , japan , the united kingdom , the european union , and australia .

the january 2017 u.s. withdrawal from the tpp appears to have complicated taiwan's strategy for joining the tpp .

taiwan had sought u.s. support for its eventual membership .

a key taiwan government initiative aimed at boosting domestic innovation , economic growth , and job creation is the "five plus two" innovative industries program .

the first five industries are the "internet of things," smart machinery , biotechnology and pharmaceuticals , green energy technology , and national defense .

the "plus two" industries are high - value agriculture and the circular economy ( dealing with recycling and re - use of resources ) .

in addition , taiwan's executive yuan in may 2017 approved an eight - year $58 billion "forward - looking infrastructure development program" focused largely on investments in railways , aquatic environments , green energy , digital technology , and urban and rural facilities .

externally , taiwan's government has launched a new southbound policy , aimed at reducing economic dependence on the prc and "developing comprehensive , mutually beneficial relations with countries in the association of southeast asian nations and south asia , australia and new zealand" through economic and trade collaboration , people - to - people exchanges , resource sharing , and regional connectivity .

challenges for the program include pressure from the prc on southeast asia countries not to cooperate with taiwan , and taiwan's lack of representative offices in two target countries for the new southbound policy , cambodia and laos .

still , taiwan's strategy to diversify its economic ties may have led to positive results in the case of foreign tourism in taiwan .

in 2016 , the number of mainland chinese tourists to taiwan fell by 16.2% over the previous year , but an increase in tourists from elsewhere , mainly from asia , helped boost the overall level of inbound tourists to taiwan by 2.4% .

in the 2017 edition of its annual report on congress on "military and security developments involving the people's republic of china," the department of defense ( dod ) states that the prc's military , the people's liberation army ( pla ) , "continues to prepare for contingencies in the taiwan strait to deter and , if necessary , compel taiwan to abandon moves toward independence , or to unify taiwan with the mainland by force , while simultaneously deterring , delaying , or denying any third - party intervention on taiwan's behalf. .

the dod report outlines four possible courses of military action for the prc against taiwan: 1 ) blockades of maritime and air traffic to force taiwan's capitulation ; 2 ) a limited campaign of "disruptive , punitive , or lethal military actions" intended to "induce fear in taiwan and to degrade the taiwan population's confidence in their leaders" ; 3 ) missile attacks and precision air strikes "to degrade taiwan's defenses , neutralize taiwan's leadership , or break the taiwan people's resolve" ; and 4 ) an amphibious invasion , which dod says would entail "significant political and military risk" for the prc .

in its own 2017 quadrennial defense review , taiwan's ministry of national defense ( mnd ) judges that , "the pla now possesses the capability to impose a blockade on taiwan and conduct multi - dimensional operations to seize our offshore islands. .

dod notes that the balance of power across the taiwan strait continues to shift in the prc's favor .

in dod's words , taiwan faces the challenge of "declining defensive advantages. .

china's multi - decade military modernization effort has eroded or negated many of taiwan's historical advantages in deterring pla aggression , such as the pla's inability to project sufficient power across the taiwan strait , the taiwan military's technological superiority , and the inherent geographic advantages of island defense .

although taiwan is taking important steps to build its war reserve stocks , grow its defense - industrial base , improve joint operations and crisis response capabilities , and strengthen its officer and noncommissioned officer corps , these improvements only partially address taiwan's declining defensive advantages .

the dod report raises additional concerns about taiwan's planned shift to an all - volunteer force by 2019 , noting that , "the transition has led to additional personnel costs needed to attract and retain personnel under the volunteer system , diverting funds from foreign and indigenous acquisition programs , as well as near - term training and readiness. .

in its 2017 quadrennial defense review , taiwan's mnd itself identifies challenges it faces as including "constrain[t]s in defense financial resources and manpower , difficulty in acquiring advanced weapons systems , increasing threats to cyber security , decreasing defense awareness in the public , and increasing incidents of complex emergencies," such as typhoons and earthquakes .

on the issue of public awareness , the review notes , "due to ongoing economic , social , and cultural exchanges across the taiwan strait , many of our fellow citizens have gradually lost awareness that the two sides of the strait remain military adversaries , and that the risk of war still exists. .

ongoing prc military reforms may reduce the likelihood of military action against taiwan in the near term , according to two national defense university china experts .

they note that , " ... in the near term the pla is likely to face a degree of organization disruption as new lines of authority are clarified , new leaders take their positions , and rank - and - file personnel seek to understand where they stand in the new organizational chart and what their roles will be. .

the result , the experts write , is that , " ... the pla will be focused inward for the next few years , reducing its ability to fight a major war. .

over the longer - term , however , if the reforms succeed in improving china's ability to conduct joint operations in multiple domains , the experts predict that , "the result could be a better - trained joint force that will pose an even greater threat to taiwan's security. .

before president tsai took office , some commentators speculated that her party's strong taiwan identity and ambivalent attitude toward the mainland - originated republic of china might lead her to reevaluate taiwan's relationship to maritime features claimed in the name of the republic of china .

in her may 20 , 2016 , inauguration speech , tsai signaled no change in taiwan's sovereignty claims .

i was elected president in accordance with the constitution of the republic of china , thus it is my responsibility to safeguard the sovereignty and territory of the republic of china ; regarding problems arising in the east china sea and south china sea , we propose setting aside disputes so as to enable joint development .

the 115 th congress has passed one bill relating to taiwan .

the consolidated appropriation act , 2017 ( p.l .

115-31 ) provides $31,963,000 to carry out the taiwan relations act ( p.l .

96-8 ) .

multiple bills are pending .

the house and senate versions of the national defense authorization act for fy2018 ( h.r .

2810 ) would include provisions related to the executive branch's handling of arms sales requests from taiwan , reciprocal port calls , and , in the case of the senate amendment to h.r .

2810 , high - level military exchanges , taiwan's participation in multilateral military exercises , and u.s. support to taiwan to develop indigenous undersea warfare capabilities .

s. 1620 ( cotton ) would also include provisions related to high - level military exchanges , reciprocal port calls , and taiwan's participation in multilateral military exercises .

h.r .

2621 ( thornberry ) would express the sense of congress that the united states should continue to support humanitarian and disaster relief assistance to taiwan .

among other bills , the taiwan travel act ( s. 1051 ( rubio ) and its companion , h.r .

535 ( chabot ) ) would include a sense of congress provision stating that high - ranking u.s. and taiwanese government officials should travel to each other's countries for meetings .

s. 1051 would include an addition provision requiring the secretary of state to provide a report to congress on executive branch travel to taiwan .

h.r .

3320 ( yoho ) would amend the requirements in p.l .

108-235 for an annual report describing the u.s. plan to endorse and obtain observer status for taiwan at the annual meeting of the world health assembly .

h.res .

271 ( yoho ) would encourage the united states trade representative to commence negotiations for a bilateral free trade agreement .

appendix a .

the six assurances appearing before the house and senate to explain the august 17 , 1982 , u.s. - prc joint communiqué , then - assistant secretary of state john h. holdridge wove into his prepared statement a set of assurances that corresponded to what taiwan's ministry of foreign affairs said were assurances the reagan administration had offered privately to taiwan's president a month earlier .

a portion of holdridge's testimony is reproduced below .

crs has used bold text to highlight the statements in the testimony that later became known as the "the six assurances. .

excerpt of testimony of john h. holdridge , assistant secretary , bureau of east asian and pacific affairs , department of state , before the senate committee on foreign relations , august 17 , 1982 "turning to the [august 17 , 1982 u.s. - prc joint communiqué] itself , let me recapitulate and emphasize a few key features , and then i will be happy to take your questions..... fourth , we did not agree to set a date certain for ending arms sales to taiwan , and the statements of future u.s. arms sales policy embodied in the communiqué do not provide either a timeframe for the reduction of u.s. arms sales or for their termination .

the u.s. statements are fully consistent with the taiwan relations act and we will continue to make appropriate arms sales to taiwan based on our assessments of their defense needs .

"... as to our position on the resolution of the taiwan problem , we have consistently held that it is a matter to be worked out by the chinese themselves .

our sole and abiding concern is that any resolution be peaceful .

it follows that we see no mediation role for the united states nor will we attempt to exert pressure on taiwan to enter into negotiations with the prc .

"i would also like to call your attention to the fact that there has been no change in our longstanding position on the issue of sovereignty over taiwan .

the communiqué , paragraph 1 , in its opening paragraph simply cites that portion of the joint communiqué on the establishment of diplomatic relations between the united states and the prc in which the united states acknowledged the chinese position on this issue ; that is , that there is but one china , and taiwan is a part of china. .

it has been reported in the press that the chinese at one point suggested that the taiwan relations act be revised .

we have no plans to seek any such revisions .

"finally , in paragraph 9 the two sides agree to maintain contact and hold appropriate consultations on bilateral and international issues of common interest .

this should be read within the context of paragraphs 8 and 9 , which deal with the two sides' desire to advance their bilateral and strategic relations .

it should not be read to imply that we have agreed to engage in prior consultations with beijing on arms sales to taiwan .

"we hope and expect that this communiqué and the step forward which it represents in the resolution of united states - chinese differences on this issue will enhance the confidence of the people of taiwan , whose well - being and prosperity continue to be of the utmost importance to us..... " appendix b .

major arms sales to taiwa .

