base erosion and profit shifting ( beps ) are "tax - avoidance strategies that exploit gaps and mismatches in tax rules to artificially shift profits to low or no - tax locations. .

for example , countries worldwide can experience reduced tax collections through various mechanisms that firms use to shift corporate profits out of higher tax jurisdictions into lower tax jurisdictions and other mechanisms that reduce interest , dividend , and royalty taxes .

the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) has been engaged in an ongoing project to reduce beps .

in october 2015 , the oecd published its final list of 15 beps action items to equip governments with measures to address tax avoidance ( although some updated or additional material has been provided ) .

some of these proposals can be ( or have been ) implemented in the united states and in other countries through administrative actions , and others would require legislative action .

some would require modifications of international tax treaties .

u.s. multinational firms will be affected not only by actions taken by the united states but also by actions undertaken by other countries .

the oecd framework was adopted by the g - 20 finance ministers in february 2016 .

all oecd and g - 20 countries agreed to implement four minimum beps standards: 1 .

action 5 , countering harmful tax practices ( mostly aimed at patent boxes ) ; 2 .

action 6 , preventing treaty abuse ( largely about arranging payments to flow through countries with treaties that reduce withholding taxes on dividends and other passive payments ) ; 3 .

action 13 , country - by - country ( cbc ) reporting ; and 4 .

action 14 , increasing the effectiveness of dispute resolution .

the beps project presents opportunities and concerns .

one opportunity is that the united states could gain from more multinational cooperation to deal with profit shifting , which has been estimated to cause a loss in revenues of billions of dollars .

the beps action items address the main methods of achieving profit shifting , including action 4 ( excessive interest deductions in high - tax countries ) and actions 8-10 ( transfer pricing , that is , the price of purchasing and selling between related companies , in which pricing of intangibles is thought to be the major method used to accomplish profit shifting ) .

in contrast , the united states risks losing some revenue if other countries increase their taxation of u.s. firms , even if that income was previously in low - tax jurisdictions , because the united states has a worldwide tax system that taxes income of foreign subsidiaries when repatriated but provides a foreign tax credit ( i.e. , credits for foreign taxes paid offset u.s. tax on foreign source income ) .

concerns have been expressed , in congressional hearings and in articles , about claims to u.s. multinationals' income tax bases by other countries that may be viewed as inappropriate .

the senate finance committee requested that the government accountability office ( gao ) study beps actions ; gao's study focused on transfer pricing guidance and documentation , including cbc reporting .

the concern is that cbc reporting , which will share data with other countries about the activities of u.s. multinational firms , may be used by countries to effectively implement a formula - based approach to taxation .

the united states has adopted cbc reporting for 2017 ( a year behind most countries ) , even though all of its sharing agreements are bilateral , with a country - by - country agreement , whereas most countries signed a multilateral agreement .

companies are also concerned about confidentiality , and there have been proposals to make cbc reports public .

the united states will share these data only through confidential bilateral agreements .

in addition , some are concerned about the permanent establishment ( which generally determines whether a country has any right to tax any profits under an income tax ) issues in action item 7 and the use of an expanded permanent establishment treatment to allow foreign taxation of u.s. firms' income that is not appropriately allocated to the foreign sources .

some concerns about capturing revenues by other countries have been heightened by the european union's ( eu's ) actions against several u.s. multinational corporations ( among them apple in ireland ) calling for back tax payments and by the united kingdom's ( uk's ) and australia's enactments of diverted profits taxes ( sometimes referred to as the "google tax" ) , which addresses profits of firms without permanent establishments , as well as the allocation of profits for firms with permanent establishments .

at the same time , a uniform set of standards and reporting requirements may be beneficial to u.s. multinationals , as many countries might otherwise have enacted unilateral changes in rules and reporting standards .

in particular , the uniform cbc reporting may be beneficial in that it forestalled unilateral enactment of reporting requirements that vary from country to country and that may have been more burdensome to firms than the uniform reporting rules .

although the united states has adopted the four minimum standards , other countries are in the process of adopting additional standards in various action items .

the oecd's recent progress report highlighted increased transparency in rules , reduced opportunities for treaty abuse , curtailment of harmful tax practices via patent boxes , eliminating high returns to "cash boxes" addressed in the transfer pricing action item , and cbc reporting .

europe has a general constraint in which eu rules prohibit laws that discriminate against cross - border restrictions on trade .

such a restriction is what beps measures are sometimes targeting , as in the controlled foreign corporation , or cfc , rules ( action 3 ) , which are designed to prevent artificial shifting of income into low - tax foreign subsidiaries , and limitations of benefits ( lob ) in the multilateral instrument ( action 15 ) .

many of the action items may not be relevant to certain countries that already have achieved the standards ( such as cfc rules or limits on interest deductions ) ; also , many actions require legislative changes that may be difficult or time consuming .

for the united states , proposed actions in action 1 ( the digital economy ) or most provisions under action 5 ( harmful tax practices ) would not be relevant because they apply to value added taxes ( or vats ) or special regimes ( such as patent boxes ) that do not exist in the united states .

many of the other standards are already partly or fully captured in u.s. law and practice , even though in some cases u.s. practices are at odds with the beps standards .

notably , although the united states has strong cfc rules , its check - the - box and temporary look - through rules conflict with beps standards .

its restrictions on interest deductions are weaker than those suggested by beps .

an important approach used by multinational corporations , cost - sharing arrangements , also appears incompatible with the transfer pricing guidelines .

these issues are discussed in further detail below .

this report first reviews the basics of international tax rules .

it then discusses the various action items organized into action item 1 , which relates to the digital economy and proposes standards only with respect to vats ; action items 2-5 , 7 , and 8-10 , items related primarily to profit shifting ; action item 5 , which relates to harmful tax practices ; action item 6 , regarding tax treaties ; and action items 11-15 , which are primarily administrative in nature .

action 1 focuses on the general issue of the effects of the digital economy .

it discusses the broad set of consequences of a digital economy that may exacerbate base erosion and profit shifting issues or even render existing rules obsolete .

the discussion deals with three types of taxes: ( 1 ) corporate profits taxes ; ( 2 ) withholding taxes on income such as dividends , interest , and royalties ( in this case , royalties ) ; and ( 3 ) the value added tax ( vat ) .

standards , however , are provided only with respect to the vat .

the digital economy is an economy based on digital technologies .

it refers to numerous online activities , such as advertising , broadcasting and media , production monitoring , retailing , and tracking , as well as financial services , remote education and health care diagnosis and records , software , and cloud computing .

digital activity also involves gathering customer data and converting it into revenue ( such as through sales of advertising ) and user - generated content .

these activities are characterized by mobility , reliance on intangible assets , network effects that may lead to oligopoly or monopoly , and in some cases low barriers to entry that lead to volatility .

the oecd analysis also raises questions of whether income from certain activities , such as cloud computing , should be considered profit or royalties .

the digital economy issues are particularly important to u.s. multinationals because u.s. firms are the major firms in this industry .

with many aspects of the digital economy rendering the physical presence rules for nexus irrelevant , this discussion focuses on new approaches for establishing nexus as well as tightening ( but not abandoning ) physical presence ( addressed in the permanent establishment standards under action item 7 ) .

the oecd considered , but abandoned , using economic presence rather than physical presence as the standard nexus test .

economic presence might be measured by sales , having a local domain name or website , having a local payment option , the volume of data collected , contract conclusion with customers , and monthly active users .

action item 1 also considered allocating income through fractional apportionment , and a modified deemed profit ratio on presumed expenses .

in addition , the action item discussed a withholding tax on digital transaction payments and an equalization levy ( an excise tax , for example , on gross sales ) .

none of these approaches were provided as a standard , although countries are free to adopt such an approach if needed to address beps issues .

it can be argued that these particular standards are inconsistent with the concept of where profit accrues , meaning that the profit from remote sales or digital sales should accrue to the source of the investment and ownership of the asset , and not be based on the location of customers ( just as exports of goods into a foreign market would not trigger profits tax ) .

a physical presence in a country would require some amount of capital assets ( such as a building or equipment ) , but a digital presence would not .

the adoption of economic rather than physical presence as a basis for nexus could have consequences for u.s. firms in that other countries might increase taxes imposed , which might ultimately be credited by the united states .

standards were not provided specific to the digital economy with respect to profits taxes and passive income from capital .

related standards were subsumed in other actions , such as the definition of permanent establishment ( action 7 ) , in which proposals were made to limit exceptions , and cfc rules ( action 3 ) , in which proposals were made to ensure current taxation of income in the digital economy to the ultimate parent company , as well as other action items .

action 1 did discuss options to ensure that the digital enterprises that provide business - to - customer direct sales be subject to the vat by requiring compliance by the nonresident remote sellers .

this issue is not directly relevant to the united states , although u.s. firms could be affected by other countries' vat regimes .

the following actions relate primarily to reducing profit shifting by multinationals .

this action item is not particularly relevant to u.s. rules , as it primarily addresses preferential regimes , largely focused on patent boxes , or special regimes that provide for lower tax rates for income from certain types of innovations or intellectual property ( ip ) .

the united states does not have a patent or innovation box , although proposals have been made for adopting one ; a proposal by representatives boustany and neal would appear to be consistent with oecd requirements in most respects .

a number of other countries do have preferential regimes , although they vary substantially .

although this provision would not affect u.s. rules ( at least not currently ) , it could have economic effects that might be of concern .

notably , while it would reduce the likelihood of artificial profit shifting due to preferential regimes , it might increase the attractiveness of locating research abroad rather than in the united states .

this action item is also concerned with transparency in certain tax rules , which would affect the united states , largely because the item covers advance pricing arrangements ( apas ) that agree in advance to transfer prices .

the oecd has had a long history of examining harmful tax practices , and this action item continues that examination and makes recommendations .

the treaty shopping item has three major elements: 1. an inclusion of a statement in tax treaties that the parties intend to avoid creating an opportunity for no or reduced taxation through tax evasion , including treaty shopping ; 2. a limitation on benefits ( lob ) , such as that in u.s. treaties , aimed at treaty shopping ; and 3. a more general anti - abuse rule based on a principal purpose test ( ppt ) of transactions .

if one of the principal purposes is to obtain treaty benefits , these benefits would be denied unless in accordance with the purpose of the treaty .

the action item proposes flexibility and allows implementation through a combined lob and ppt rule , a ppt rule alone , or an lob rule with a mechanism to deal with any remaining conduit financing arrangements not already dealt with in the treaty .

the lob rules have specific criteria and are more certain , whereas the ppt rule is a more flexible rule that deals with a broader range of abuses but with less certainty .

the statement of intent to avoid opportunities through tax evasion is a minimum provision .

the need for flexibility reflects the presence of restrictions within the eu on withholding taxes on member states , the existence of domestic law anti - abuse rules in some states , or a general economic substance rule .

the united states does not plan to include ppt and already has lob rules .

this section addresses the remaining five provisions ( 11-15 ) : monitoring beps , mandatory disclosure , country - by - country ( cbc ) reporting , dispute resolution , and a multilateral instrument to incorporate beps into bilateral tax treaties .

action 11 provides a review of indicators , evidence , and data needs to monitor beps .

it notes that revenue losses due to beps are estimated at between 4% and 10% of global corporate income tax revenues ( $100 billion to $240 billion annually ) at 2014 levels .

it summarizes beps indicators , including ( 1 ) profit rates of affiliates in low - tax countries are higher than the multinational firms' worldwide profit ; ( 2 ) effective tax rates of large multinationals are lower ( by 4 to 8.5 percentage points ) than those of similar domestic firms ; ( 3 ) foreign direct investment is increasingly concentrated in countries with high ratios of investment to gross domestic product ( gdp ) ; ( 4 ) the separation of taxable profits from the location of value - creating activities is especially clear with intangibles and has grown ( eg , royalties compared with r&d spending are six times higher in low - tax countries than on average and have increased three - fold between 2009 and 2012 ) ; and ( 5 ) debt is more concentrated among affiliates in high - tax countries ( eg , ratios are three times higher than worldwide firm ratios ) .

the action item also notes that measuring the magnitude of beps is constrained by existing data limitations .

it provides suggestions to improve the analysis of existing data and uses new data provided under actions 5 , 13 , and 12 .

it proposes that the oecd work with governments to report and analyze more corporate statistics and notes that cbc data analysis has the potential to improve beps economic analysis .

action 11 goes on to describe existing data sources , including private and government entities ( i.e. , both public and private tax return data ) .

it has an extensive review of empirical studies , including the effect of tax rates on profit shifting .

it notes that there is a difference between the effect of unilateral policy changes and internationally coordinated ones .

action 11 discusses the need for additional analysis on the pervasiveness of beps ( whether profit shifting is due to a small group of firms or most firms ) ; differences in profitability of multinational and domestic firms that make comparisons difficult ; factors contributing to group and affiliate profitability ; other tax factors in location decisions ; effects of uncertainty , reputation and compliance costs , and disclosures ; the mobility of capital and labor ; and governments' strategic behavior .

two appendices discuss evidence of tax planning ( eg , profit rates and patent locations ) and provide a toolkit for estimating beps effects .

action 11 encourages publication of new corporate tax statistics on a consistent basis across countries and also suggests that governments improve public reporting of business tax revenue statistics , especially for multinational firms .

although the focus of action 11 is worldwide , u.s. multinational firms are likely responsible for a significant share of the profit shifting from the united states to low - tax countries .

estimates suggest that , for 2012 , revenue losses amounted to 5% - 19% of u.s. corporate profits taxes , or $20 billion to $76 billion .

another indicator of profit shifting out of the united states is the share of taxable income as a ratio of gdp , made possible by tax data on the distribution of profits of foreign affiliates by country that is available in the united states , but not in general in other countries .

while profits of u.s. - controlled foreign corporations as a share of gdp in the remaining six of the g - 7 countries was 0.6% in 2004 , rising to 0.7% in 2010 , large tax havens showed much higher ratios and , in some cases pronounced growth ( eg , the share in ireland rose from 7.6% to 41.9% ) .

small tax havens also showed high - growth rates ( eg , the share rose from 546.7% to 2,065.6% in the cayman islands ) .

the action item proposes mandatory disclosure rules for aggressive or abusive transactions and structures .

the idea behind this proposal is to provide tax authorities with early information and to act as a deterrent .

disclosure would also place pressure on tax avoidance markets , and there would be a more limited opportunity to intervene .

current mandatory disclosure regimes are of two basic types .

a transaction - based approach is used in the united states , which identifies schemes and then requires disclosure from taxpayers who benefit and persons ( such as promoters ) who provide assistance .

this approach requires reporting from both taxpayers and promoters .

a promoter - based approach is used in the united kingdom and ireland and places the primary disclosure obligation on the promoter .

the transaction - based approach tends to rely on specific hallmarks , whereas the promoter - based approach covers generic ones , for example , in which tax benefits are one of the main benefits .

in various cases ( eg , when the promoter is offshore and there are practical difficulties in compliance ) , the disclosure obligation must fall on the taxpayer .

a country may introduce a dual reporting requirement or one that falls primarily on the promoter , but the recommendation for offshore promoters , and for no promoter or cases where the promoter asserts legal privilege , is that the obligation should fall on the taxpayer .

the action also discusses defining the scope of a disclosure regime: single step or multistep .

a single - step regime would broadly cover tax benefits even if the tax benefit is not identified as avoidance or the main benefit .

this approach may generate a large number of disclosures .

a multistep regime would define a threshold condition ( such as cases in which the tax benefit is the main benefit ) , although this approach might not work well for international transactions .

a dollar de minimis is also an option .

in addition , the action discusses generic hallmarks , such as confidentiality , containing a premium fee or contingent fee , contractual protection ( eg , insurance against failure ) , and a standardized - tax product , and specific hallmarks , such as the generation of losses , common to a number of countries .

the united states also includes listed transactions ( used before ) , transactions of interest ( with potential ) , and generating book - tax differences .

other countries have hallmarks such as leasing transactions , schemes to convert salary into nontaxed compensation , schemes involving entities in low - tax jurisdictions , schemes with hybrid instruments , converting income into capital or gifts , differences used in the united states .

the action suggests a mix of generic and specific hallmarks .

the action recommends disclosure at the date of availability in which the promoter discloses and at implementation when the taxpayer discloses .

it also discusses penalties and some other procedural matters .

this action item also has a number of recommendations for international tax schemes , including removal of the threshold condition , hallmarks that focus on beps risks , a broad definition , and to make inquiries as to whether the arrangement will be covered by disclosure requirements .

it encourages information exchange and , in particular , recommends using the joint international tax shelter information and collaboration ( jitsic ) network .

existing u.s. law has disclosure provisions , and there is no indication of any action in this area .

this action item provides for a standardized approach to providing information to document multinationals' activities .

the first is the provision of a master file that contains information on operations and transfer prices and is available to all tax administrations .

the second is detailed transfer pricing information in a local file for each country that identifies related - party transactions and transfer pricing analyses .

the third is a cbc report that will provide , for each jurisdiction , information on revenue , profit , taxes paid , employees , capital , retained earnings , and tangible assets .

it also requires information on the business activities of each entity in the jurisdiction .

the first two reports will be provided directly to local tax administrations , and the cbc report will be filed in the parent's jurisdictions and shared through automatic exchange of information .

the reports apply to firms with revenue of 750 million euros or more .

reporting will begin in 2018 for the 2016 tax year .

the action item provides recommendations for the design including penalties , focuses on international tax schemes , and proposes information sharing .

the treasury has implemented cbc reporting but is not requiring the master or local file to be submitted .

the gao study indicated that treasury officials believed they already have enough information to enforce transfer pricing .

although many countries have signed multilateral agreements , the united states is implementing bilateral agreements in 2017 .

the united states has opted for bilateral treaties because of concerns about confidentiality and inappropriate use .

as of june 12 , 2017 , bilateral agreements have been signed with iceland , new zealand , norway , and the netherlands , with more in the pipeline .

companies have expressed a concern that if agreements are not finalized by mid - 2018 , international affiliates would be required to provide local reporting .

the gao study reported stakeholder ( representing companies ) concerns about several issues .

one was that the information in the reports could be misused and lead , effectively , to formulary apportionment , where profits are based on the share of business factors .

such a move could lead to double taxation and audit disputes .

gao also discussed administrative costs for the irs , indicating they would be similar to other regulatory changes of this nature , and compliance costs for firms .

the oecd had indicated the cbc reporting could reduce compliance costs by standardizing reporting , but stakeholders believed compliance costs would be increased both because of requirements to collect new information and increased audits and disputes .

they indicated that most costs for u.s. multinationals would be the cbc reporting rather than the reports filed with local authorities .

the action item seeks to improve the effectiveness of the mutual agreement procedure ( map ) to provide for more certainty and limit double taxation .

it has a minimum standard that includes three elements for countries: ensure treaty obligations for map are implemented and cases resolved in a timely manner , ensure that administrative processes promote the prevention and timely resolution , and ensure access to the procedure .

peer reviews are being conducted on each country's practices .

some countries committed to binding arbitration .

action 14 is consistent with the united states' position , and u.s. tax treaties call for mandatory binding arbitration , although treaties with japan , spain , and switzerland that would require binding arbitration have been delayed in the senate for unrelated reasons with no definite prospects for approval .

some of the developing countries have been reluctant to adopt binding arbitration as a part of dispute resolution because of fears of giving up sovereignty over tax matters .

one commentator has suggested that the minimum standards in action 14 are not meaningful because nearly all treaties already have map rules .

the multilateral instrument ( mli ) was a document designed to modify bilateral tax treaties to quickly implement the beps measure .

this agreement has been signed by almost 70 countries , although the united states has not , and has not indicated any intention to sign .

to accommodate differences across countries as to what elements of the beps standards are to be adopted , the mli was made very flexible , and some see that flexibility weakening its value .

