the rohingya — a predominately sunni muslim minority of northern rakhine state in burma ( myanmar ) — are facing several concurrent crises precipitated by the reported attack on august 25 , 2017 , on burmese security facilities near the border with bangladesh .

the attacks , allegedly conducted by a relatively new and little known rohingya nationalist group , the arakan rohingya salvation army ( arsa ) , and an ensuing "clearance operation" conducted by burma's security forces have resulted in the rapid displacement of more than 600,000 rohingya into makeshift camps in eastern bangladesh , and the internal displacement of an unknown number of people within rakhine state .

these events have created two immediate humanitarian crises in bangladesh and in rakhine state .

in addition , long - standing policies and attitudes in burma regarding the rohingya are creating major challenges to the possibility of their voluntary return .

starting in the 1960s under burma's military juntas and continuing until today under a mixed civilian / military government , burma's laws and policies have deprived most of the rohingya of many of their human rights , including their citizenship .

according to some observers , it is likely that many of the displaced rohingya will not wish to return to burma unless their safety can be secured , the discriminatory laws and policies are changed , and their human rights restored .

if conditions in burma are not suitable for repatriation , the international community may need to consider other assistance for the rohingya , including longer - term accommodation in camps in bangladesh and exploring local integration and resettlement options .

allegations of organized , systematic , and severe human rights abuses by burmese security personnel , arsa and its supporters , and local rakhine "vigilantes" have given rise to claims of possible crimes against humanity , ethnic cleansing , or genocide taking place in rakhine state .

beyond ensuring that such violence stops , the allegations of human rights abuse present burma and the rest of the world , including the united states , with the challenge of adequately investigating and documenting the possible human rights abuses , and if necessary , establishing suitable measures for accountability of those found responsible .

the ongoing violence in rakhine state reportedly is another factor contributing to the reluctance of many rohingya to return to burma .

the displacement of the rohingya , combined with the alleged violence of the burmese security force's clearance operation , has also created an environment that could give rise to the radicalization of portions of both the rohingya and predominately buddhist rakhine population .

some rohingya may join the ranks of arsa or become supporters of other more militant extremist organizations .

islamist militant groups , in particular , may attempt to recruit rohingya .

in addition , some rakhine may enlist with the extant rakhine - based ethnic armed organizations ( eaos ) or form local militias to defend themselves from the perceived arsa threat .

the trump administration has responded to the crises by making gradual and limited changes to u.s. policy .

the initial response from the state department was to denounce the alleged arsa attacks , and call upon the burmese government and military to exercise restraint in responding to the attacks .

as the number of displaced persons increased , the trump administration provided additional funding for humanitarian assistance , but refrained from commenting on the allegations of serious human rights abuses .

more recently , the state department announced new restrictions on relations with the burmese military , but indicated that its focus was on solving problems , not punishing people .

congress may choose to consider what actions , if any , the united states should take in response to these various crises and challenges .

among the issues the rohingya crises raise are the following: humanitarian policies and issues : how much humanitarian assistance is needed in bangladesh and in rakhine state , and for how long ? .

what role should the united states play in providing that assistance ? .

how should international assistance be coordinated ? .

repatriation / resettlement issues : what are the prospects for safe and voluntary repatriation of the displaced rohingya ? .

what arrangements should be made for the resettlement of those who do not wish to return to burma , and what role should the united states play in such a resettlement program ? .

issues of discrimination in burma : how important is rectifying burma's discriminatory laws and policies for the voluntary repatriation of the rohingya and reconciliation between the rakhine and rohingya ? .

what measures should the united states take to encourage or pressure the burmese government to repeal or amend discriminatory laws and policies ? .

human rights abuse issues : what efforts should be made to investigate and document the alleged human rights abuses , and what role should the united states play in supporting or conducting such efforts ? .

what are the options for securing accountability for those people or organizations determined to be responsible for human rights abuses ? .

issues regarding the risk of radicalization : how serious is the risk of radicalization of rakhine or rohingya , or their recruitment by existing eaos or islamist militant groups ? .

what measures , if any , should the united states take to assist the bangladesh government and the burmese government to counteract efforts to radicalize members of either ethnic community ? .

does the treatment of the rohingya minority pose a radicalization risk for communities elsewhere in the region ? .

issues r elated to p otential d estabilization of the r egion : will the displaced rohingya in bangladesh raise domestic political tensions related to islamist agendas for bangladesh ? .

will this have an impact on bangladesh domestic politics and bangladesh - burma relations ? .

issues for u.s. p olicy t oward burma : do the events in rakhine state warrant a rethink or adjustment in current u.s. policy toward burma ? .

should some of the previously waived u.s. sanctions on burma be reinstated to encourage or promote changes in the policies and behavior of the burmese government or the burmese military ? .

what forms of assistance should the united states provide to the bangladesh government and the burmese government to respond to the various crises coming out of the events in rakhine state ? .

how will the issue affect u.s. geopolitical interests , given china's substantial influence in burma ? .

on november 2 , 2017 , companion bills were introduced in the house of representatives and the senate that offer an approach to addressing the rohingya crises , as well as a reformulation of u.s. policy toward burma .

the burma unified through rigorous military accountability act of 2017 ( burma act ; h.r .

4223 ) and the burma human rights and freedom act of 2017 ( s. 2060 ) would impose sanctions on selected burmese military leaders , limit security and military assistance , and place conditions on multilateral assistance until the burmese government and military meet certain criteria to address the various crises in rakhine state .

the burma human rights and freedom act of 2017 would also appropriate $104 million for humanitarian assistance to "the victims of the burmese military's ethnic cleansing campaign targeting rohingya in rakhine state. .

on august 25 , 2017 , arsa members and local rohingya supporters reportedly attacked 30 security facilities , including border outposts and one military base , killing over a dozen burmese security personnel .

the burmese military , or tatmadaw , almost immediately began a "clearance operation," deploying more than 70 battalions , or an estimated 30,000-35,000 soldiers , into rakhine state .

according to state counsellor aung san suu kyi , the clearance operation ended on september 5 , 2017 .

the "clearance operation" in the townships of buthidaung , maungdaw , and rathedaung in northern rakhine state was a major factor leading to the displacement of more than 600,000 rohingya into bangladesh , as well as the internal displacement of an unknown number of rakhine , rohingya , hindu , magyi , mro , and thet in rakhine state .

the current crisis in rakhine state can be traced further back to october 10 , 2016 , when arsa allegedly attacked three border outposts , killing nine police officers .

the tatmadaw responded by initiating a similar "clearance operation" that resulted in approximately 87,000 rohingya crossing into bangladesh , and the internal displacement of an unknown number of rohingya into temporary camps .

rakhine state ( also known as arakan state ) is located in western burma , east of the bay of bengal and on the border with bangladesh .

the state is 14,200 square miles in size ( slightly larger than the state of maryland ) , with an estimated population ( pre - crises ) of 3.2 million .

the largest ethnic group in rakhine state is the rakhine ( or arakan ) , a predominately theravada buddhist community .

the next largest ethnic group is the rohingya , a predominately sunni muslim community .

other ethnic groups living in rakhine state include bamar , chin , daingnet , hindu , kamar ( also sunni muslims ) , magyi , mro , and thet .

various sources estimate the pre - crises rohingya population of rakhine state at 1.0 million - 1.1 million ; the ethnic rakhine population is thought to be about 2 million .

most of the rohingya live in the northern rakhine townships of buthidaung , maungdaw , and rathedaung ; the rakhine are the majority population in central and southern rakhine state .

according to the rohingya , their ancestors have lived in what is now northern rakhine state since at least the 9 th century .

prior to the military coup of 1962 , the rohingya were burmese citizens , and were elected to burma's parliament , served in the government , and were officers in the military .

after the coup , burma's military leaders began a systematic policy of discrimination against the rohingya , and carried out military campaigns to drive the rohingya out of burma .

for example , in 1978 , under general ne win , the burmese military swept across northern rakhine state as part of operation dragon king , pushing an estimated 200,000-250,000 rohingya into bangladesh .

in 1982 , burma's military junta promulgated the citizenship law that effectively stripped the rohingya of their citizenship .

the 1982 citizenship law remains in effect .

the burmese military , the government led by aung san suu kyi , as well as a majority of burma's population — including the rakhine — maintain that most of the rohingya are illegal immigrants from bangladesh , and should therefore be identified as "bengali. .

according to this narrative , the influx of "bengalis" into burma began during the period of british rule , when burma was part of the british raj , and continued after burma's independence in 1948 , as "bengalis" freely moved across the porous border with then - east pakistan , now bangladesh .

relations in rakhine state between the rakhine majority and the rohingya minority have vacillated between periods of relatively peaceful coexistence and times of violent confrontation .

predominately rakhine and rohingya villages often exist in close proximity , with regular social and economic interaction .

interethnic violence typically arises , however , when members of one ethnic group allegedly mistreat members of the other ethnic group .

such an event precipitated the outbreak of interethnic violence in june to october 2012 that resulted in dozens of deaths , approximately 200,000 rohingya fleeing to bangladesh , and another 120,000 rohingya becoming internally displaced persons ( idps ) living in camps in rakhine state .

unhcr and other humanitarian organizations report that 94% of the more than 600,000 displaced people in bangladesh are rohingya , with a smaller number of ethnic hindu and rakhine known to be among them .

an estimated 54% of the displaced are children and 4% are elderly .

the remaining 42% are adult refugees , roughly 52% of whom are women .

concerns have been raised about the status and whereabouts of "missing men" ( mostly men of military age ) who are reportedly not among those fleeing the country .

as of early november 2017 , the estimated range of the total number of displaced ( mostly rohingya ) in bangladesh ( including from this crisis and from previous waves of displacement during the past five years ) is estimated at between 700,000 to just over 900,000 .

u.n. secretary general antónio guterres stated , "the situation has spiraled into the world's fastest - developing refugee emergency and a humanitarian and human rights nightmare. .

precise figures on the overall number of people displaced — either within burma's rakhine state or across the border in bangladesh — are not available because the situation remains fluid , and access to affected areas of northern rakhine state is limited .

while the pace at which newly displaced persons are entering bangladesh varies , experts say that at one time up to 20,000 people attempted to cross the border each day .

their ability to enter bangladesh is reportedly being hampered by burmese security forces building fencing and allegedly placing landmines along the border .

lack of transport and cost also limit people's ability to cross the border .

bangladesh has so far kept its borders open .

neither bangladesh nor burma are states parties to the 1951 convention relating to the status of refugees or its 1967 protocol .

although accurate figures are not available , it is estimated that between 700,000 to just over 900,000 displaced ( mostly rohingya ) are currently in camps in bangladesh .

thousands of rohingya are displaced in other nations in south and southeast asia , including india , malaysia , and thailand .

potentially more than 1 million rohingya may wish to return to northern rakhine state , depending on the conditions set for their return , as well as the likely situation they would face once they do so .

if conditions are not acceptable and / or inadequate measures are taken for the security of the returnees , then it is possible that many of the displaced rohingya would not voluntarily return to burma , and other provisions would need to be made .

aung san suu kyi has indicated that her government would like the repatriation to be managed in accordance with a 1992 agreement between bangladesh and burma negotiated following a previous case of mass displacement .

as previously stated , bangladesh does not accept this proposal , and has called for the united nations to be involved in resolving the conditions of return to burma .

the 1992 agreement stipulated that burma would accept the return of anyone who could provide evidence of their prior residence in burma .

one burmese official has stated that this may mean proof of eligibility for burmese citizenship , which would significantly reduce the number of rohingya who would be permitted to return to burma .

it is unlikely that many of the displaced rohingya possess documents to establish their prior residence in burma given the circumstances under which they fled to bangladesh .

the burmese government — whether under past military rule or under the current mixed civilian - military government — enforces a number of discriminatory policies specifically toward the rohingya .

among these policies are the following: denial of citizenship — the 1982 citizenship law effectively revoked the citizenship of most of the rohingya in burma .

prior to august 2017 , the u.n. high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) reported that nearly 1 million people ( mostly rohingya in rakhine ) were stateless .

denial of suffrage and representation — in 2015 , then - president thein sein invalidated the temporary identification cards ( "white cards" ) possessed by many rohingya that had permitted them to vote in past elections .

as a result , the union election commission did not allow the rohingya to vote in the 2015 parliamentary elections , and prohibited rohingya political parties and candidates from participating in the elections .

denial of education and employment — because they are not citizens , most rohingyas cannot attend public universities , work for the government , or join the military or the myanmar police force .

restrictions on movement — rohingya in rural areas are prohibited from moving out of their home villages without the permission of local authorities .

restrictions on marriage , religious conversion , and procreation — in 2015 , burma's union parliament passed four "race and religion protection laws" that seemingly targeted burma's muslim population and , in particular , the rohingya .

the laws banned cohabitation with someone who is not one's spouse ( to ban de facto polygamy ) , prohibited interfaith marriages and conversion to islam within a marriage without government approval , and required that women living in certain regions — regions with a high percentage of muslim households — space pregnancies at least 36 months apart .

aung san suu kyi responded to the october 2016 attacks and the ensuing unrest by forming an international commission , the advisory commission on rakhine state , headed by former u.n. general secretary kofi annan , to "identify the factors that have resulted in violence , displacement , and underdevelopment" in rakhine state .

on august 24 , 2017 , the commission released its final report , cautioning that "a highly militarized response is unlikely to bring peace to the area. .

among the commission's recommendations are to promote greater economic development in rakhine state , to align burma's 1982 citizenship law with international standards and enable the rohingya to obtain citizenship , and to make arrangements for the resettlement of idps .

aung san suu kyi has said that the burmese government is willing to abide by most of the commission's recommendations , and on october 9 , 2017 , appointed a committee tasked to implement the recommendations of the advisory commission , as well as those of the maungdaw regional investigation commission .

the new implementation committee consists entirely of government officials , and while it includes at least one rakhine member , it has no rohingya representative .

the united nations , the local and international media , human rights organizations , and international humanitarian organizations have accused burma's security forces of serious human rights abuses that may constitute ethnic cleansing , crimes against humanity , or possibly genocide during both "clearance operations" conducted following the october 2016 and august 2017 attacks on security installations .

u.n. high commissioner for human rights zeid ra'ad al hussein told the u.n. human rights council the following on september 11 , 2017: we have received multiple reports and satellite imagery of security forces and local militia burning rohingya villages , and consistent accounts of extrajudicial killings , including shooting fleeing civilians .

last year i warned that the pattern of gross violations of the human rights of the rohingya suggested a widespread or systematic attack against the community , possibly amounting to crimes against humanity , if so established by a court of law .

because myanmar has refused access to human rights investigators the current situation cannot yet be fully assessed , but the situation seems a textbook example of ethnic cleansing .

the tatmadaw has denied the allegations ; the burmese government and the tatmadaw assert that arsa is responsible for any human rights violations that may have occurred in rakhine state .

many of the rohingya and others who have arrived in bangladesh following the two "clearance operations" claim that tatmadaw soldiers entered their villages , and proceeded to kill civilians , rape women and girls , and then burn down the entire village .

international medical teams treating the rohingya in these camps report that some people bear gunshot wounds consistent with being shot from behind , and some women and girls have injuries consistent with sexual assault .

one bbc reporter who obtained access to the area witnessed the looting and destruction of a rohingya village by what appeared to be a group of rakhine men .

the tatmadaw soldiers escorting the reporter reportedly made no effort to interrogate or detain those involved .

utilizing satellite imagery , human rights watch and other organizations have documented the destruction of nearly 300 villages and thousands of houses and businesses in northern rakhine state .

according to its assessment of satellite imagery , human rights watch claims that at least 288 villages in northern rakhine state have been partially or totally destroyed by fire since august 25 , 2017 .

some of the images show that rohingya structures have been burned , but neighboring rakhine buildings are unharmed .

in addition , reports say at least 66 villages have been damaged after september 5 , 2017 , the day the second "clearance operation" supposedly stopped .

the displacement of more than 600,000 rohingya into bangladesh , the internal displacement of presumably thousands of rakhine and other ethnic groups within rakhine state , and the alleged violence associated with those displacements has created a potentially fertile environment for the radicalization of previously apolitical populations .

there is speculation that some of the disgruntled and abused rohingya may choose to support arsa or more militant islamic or nationalist organizations .

displaced rakhine may look to groups such as the arakan army , a rakhine - based ethnic armed organization reportedly active in southern chin state and northern rakhine state , to defend them from arsa .

this could open a new front in burma's long - standing low - grade civil war , and have an impact on the ongoing efforts to negotiate an end to the conflict .

there is much uncertainty related to arsa and the extent to which it has outside support .

arsa has denied its alleged ties to international terrorist groups and portrays itself as an ethno - nationalist group seeking to defend its own people .

despite this , some observers view arsa as a militant group with ties to international terrorists .

others emphasize that the recent attacks against the rohingya have created a situation that may present opportunities for recruitment of rohingya by international terrorist organizations even if arsa itself has no ties to such groups .

an international crisis group ( icg ) report of december 2016 described the emergence of a muslim insurgency , the harakah al - yaqin ( hay ) , in burma .

hay is now known as the arakan rohingya salvation army ( arsa ) .

icg described hay as led by a committee of emigres in saudi arabia .

icg described the group as not having a terrorist agenda .

the icg report warned that a disproportionate response by burma "could create conditions for further radicalizing sections of the rohingya population. .

unconfirmed indian media reports point to ties between elements within the rohingya community and pakistan's isi and pakistan - and bangladesh - based terrorist groups .

some analysts believe that the is or aqis may use the rohingya issue to boost recruitment to their ranks .

even if arsa has no links with terrorist groups , the presence of so many dispossessed and abused rohingya in bangladesh would appear to make it a fertile ground for recruitment by terrorist groups .

recent analysis is highlighting the potential that the rohingya issue could become a new focus of international jihadism both as a cause to fight for and as a motivating issue for recruitment and support .

one february 2017 think tank report said: "leaders of global terrorist organizations , including al - qaeda and the islamic state , have sought to rally their supporters behind a much wider campaign against the myanmar government and military... .

these terrorist groups have defined myanmar ... as the next great battleground for islamists worldwide , following the wars in syria and iraq. .

it has also been observed that "marginalized refugees and angry sympathizers are vulnerable to recruitment by extremists who can exploit their causes. .

the rohingya issue also has the potential to have an impact on bangladesh's domestic political landscape and its international relations .

the bangladesh national party has reportedly criticized the awami league government for failing to describe the human rights crisis as genocide against the rohingya and for failing to bring india and china in to resolve the crisis .

the bangladesh islamist movement hefazat - e - islam , which reportedly runs 25,000 madrassas in bangladesh and is based in chittagong , has called for the liberation of rakhine and threatened to wage jihad on burma if it does not stop torturing rohingya muslims .

an estimated 20,000 hefazat supporters and other hardliners marched against the violence against the rohingya in september 2017 .

this demonstration followed an earlier rally that gathered in support of the rohingya in september 2017 .

some of the demonstrators have urged the bangladesh government to go to war with burma and liberate rakhine for the rohingya .

some in the bangladesh media have also gone as far as contemplating the arming of the rohingya .

beyond the risk of rising radicalization in the region , the rohingya crises are creating pressure on regional relations .

the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) , southeast asia's primary regional forum , was unable to agree upon the text of a joint statement issued in september 2017 regarding the situation in rakhine state , as malaysia withheld its support , calling the text , "a misrepresentation of the reality of the situation. .

malaysia , a predominately muslim nation that has a moderate - sized rohingya community , has been pushing asean and the international community for a more active response to the crises , particularly regarding the alleged human rights violations .

indonesia , asean's other predominately muslim nation , has backed a more measured response , but its government also has to contend with pro - rohingya political protests advocating a stronger stance on the issue .

other asean members , such as singapore , have maintained asean's tradition of noninterference in the internal affairs of other nations , while supporting greater humanitarian assistance , condemning arsa's attacks of october 2016 and august 2017 , and calling for an end of violence in rakhine state .

asean's internal disagreement on addressing the rohingya crisis may preclude it playing a significant role in addressing the short - term and long - term challenges in responding to the crisis .

evolving geopolitical dynamics between china and india may influence those governments' responses to the rohingya humanitarian crisis .

china's approach to the issue may be influenced by its investment in oil and gas pipelines that link kunming in southern china with the rakhine coast in burma as part of its belt and road initiative ( bri ) .

in addition to this energy link , china is seeking to build a deep water port and develop a special economic zone at kyaukphyu in rakhine state in order to lessen china's dependence on the strait of malacca .

the importance of these trade and energy routes may mean that humanitarian or human rights concerns are secondary considerations relative to china's strategic and economic interests in its relationship with burma .

india's response to the rohingya crisis will also likely be influenced by geopolitical concerns relative to countering rising chinese influence in the indian ocean littoral .

prime minister modi has described burma as a key pillar in india's "act east" policy .

as a result , india may also determine that its economic and security priorities may influence its approach to humanitarian or human rights issues in its relations with burma .

congress and past administrations have generally agreed that the overall objective for u.s. policy in burma is to see the establishment of a democratically elected civilian government that respects the human rights and civil liberties of all of burma's citizens or residents , regardless of ethnicity or religion .

during the period of military rule ( 1962-2011 ) , congress passed progressively stricter sanctions on burma to press burma's military junta to stop the repression of the burmese people and possibly transfer power back to a civilian government .

from 2009 to 2016 , the obama administration adopted a strategy of enhanced engagement under which greater contact was made with burma's military leaders , while the sanctions were to remain in place until sufficient changes had taken place in burma to warrant the removal of the sanctions .

during president obama's second term , that strategy shifted to removing sanctions to encourage further political and economic reforms in burma .

the various crises emerging from burma's treatment of the rohingya present congress with a variety of issues on which it may wish to take action .

the humanitarian assistance crises in bangladesh and rakhine state have outstripped the current resources available and threaten to worsen , unless better access to affected people is permitted .

problems with repatriation of the refugees raise issues of either finding ways for bangladesh and burma to resolve their differences on the repatriation process , and / or preparing for long - term support for the displaced , including making arrangements for resettlement in other nations .

burma's discriminatory laws and policies not only undermine efforts to repatriate the displaced rohingya , but also contribute to a systemic human rights problem and could lead to the radicalization of some members of both ethnic communities .

the continuing use of "force and intimidation" by burma's security forces also reduces the likelihood that the rohingya would voluntarily return to rakhine , raises prospects for radicalization , and brings up issues of accountability for alleged atrocities , including crimes against humanity , ethnic cleansing , and possibly genocide .

the rohingya crises also have the potential to become a security issue for the region .

this could unfold if the plight of the rohingya becomes a cause for international and / or bangladesh - based terrorist groups .

the issue could also affect the domestic political balance between the awami league and other political factions and movements in bangladesh that are relatively more islamist in their ideology .

it could also become a regional security issue should it lead to increased tensions between bangladesh and burma .

it also has the potential to impact regional geopolitical dynamics by facilitating burma - china relations at a time when the united states and the west are critical of burma .

the burma unified through rigorous military accountability act of 2017 ( burma act ; h.r .

4223 ) and the burma human rights and freedom act of 2017 ( s. 2060 ) were introduced on november 2 , 2017 , providing similar formulations of u.s. policy toward burma , and comparable efforts to address the rohingya crises ( see table 1 ) .

both bills would impose a visa ban on senior military officers involved in human rights abuses in burma , place new restrictions on security assistance and military cooperation , reinstate the jadeite and ruby import ban of section 3a of the burmese freedom and democracy act , and require u.s opposition to international financial institution ( ifi ) loans to burma if the project involves an enterprise owned or directly or indirectly controlled by the military of burma .

both bills also call for additional humanitarian assistance to burma .

s. 2060 explicitly appropriates $104 million in funding .

s. 2060 also requires the president to review burma's eligibility for the generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) program .

