drug compounding is a process by which a pharmacist or physician combines , mixes , or alters various drug ingredients to create a drug to meet the unique needs of an individual patient .

compounded drugs include both nonsterile products ( eg , capsules and ointments ) and sterile products ( eg , injectable and ophthalmic products ) .

in situations where a product approved by the food and drug administration ( fda ) would not be medically appropriate to treat a patient , a pharmacist or physician may formulate and dispense or administer a compounded drug product .

for example , a patient with an allergy may need a medication without a certain dye , or an elderly person with a limited ability to swallow may need a medication in liquid form that is not commercially available .

the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) authorizes fda to regulate the manufacturing and sale of drugs in the united states , including compounded drugs .

generally , a new drug may not be sold unless the fda , through its drug approval process , has determined that the drug is safe and effective for its intended use .

the ffdca defines a new drug to be a drug "the composition of which is such that such drug is not generally recognized ... as safe and effective for use under the conditions prescribed , recommended , or suggested in the labeling thereof. .

although compounded drugs are considered new drugs , it would not be practicable for pharmacies to obtain approval for each drug compounded for an individual patient .

thus , compounded drugs are not evaluated by fda prior to marketing for safety or effectiveness and until the 1990s , responsibility for overseeing and regulating drug compounding has generally been left to the states .

historically , pharmacy compounding has been regulated by state entities ( eg , state boards of pharmacy ) , and the frequency of inspections and level of oversight by state regulators has varied .

in response to concerns surrounding the practice of large - scale compounding that resembled drug manufacturing , in 1992 , fda issued guidance explaining the types of compounding that may be subject to enforcement action by the agency .

congress provided statutory authority for portions of the guidance in ffdca section 503a .

in response to the 2012 fungal meningitis outbreak and a series of adverse event reports and quality problems linked to compounding facilities , congress held a series of hearings , which led to the enactment of the cqa in november 2013 .

the law established ffdca section 503b and created a new category of drug compounders called outsourcing facilities .

entities that compound drugs in ways that exceed the circumstances described in section 503a ( i.e. , facilities that compound drugs in bulk for use in hospitals or other facilities ) may register with fda as such .

an outsourcing facility is defined as a facility at one geographic location or address that is engaged in the compounding of sterile drugs , has elected to register as an outsourcing facility , and complies with all the requirements of section 503b .

since the enactment of the cqa , fda has issued numerous draft and final guidance documents to explain its policy on certain requirements and facilitate implementation of the compounding provisions under ffdca sections 503a and 503b .

the agency also has issued a draft mou addressing the interstate distribution of certain compounded drug products .

additionally , since enactment of the cqa , fda has conducted over 400 inspections of drug compounders , issued more than 150 warning letters advising compounders of violations of federal law , and overseen more than 125 recall events .

fda also has communicated with stakeholders and state regulators via annual listening sessions , a notice - and - comment guidance development process , intergovernmental meetings , and information posted to the fda website , among other things .

as of december 2017 , fda's website lists 73 entities that have registered as outsourcing facilities .

because 503a compounding pharmacies are not required to register with fda and are generally overseen by state regulatory bodies , it is difficult to quantify the total number of these entities .

in november 2016 , the government accountability office ( gao ) published a report on drug compounding that included results from a survey of state pharmacy regulatory bodies .

according to the report , most states that participated in the intergovernmental meetings found them to be helpful .

of the 40 states that reported having had compounding - related communication with fda , 60% ( 24 states ) reported being very or somewhat satisfied with the communication , whereas 23% ( 9 states ) reported being very or somewhat dissatisfied .

respondents in 15 states reported experiencing one or more communication challenges with fda , citing issues such as timeliness and difficulties getting the agency to respond to requests for information .

other stakeholders , including certain compounding pharmacist and physician groups , have voiced concern regarding fda's interpretation and implementation of certain statutory provisions ( eg , the prescription requirement and draft mou ) .

stakeholders in this space include state regulators , pharmacists and physicians who compound drugs , outsourcing facilities , and the groups that represent these entities .

in response to the issues flagged by stakeholders , congress has responded by sending letters to fda , issuing directives in report language , and introducing legislation to amend the statutory provisions concerning compounding .

the following sections discuss some of the issues that have been raised in response to fda's implementation of the compounding provisions , as well as the actions taken by congress .

this is not a comprehensive list of all of the issues flagged by interested parties , but rather a summary of selected issues that have been the subject of congressional letters to the agency , report directives , and legislation .

the three issues discussed are: ( 1 ) the prescription requirement and compounding for office - use , ( 2 ) the draft mou addressing interstate distribution of compounded drugs , and ( 3 ) inspections under cgmp requirements .

in working to address the issues raised by stakeholders and maintain public health protections , policymakers may consider issues such as patient access to compounded drugs , drug quality , and necessity of compounding .

with respect to patient access , some patients have a legitimate medical need for compounded drugs , whereby an fda - approved product would not be medically appropriate treatment .

for these patients , preserving timely access to compounded medications is important , a concern raised by those who support compounding for office - use .

drug quality is also a consideration , particularly in the context of patient safety .

pharmacies that compound pursuant to section 503a are exempt from cgmp requirements , are not subject to fda registration , and are generally not inspected by the agency unless it is for cause .

because these pharmacies are not required to register with fda , the agency is often unaware of potential issues with the compounded products or compounding practices until it receives a complaint or adverse event report , which pharmacies are not required to submit .

for these reasons , among others , fda maintains that compounded drugs pose a higher risk than fda - approved drugs .

a related policy consideration is necessity .

as discussed , fda's interpretation of the prescription requirement has been met with some opposition , and certain stakeholders have argued that compounding for office - use by 503a pharmacies should be allowed because health care providers need to keep certain compounded drugs in stock for immediate administration .

however , fda and outsourcing facility groups have generally disagreed that 503a pharmacies need to compound for office - use .

outsourcing facilities created by the cqa are able to produce in bulk while also providing additional patient protections since they are subject to more stringent regulatory requirements ; as such , allowing 503a compounding pharmacies to produce for office - use may not be necessary .

if a hospital , clinic , or health care practitioner wants to keep compounded drugs in stock for office - use , they can generally obtain non - patient - specific compounded drugs from outsourcing facilities that are registered under section 503b .

fda also has stated that allowing pharmacies to compound without a patient - specific prescription may provide less incentive for such entities to register as outsourcing facilities .

to help health care providers determine which outsourcing facilities compound the drugs they need for purposes of office - use , fda has issued a list of the drugs that registered outsourcing facilities have produced .

several other stakeholders , including the pharmaceutical industry , have generally supported fda's prescription requirement guidance .

