the federal milk marketing order ( fmmo ) system was established in the 1930s to aid farmers facing low milk prices .

as transportation and refrigeration developed in the late 1800s and early 1900s , milk dealers ( called "handlers" in the fmmo system ) became the main agents moving producers' milk into larger consumption areas .

no standard pricing systems existed at this time .

instead , milk dealers controlled the price producers received .

given the high perishability of milk , local dealers were perceived as having asymmetric market power over producers that resulted in unfair buying practices .

producer cooperatives formed in attempts to develop different pricing methods to enhance producer incomes .

in the midst of the great depression of the 1930s , the federal government established marketing orders that set minimum prices that producers receive for their milk .

thus , fmmos were intended to level the playing field by returning some market power to milk producers .

milk marketing orders require fmmo - regulated milk handlers to pay milk producers minimum prices for grade a fluid milk .

orders primarily use two milk pricing mechanisms — classified end - use pricing and milk pooling — to determine the minimum price of the milk that handlers pay to producers .

in turn , all milk producers within an order receive the same "uniform" price — also called the "blend" price — which represents a weighted share of all end uses of milk .

under the classified pricing system , the minimum price milk handlers must pay for milk components is calculated by formula based on end use .

handlers pay milk producers based on the pounds of milk marketed .

the current system of pricing , with several additional adjustments , was implemented in january 2000 following the 1996 farm bill fmmo reform .

some dairy stakeholders have raised concern about how ams prices milk under federal orders and about the ability of fluid milk processors to manage risk .

these include dairy forward pricing and class i advanced pricing .

also , in 2015 california producers started the process for joining the fmmo system and will likely hold a referendum at some point in the future .

a positive vote by these producers would increase the volume of milk production under federal orders .

in addition , organic dairy producers have raised concerns about how fmmo pooling applies to organic milk handlers and producers .

in 1999 , congress authorized the dairy forward contract pilot program to provide dairy producers with a risk management tool used by other agricultural commodity producers .

the program allowed producers who were not members of cooperatives to forward contract with proprietary handlers in exemption of fmmo minimum price requirements .

 ( dairy cooperatives had already been forward contracting and are not required to pay federal order minimum prices to their members. ) .

milk used for class ii , class iii , and class iv purposes could be included in the program .

forward contracting on milk used for class i ( fluid milk ) was prohibited .

after the pilot program expired in december 2004 , congress established the dairy forward pricing program ( dfpp ) in section 1502 of the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) .

the dfpp included most of the language of the pilot program .

alternatively , producers and cooperatives were free to continue to price milk under fmmo minimum payment provisions .

the dfpp was authorized through september 30 , 2012 .

after the 2008 farm bill provision expired in 2012 , congress extended the dfpp through september 30 , 2013 .

congress then reauthorized the dfpp in section 1424 of the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) , extending the forward contract program through september 30 , 2018 , with contracts signed by september 2018 to expire by september 30 , 2021 .

in a 2002 report mandated by congress , usda concluded that the pilot program was effective in reducing price volatility — the goal of forward contracting .

it did not return a higher average payment price for milk .

the study found that about 4% of eligible producers participated in the forward contracting pilot , pricing 5.3% of eligible milk under forward contracts .

twenty - two milk handlers offered producers forward contracts , and during the study period , an average of 25 plants received forward contracted milk monthly , ranging from 11 plants in the first month of the study to a high of 35 plants from august 2001 to november 2001 .

participation in the dfpp continued to be low .

in 2011 , ams deputy administrator dana coale stated in written testimony to the house agriculture committee , "participation in the program has been minimal , approximately 300 producers of a possible 10,000 to 15,000 .

low participation rates may be attributed to perceived unfavorable price relationships and a limited number of processors offering forward contracts. .

this would indicate that 2% to 3% of producers who are not members of cooperatives use forward contracts .

in testimony before the house committee on agriculture in march 2017 , the international dairy foods association ( idfa ) stated that congress should make the dfpp permanent in the next farm bill .

making the dfpp permanent would eliminate the uncertainty that forward contract users face as the program's termination approaches at the end of a farm bill .

in addition , idfa said congress should expand the program to include class i milk to provide fluid processors with the same risk management tool available to dairy product manufacturers .

at the same hearing , the national milk producers federation ( nmpf ) stated that it supported the extension of dfpp but was noncommittal on extending it to class i milk because of uncertainty on how this change would impact the price computations of milk .

those who oppose forward contracting for class i milk might argue that it could undermine fmmo minimum pricing since class i handlers effectively would not be required to pay the class i price for milk .

some class i milk processors engage in cross - hedging using the class iii and class iv chicago mercantile exchange ( cme ) futures contracts to try to reduce the risk of price swings that may occur in fluid milk .

some analysts believe that fmmo advanced class i pricing and the class i formula of the "higher of" the class iii or class iv skim milk pricing factors compromise the ability of processors to manage price risk in fluid milk ( see " class i and class ii " ) .

the analysts believe that the advanced pricing factors contribute to large basis ( cash price minus futures price ) risk in using class iii or class iv futures to hedge against risks for class i milk .

the view is that the utility of a cross - hedge is compromised because the class i price is set about two weeks in advance of the cme settlement of the class iii and class iv contracts .

during this two - week gap , there could be significant shifts in the cheese or butter / powder markets that alter class iii and class iv settlement prices .

this would undermine the effectiveness of this risk management technique .

also , the class i mover or "higher of" class iii or class iv provision results in a risk that class i prices will not align well with either the class iii or class iv futures contracts .

to address this situation , nmpf and idfa have proposed that congress change the way usda calculates the class i advanced price .

instead of using the higher of the class iii or class iv advanced pricing factors , the proposal calls for using the average of the advanced class iii and class iv pricing factors , plus an additional $0.74 per cwt .

according to analysis by the american farm bureau federation , this change in the formula would have significantly reduced the basis risk ( cash price minus futures price ) on the cme contracts to about $0.02 per cwt , compared with an average of $0.47 per cwt on class iii and an average of $0.90 per cwt on class iv during the 2001-2017 period .

supporters of this proposed change argue that it would create opportunity for fluid milk processors and large food companies seeking to hedge their costs of milk to more effectively manage price risk .

those that oppose the proposal may be concerned that this change would come through a legislative process instead of through the fmmo hearing process wherein producers and processors could express concerns about the proposal .

producers could also be concerned about effect the proposed formula change could have on the class i milk price .

in february 2015 , dairy producers in california petitioned usda to hold a hearing to promulgate a federal milk marketing order for their state .

the petitioners believe that the way the california department of food and agriculture ( cdfa ) currently administers the state order is causing disorderly marketing within california and that the fmmo system would provide more income to california milk producers .

in the 1996 farm bill , congress authorized a california fmmo if state producers petitioned and approved such an order .

the provision also allows california to maintain the state order milk quota .

the 2014 farm bill amended the provision on california orders in the 1996 farm bill to require regular rulemaking rather than the expedited process that was used for consolidation of federal orders in the 1996 farm bill .

the california state order and fmmos differ in several ways .

if california joins the federal order system , usda will likely need to address these differences .

as examples , california has five classes of milk , computes classified milk pricing differently than fmmo pricing , and has a milk quota system for class i milk .

the petitioning california dairy producers have stated that the california order fails to establish minimum prices in the california market that reflect national values .

specifically , california's class 4b ( equivalent to the fmmo class iii for cheese ) formula undervalues whey in such a way that from august 2012 until february 2015 , the minimum producer price was $1.96 per cwt lower than the fmmo class iii price .

the petitioners assert that this difference in pricing benefits cheese processors in california at the expense of milk producers .

the dairy producers argue that the california classified pricing has cost dairy farmers $1.5 billion from 2010 through 2014 .

the california milk producers stipulate in their petition that if california enters the fmmo system , the state quota system should be preserved .

the quota system provides an additional payment from the state pool to quota holders .

california originally established the milk quota in 1969 to pay producers of higher - valued fluid milk to join the state pooling system .

analysts estimate that the milk quota was valued at about $1.2 billion in 2015 .

usda held public hearings on the california order from september 22 to november 8 , 2015 .

usda published a proposed rule , or "recommended decision," in the federal register on february 14 , 2017 , and included a 90-day comment period for the california fmmo .

the "recommended decision" would allow california to maintain its quota system separate from the fmmo .

payments for the quota milk would be paid through authorized fmmo deductions , but cdfa would manage the quota .

the california order would adopt the four classes of milk of the fmmo system along with the fmmo make allowances and yield factors .

usda is in the process of evaluating public comments , after which it is to release a final decision .

should this be a milk marketing order , california milk producers will vote on it .

milk producers affected by a california fmmo may vote on usda's final decision , while qualified cooperatives may bloc vote for their members .

if two - thirds of milk producers or producers that represent two - thirds of milk production vote positively , the california fmmo would be adopted .

handlers of certified organic milk who operate in fmmo marketing areas are obligated to participate in the fmmo pool for fluid products ( class i ) .

according to the organic trade association ( ota ) , most organic milk is purchased on long - term forward contracts , and about 65% of organic milk is processed into class i products .

organic milk handlers pay prices well above the fmmo class i price for fluid milk and for milk going into manufactured organic dairy products .

ams treats certified organic and conventional milk the same for minimum pricing and pooling under the fmmo system .

however , conventional milk cannot be sold as organic milk , and ota argues that the fmmo system disfavors organic milk handlers and producers .

in september 2015 , ota requested a usda hearing to consider amending how fmmos treat certified organic milk .

organic milk is pooled in the fmmos , and organic fluid milk handlers are obligated to pay the fmmo class i price into the producer - settlement fund .

in addition , the fmmo system is supposed to balance fluid supplies with manufacturing milk supplies when necessary .

however , an organic fluid bottler would not be able to rely on conventional milk handlers in the fmmo to supply organic milk , because milk handlers cannot substitute conventional milk for organic milk .

according to fmmo statistics , organic milk accounted for 5.5% of total fluid milk products across all orders in 2016 .

ota proposed that organic milk handlers receive a producer - settlement fund credit .

the proposal was based on 7 c.f.r .

1000.76 ( b ) , referred to as the "wichita option," which governs milk payments by partially regulated distributing plants — plants that occasionally market fluid milk in the order .

under this section , if partially regulated handlers demonstrate that they pay producers more than the fmmo uniform price , they may be exempt from paying into the producer - settlement fund .

under the ota proposal , if organic milk handlers pay producers a price for all milk — regardless of class usage — above the fmmo class i price , plus a $2.90 per cwt threshold , they would be eligible for a producer - settlement fund credit .

this proposed threshold is the premium for organic milk over conventional milk as calculated by the central milk producers cooperative , a large marketing agency that supplies milk to various markets .

for example , if the fmmo class i price were $22.00 per cwt and organic handlers paid $26.60 per cwt , the credit would be calculated as ( $26.60 - ( $22.00 + $2.90 ) ) = $1.70 per cwt credit .

if all handlers of class i milk were obligated to pay $2.00 per cwt into the producer - settlement fund for a certain month , the organic milk handler would be obligated to pay in only $0.30 per cwt ( $2.00 - $1.70 ) .

if the credit were higher than the monthly class i handler obligation , organic handlers would not withdraw the difference from the pool .

nmpf and 10 milk cooperatives opposed the ota proposal in comments submitted to usda .

they argue that it would essentially exempt organic milk from fmmo revenue sharing and that it does not ensure that organic milk producers would receive the money , or a share of the money , that handlers kept by not paying into the producer - settlement fund .

also , opponents believed the proposal could harm conventionally produced milk in the balancing function between fluid and manufactured products .

for example , if supplies of organic milk were larger than demand for fluid organic milk , the excess organic milk would likely end up being used as class i fluid milk , resulting in conventional milk typically used as class i being pushed into manufacturing classes , lowering uniform prices for all producers .

ota withdrew its request for a hearing on january 12 , 2017 .

ota noted that the public record provided no explanation for why no hearing had been scheduled during the 16 months that had lapsed since ota had requested a hearing .

in the withdrawal letter , ota noted that it could resubmit the proposal in the future .

appendix a. usda classified milk formulas below are the fmmo price formulas for each of the four classes of milk .

each class price is the sum of its skim milk and butterfat components derived from wholesale prices for grade aa butter , 40-pound blocks and 500-pound barrels of cheddar cheese , nonfat dry milk ( ndm ) , and dry whey that usda reports each month .

the component prices ( protein , butterfat , other solids , nonfat solids ) are derived from the wholesale products and then used to compute skim milk and butterfat values .

all classes of milk are priced on a standardized hundredweight basis ( cwt , 100 pounds ) that assumes that they are 96.5% skim milk and 3.5% butterfat .

skim milk prices are reported on a per cwt basis and butterfat on a per pound basis .

the class formulas are adjusted to reflect the different weight reporting basis — 0.965 for cwt and 3.5 for pounds .

class i = ( class i skim milk price x 0.965 ) + ( class i butterfat price x 3.5 ) class i skim milk price = higher of advanced class iii or iv skim milk pricing factors + applicable class i differential .

class i butterfat price = advanced butterfat pricing factor + ( applicable class i differential divided by 100 ) .

the advanced pricing factors are computed using price formulas for skim and butterfat from the class iii and class iv formulas below , except they are based on a two - week weighted average .

the advanced factors are announced by the 23 rd of the month prior to the specific pricing month .

class ii = ( class ii skim milk price x 0.965 ) + ( class ii butterfat price x 3.5 ) class ii skim milk price = advanced class iv skim milk pricing factor + $0.70 .

class ii butterfat price = butterfat price + $0.007 .

class ii nonfat solids price = class ii skim milk price divided by 9 .

the advanced class iv skim milk pricing factor is also announced by the 23 rd of the month , but the butterfat price for class ii milk is based on the actual monthly butterfat price and not an advanced price .

a premium of $0.70 ( for cwt ) and $0.007 ( for pounds ) is added to the skim and butterfat price , respectively , to attract milk to class ii use .

class iii = ( class iii skim milk price x 0.965 ) + ( butterfat price x 3.5 ) class iii skim milk price = ( protein price x 3.1 ) + ( other solids price x 5.9 ) .

protein price = ( ( cheese price - $0.2003 ) x 1.383 ) + ( ( ( ( cheese price - $0.2003 ) x 1.572 ) - butterfat price x 0.9 ) x 1.17 ) .

other solids price = ( dry whey price - $0.1991 ) times 1.03 .

butterfat price = ( butter price - $0.1715 ) times 1.211 .

the formulas include a four - or five - week weighted average of wholesale prices for cheese , dry whey , and butter with a make allowance deduction of $0.2003 for cheese and $0.1991 for dry whey .

the yield factors are 1.383 and 1.572 for cheese and 1.03 for dry whey .

the butterfat price is the same for class iv .

class iv = ( class iv skim milk price x 0.965 ) + ( butterfat price x 3.5 ) class iv skim milk price = nonfat solids price x 9 .

nonfat solids price = ( nonfat dry milk price - $0.1678 ) x 0.99 .

butterfat price = ( butter price - $0.1715 ) times 1.211 .

the class iv price formulas include a four - or five - week weighted average of ndm and butter wholesale prices with a make allowance deduction of $0.1678 for ndm and $0.1715 for butter .

the yield factors are 0.99 for ndm , 1.211 for butter , and 9 for the pounds of nonfat solids in 100 pounds of milk .

appendix b .

the amendment process for federal orders amending an existing milk marketing order follows procedures similar to what would be followed to create a new marketing order .

the process can be summarized in the following six steps: 1 .

pre hearing procedures including preliminary investigation by usda .

although any producer or handler can petition usda for a change in the federal order system , such a request usually emanates from dairy producers or their cooperative associations .

usda then investigates their proposals and determines whether a hearing is necessary .

the amendment process requires that a formal notice of a hearing be published in the federal register , giving the time and place of the hearing and the proposals to be considered .

2 .

public hearing .

the principal participants at the hearing are representatives of producers , handlers , and consumers , who appear as witnesses and present evidence on how a proposed change in an order would affect their interests .

the hearing is presided over by a usda administrative law judge , who handles procedural questions and decides on the order of witnesses .

except for official documents , the public hearing record is the sole source of information for appraising the issues .

at the close of a hearing , the judge presiding over the case sets a time period within which witnesses may file written briefs .

3 .

recommended decision issued by usda .

after the hearing , the record is turned over to the ams dairy program for study and preparation of a recommendation on the issues .

the preparation time varies depending on the complexity of the issues .

a proposed decision is made public by the administrator of ams .

interested persons appraise the potential effects of the proposed amended order and file written comments on the amended order .

4 .

final decision issued by usda .

the dairy program is required to reexamine the findings and conclusions in light of the exceptions received and then provide a draft final decision to the secretary of agriculture for review , approval , and publication .

the provisions of the order contained in the decision are usda's final proposed regulations and are the provisions presented to producers for their approval .

5 .

producer approval .

before usda can issue an amended order , the affected producers and cooperatives must approve it by referendum .

approval is contingent on a favorable vote either by two - thirds of the eligible producers or by producers who supply two - thirds of the milk sold in the marketing area .

a dairy cooperative may bloc vote its membership on all questions involving new or amended orders .

when this occurs , all producers within the cooperative are considered to have voted as the cooperative voted .

6 .

final order .

in the event of a favorable vote , usda will publish the final order in the federal register .

an important feature of the approval process is that producers are required to vote on the order as amended , not just the amendment to the order .

this requirement is not explicit in the statute .

instead , it represents a long - standing usda approach in carrying out the federal milk marketing order program .

although the amendment process usually allows for conflicting views to be resolved in advance of the final vote , some producers may conceivably have to choose between an order with which they are dissatisfied and no order at all .

