iraqis have persevered through intermittent wars , internal conflicts , sanctions , displacements , unrest , and terrorism for decades .

a 2003 u.s. - led invasion ousted the dictatorial government of saddam hussein and ended the decades - long rule of the baath party .

this created an opportunity for iraq to establish new democratic , federal political institutions and reconstitute its security forces , but it also ushered in a period of chaos , violence , and political transition from which the country is still emerging .

latent tensions among iraqis that were suppressed and manipulated under the baath regime became amplified in the wake of its collapse .

political parties , ethnic groups , and religious communities competed with rivals and amongst themselves for influence in the post - 2003 order , amid sectarian violence , insurgency , and terrorism .

misrule , foreign interference , and corruption also took a heavy toll on iraqi society during this period , and continue to undermine public trust and social cohesion .

in 2011 , when the united states completed an agreed military withdrawal , iraq's gains proved fragile .

security conditions deteriorated from 2012 through 2014 , as the insurgent terrorists of the islamic state organization ( is , aka isis / isil ) — the successor to al qaeda - linked groups active during the post - 2003 transition — drew strength from conflict in neighboring syria and seized large areas of northern and western iraq .

since 2014 , war against the islamic state has dominated events in iraq , and many pressing social , economic , and governance challenges remain to be addressed .

 ( see table 1 below for basic data. ) .

iraqis are now celebrating the considerable successes their security forces and foreign partners have achieved in the fight against the islamic state ( see figure 1 ) , while warily eyeing a potentially fraught political path ahead .

national legislative and governorate elections are planned for may 2018 .

iraqi prime minister haider al abadi appears well positioned to campaign for reelection , although rivals from other shia political factions may contest his leadership .

such potential challengers include former prime minister nouri al maliki and some figures associated with iran - backed militia forces that are part of the popular mobilization forces ( pmf ) mobilized to fight the islamic state .

some iraqi parties and individuals oppose a continued u.s military presence in iraq and may scrutinize u.s. - iraqi security cooperation during the election period .

the kurdistan region of iraq ( kri ) maintains considerable administrative autonomy under iraq's constitution , and held a controversial advisory referendum on independence from iraq on september 25 , 2017 .

from mid - 2014 through october 2017 , kurdish forces controlled many areas that had been subject to territorial disputes with national authorities prior to the islamic state's 2014 advance , including much of the oil - rich governorate of kirkuk .

however , in october 2017 , iraqi government forces moved to reassert security control in many of these areas , leading to some armed confrontations and casualties on both sides and setting back kurdish aspirations for independence .

across iraq , including in the kri , long - standing popular demands for improved service delivery , security , and effective , honest governance remain widespread .

stabilization and reconstruction needs in areas liberated from the islamic state are extensive .

paramilitary forces mobilized to fight is terrorists have grown stronger and more numerous since the islamic state's rapid advance in 2014 , but have yet to be fully integrated into national security institutions .

iraqis are grappling with these political and security issues in an environment shaped by ethnic , religious , regional , and tribal identities , partisan and ideological differences , personal rivalries , economic disparities , and natural resource imbalances .

iraq's neighbors and other international powers are actively pursuing their diplomatic , economic , and security interests in the country .

iraq's strategic location , its potential , and its diverse population with ties to neighboring countries underlie its importance as an area of influence to u.s. policymakers .

in general , u.s. engagement with iraqis since 2011 has sought to reinforce iraq's unifying tendencies and avoid divisive outcomes .

at the same time , successive administrations have sought to keep u.s. involvement and investment minimal relative to the 2003-2011 era , pursuing u.s. interests through partnership with various entities in iraq and the development of those partners' capabilities — rather than through extensive deployment of u.s. military forces .

the trump administration has sustained a cooperative relationship with the iraqi government and has requested funding to continue security training for iraqi forces beyond the completion of major military operations against the islamic state .

with those operations coming to a conclusion , the mission and nature of the u.s. military presence in iraq is expected to evolve .

u.s. officials and military personnel have discussed general plans to remain in iraq at the invitation of the iraqi government in order to assist iraqis in consolidating gains made to date and to train security forces .

the 115 th congress has appropriated funds for ongoing u.s. military operations , in addition to security assistance , humanitarian relief , and foreign aid for iraq .

congress is considering appropriations and authorization bills for fy2018 that would largely continue u.s. policies and programs on current terms .

the goals , scope , and terms of some assistance are subject to debate and may evolve in relation to conditions in iraq .

iraq is a parliamentary republic , governed pursuant to a constitution adopted in a november 2005 referendum .

executive authority is exercised by the prime minister , while an indirectly elected president and three vice presidents carry out ceremonial and representative functions .

legislation originates with the prime minister or presidency .

national legislative elections for iraq's council of representatives ( cor ) were held in december 2005 , march 2010 , and april 2014 .

the 328-seat legislature is directly elected by proportional representation in multi - seat districts , with eight seats reserved for minority communities .

legislators vote to confirm nominees for the prime ministership , cabinet , and presidency .

elections for the next council of representatives are planned for may 2018 .

iraq's constitution provides for a sharing of some powers between the national government and recognized subnational entities known as regions .

the kurdistan region of iraq ( kri ) is the sole constitutionally recognized region at present , and is home to most of iraq's ethnic kurdish minority .

laws adopted since 2008 also have nominally provided for the decentralization of many administrative and judicial authorities to governorates that are not part of recognized regions .

iraq's economy benefits from the country's considerable energy resources , its location at the center of the middle east region , and its young , resilient population .

since the downfall of the baathist regime and removal of international sanctions on iraq , the country's gdp per capita has increased between six - and seven - fold .

nevertheless , during this period , conflict , instability , and corruption have taken a significant toll on iraqis , and these factors continue to hinder otherwise promising development and investment trends .

because iraq's government depends on oil proceeds for nearly 90% of its revenue , lower global oil prices and the fiscal demands of war with the islamic state have greatly strained public finances since 2014 .

iraq has sought and obtained international aid and lending to meet its fiscal needs , while also accumulating arrears .

since august 2014 , the united nations has designated the situation in iraq as a level three emergency , its designation for "the most severe , large - scale humanitarian crises. .

conflict and terrorist violence in iraq have created long - running displacement crises , with the international organization for migration ( iom ) estimating that 11 million iraqis were in need of some form of humanitarian assistance as of october 2017 .

more than 5.4 million iraqis have been displaced since 2014 , and 2.1 million have returned to their home districts .

displacement in iraq was concentrated in northern areas for most of 2017 , amid iraqi and coalition military operations against the islamic state in and around the city of mosul and elsewhere in ninewa , salah al - din , and kirkuk governorates .

of the more than 1 million people estimated to have been displaced after the start of operations in mosul in october 2016 , approximately 72% remained displaced in mid - october 2017 .

during his march 2017 visit to washington , dc , iraqi prime minister haider al abadi reviewed progress in iraq's campaign against the islamic state and appealed for u.s. and international aid to help meet iraq's short term humanitarian needs and longer term stabilization and reconstruction costs .

the multilateral 2017 humanitarian response plan appeal for iraq sought $984.6 million , of which $717 million or 72.8% had been received as of november 16 , 2017 .

according to the united nations office for the coordination of humanitarian affairs ( unocha ) , the "full cost of the aggregate humanitarian needs of 11 million iraqis is estimated at well over u.s. $3 billion. .

iraqi authorities and international organizations are working to assist civilians across the country , including non - iraqi refugees and the families and communities that host and have hosted idps and refugees during years of conflict .

this includes more than 244,000 registered syrian refugees in iraq , more than 95% of whom are located in the kri .

the appeal for the iraq component of the 2017-2018 regional refugee and resilience plan ( 3rp ) in response to the syria crisis requested $228.1 million , of which $122.3 million ( 53.6% ) had been received as of november 16 , 2017 .

interrelated security , political , economic , social , and health challenges complicate assistance efforts and the viability of civilians' attempts to return home .

in northern iraq , several persistent obstacles to the return and reintegration of iraqi idps include ongoing conflict , a lack of security and services in cleared areas , endemic levels of unexploded ordnance , fear of reprisal , and destruction of private property and public infrastructure .

among returning individuals and their neighbors , localized tensions may flare regarding property disputes and damage , politics , economic opportunities , and accountability for alleged crimes .

national politics also may intrude , with some local communities finding themselves on the front lines of broader national and international disputes over territory , resources , and security .

families of confirmed or suspected islamic state members also face unique challenges , as iraqi authorities seek to isolate potential security threats and family members face scrutiny , hostility , extrajudicial violence , and / or expulsion from their homes .

human rights organizations have expressed concern about the isolation of confirmed or suspected is family members in "rehabilitation camps," and united nations officials have warned that individuals indirectly associated or accused of affiliation with the islamic state may be targeted in revenge attacks .

with major combat operations against the islamic state reaching their conclusion in iraq , officials and observers are directing greater attention toward questions of security and stability in areas retaken from the group .

concerns for the immediate future focus on defending against an expected terrorism and low level insurgent campaign by the islamic state's surviving supporters to demonstrate their persistence .

in the context of these concerns , iraqi officials and foreign donors are supporting a range of stabilization programs designed to help communities reestablish damaged infrastructure , protect public health , provide economic opportunities , and overcome disputes that emerged or were exacerbated by the rise of the islamic state .

more broadly , the state department continues to warn of significant terrorism and crime risks throughout iraq and identifies iran - backed militias as a threat to u.s. personnel and interests .

fighting has damaged formerly is - held towns and cities , and in some cases , such as ramadi and mosul , large areas of key population centers have been destroyed and rendered temporarily uninhabitable .

retreating is fighters have left behind booby - trapped houses and neighborhoods , mined essential farmland and roads with ieds , and exploited ties with locals established during their occupation to carry out retaliatory post - withdrawal terrorist attacks .

unexploded ordnance , corpses , and disrupted water and power infrastructure continue to delay the prompt return of displaced civilians .

destruction , damaged infrastructure , and explosive remnants of war are expected to impose costs on iraqi communities for years to come .

in spite of these challenges , some polling suggests that iraqis broadly feel the security situation has improved since early 2016 , although terrorist attacks in baghdad and other cities have resulted in criticism of the iraqi government's performance and led to leadership reorganizations .

the intense focus of regular security forces on operations against the islamic state reportedly has created space for militia groups and criminal organizations to assert themselves and disrupt security in areas far from the front lines , especially in far southern iraq near basra .

national elections planned for early 2018 are creating an environment in which security incidents and trends may take on added political significance , as leaders compete for the confidence and support of the iraqi public .

in areas of anbar , salah al - din , and ninewa governorates where the islamic state has receded , iraqis are working to overcome resettlement , reconstruction , service delivery , governance , and security force integration challenges .

in many instances this involves simultaneously working to combat is re - infiltration , repair damaged infrastructure , administer an overburdened criminal justice system , and root out corruption .

reports from different communities suggest that recovery is underway , but progress is uneven and the concerns of some local groups are not being addressed by local and national authorities .

iraqi officials have emphasized the importance of securing reclaimed communities and delivering immediate assistance to restore essential services and provide employment .

the availability of water and electricity services and the quality of road , health , and education infrastructure was uneven in many affected areas prior to the islamic state's advance , and the effects of conflict have raised the costs and potential importance of needed improvements .

complex local reconciliation efforts also may be required in areas where the rate of return lags for political or social reasons .

struggles to overcome divisive suspicions and build trust among local populations and national groups may prove more lasting and challenging than the physical battle against the islamic state's forces , requiring sustained commitment from iraqis and their leaders at all levels and presenting fewer obvious opportunities for direct and effective foreign involvement .

u.s. support for iraq's campaign against the islamic state and u.s. respect for iraqi sovereignty have contributed to an improvement in u.s. - iraqi relations since 2014 .

nevertheless , the presence and activities of foreign military forces in iraq remain sensitive domestic political issues among iraqis .

president trump and prime minister abadi have signaled their shared preference for close bilateral ties to continue beyond the current joint military campaign , and officials in both governments have discussed taking steps to more fully implement the 2008 strategic framework agreement to deepen current patterns of cooperation .

from a u.s. perspective , partnership with iraq may present opportunities to further strengthen increasingly capable and professional iraqi security forces , limit the potential for resurgence by the islamic state and other violent islamist extremists , and limit the likelihood of greater iranian government influence over iraq's security forces .

at the same time , the prospect of continued u.s. assistance to iraq may reopen contentious u.s. debates about the proper scope , form , content , and conditions of u.s. assistance to iraq , including the presence and missions of any u.s. forces deployed to iraq after remaining islamic state forces are defeated .

from an iraqi perspective , partnership with the united states may allow iraq to consolidate and extend the improvements its security forces have made , while providing a bulwark against unwanted interference by neighboring countries or other global powers .

however , controversy surrounding partnership with the united states and the opposition of some iraqis ( and the government of iran ) to close u.s. - iraqi ties also may present risks from the perspective of some iraqi leaders .

expanded u.s. and other international support for the krg and for peshmerga forces since 2014 has been largely transactional and driven by the logic of defeating the islamic state .

once that defeat is secured in military terms , the united states and other krg patrons may face thorny questions about the continuation of assistance , particularly if some kurdish leaders continue to advocate and work toward independence or if disputes between kurdish factions or between kurds and non - kurds over territory , oil , and / or security descend further into violence .

with elections pending and the future of relations between iraq's national government and the kurdistan region uncertain , u.s. decision - makers might also consider how less desirable scenarios could affect bilateral ties and u.s. interests , including scenarios under which iraqi leaders might rescind permission for or place undesirable conditions on the continued presence of u.s. forces in iraq .

under current or new leadership , iraq's national government could demand the united states cease its support for the krg in the context of krg - baghdad disputes .

it is also possible that confrontation among iraqis over the question of a continued u.s. presence could lead to new rounds of violence , and groups hostile to continued u.s. - iraqi cooperation might attack u.s. personnel or facilities as a means of protest or provocation .

while the islamic state has been on the defensive in iraq since mid - 2015 and appears incapable of overcoming the range of forces arrayed against it there at present , its antecedents demonstrated a capacity for resilience and reemergence that is focusing the attention of some u.s. and iraqi observers on "winning the peace" and avoiding past "mistakes. .

iraqis and their u.s. counterparts may draw different lessons about what led to the islamic state's rise and may reach different conclusions about how best to preserve gains made to date .

as noted above , capacity shortfalls and corruption in national and local government in iraq remain problematic , with security forces also facing significant capability and management gaps .

iraq's fiscal resources are constrained , stabilization and reconstruction needs are daunting , and more robust reform efforts may prompt opposition from entrenched interests .

addressing these challenges may require persistence and sacrifice from iraqis , and the ability of u.s. assistance programs to address them may remain limited .

having recaptured most areas that had been overrun and occupied by the islamic state since 2014 , iraqis and their u.s. and coalition partners are now preparing to combat renewed insurgent violence from the group while looking beyond to 2018 national elections .

military coordination among different forces has contributed to success against the islamic state but has not guaranteed political accommodation among the victors .

the roles played and actions taken by various iraqi forces and political actors in the run up to spring 2018 election may reshape relationships that are important for the country's stability and , by extension , important to u.s. interests .

prominent considerations in this regard may include: the relative success or failure of national authorities in integrating and depoliticizing forces mobilized to fight the islamic state , including the pmf ; baghdad - krg disputes over territory , security , resources , and revenue transfers ; the future of iraqis uprooted by fighting , who are returning to damaged , underserved areas and some of whom may remain wary of empowered militias ; re - emergent rivalries within the shia arab majority , some of whose members may fear a resurgence of sunni radicalism and remain skeptical of kurdish and u.s. intentions ; and the future mission , extent , and terms of any enduring u.s. military presence .

members of congress and u.s. officials face difficulties in developing policy options that can secure u.s. interests on specific issues without provoking levels of opposition from iraqi constituencies that may jeopardize wider u.s. goals .

debates over u.s. military support to iraqi state and sub - state actors in the fight against the islamic state have illustrated this dynamic , with some u.s. proposals for the provision of aid to all capable iraqi forces facing criticism from iraqi groups suspicious of u.s. intentions or fearful that u.s. assistance could empower their domestic rivals .

u.s. aid to the kurds has been provided with the approval of the baghdad government , and u.s. assistance to baghdad is provided on the understanding that u.s. equipment will be responsibly used by its intended recipients .

recent confrontations between the national government and kurdish forces in disputed territories implicates these issues directly and may complicate the continuation of prevailing patterns of assistance .

overall , it seems reasonable to expect that iraqis will assess and respond to u.s. initiatives ( and those of other outsiders ) primarily through the lenses of their own domestic political rivalries , anxieties , and agendas .

reconciling u.s. preferences and interests with iraq's evolving politics and security conditions may thus require continued creativity , flexibility , and patience .

appendix a. timeline: u.s. relations with iraq appendix b .

proposed u.s. foreign military sale .

