on september 20 , 2017 , hurricane maria made landfall in puerto rico as a category 4 storm with sustained wind speeds of over 155 miles per hour .

the hurricane also brought torrential rainfall with a range of 15 to 25 inches in many areas and 40 inches or more in isolated spots .

this resulted in widespread flooding across the island .

puerto rico's office of emergency management reported that the storm had incapacitated the central electric power system , leaving the entire island without power .

puerto rico's grid infrastructure was essentially destroyed by hurricane maria .

recovery efforts from hurricane maria focused on restoring electricity to hospitals , water treatment plants , and some industries .

however , the commonwealth of puerto rico ( the commonwealth ) was already in recovery mode following the glancing blow struck by hurricane irma on september 6 , 2017 , which left 70% of electricity customers without power .

after maria , officials were estimating that many of puerto rico's 3.5 million people could be without electricity for up to six months .

even before the 2017 hurricane season , puerto rico's electric power infrastructure was known to be in poor condition , due largely to underinvestment and poor maintenance .

questions are now being raised as to possible options for rebuilding the electricity grid on the island , given the financial debt of the puerto rico electric power authority ( prepa ) before the damage from the storms .

prepa's current debts at the end of 2016 totaled about $9 billion .

prepa is overseen by a board appointed by the puerto rican governor .

some have blamed much of prepa's woes on governance issues .

hurricanes irma and maria brought the electricity system's problems to a head , as power outages before the first storm were eclipsed in magnitude by the island - wide power outages brought on by the destruction of the second storm .

power outages in puerto rico have been common , as an apparent lack of maintenance and vegetation management practices have contributed to power outages .

some have questioned prepa's dispensing with long - established practices ( eg , a request for proposals ) following its posthurricane decision to give a major repair and reconstruction contract to a small firm .

this decision seemed to eschew normal industry practices which rely on mutual aid as a primary route to system restoration .

with the poor state of the electricity system ( physically , organizationally , and financially ) , and a perceived lack of transparency with regard to decisions ( both before and since hurricane maria ) , some have called for a new electricity system regime to lead the reconstruction and resiliency planning efforts ahead .

should congress decide that alternatives to prepa be considered , the question of what entities and structures could replace prepa will arise .

this report presents a history of prepa , describes issues related to the debt crisis in puerto rico , and offers some options if congress wants to consider restructuring the electricity system in puerto rico .

modernizing puerto rico's grid , and taking the next steps to incorporate resiliency , will be expensive .

congress may want to consider whether investment incentives to form public - private partnerships could provide alternatives for modernizing puerto rico's grid .

congress may also want to consider whether the efforts to restore electric power in puerto rico will need to progress beyond simple restoration of electricity , and require new investment and oversight by the federal government , especially if congress considers the further goal of building a resilient grid .

even before hurricanes irma and maria hit puerto rico in september 2017 , the finances and operations of prepa had attracted the attention of congress .

prepa's debt — about $9 billion — is larger than that of any other operational u.s. public corporation .

high electricity prices and the unreliability of power supply resulting from deterioration of the island's generating and transmission infrastructure have hindered the island's economic development prospects and the well - being of its residents .

in april 2017 , prepa issued a draft fiscal plan for investments to upgrade and modernize its power generation and delivery infrastructure as it seeks to restructure its debts .

most of the existing electricity infrastructure in puerto rico is considered old , with a median power plant age of 44 years ; an average depreciable service life of a power plant is typically 40 years .

prepa is thus seeking to modernize its electric generation options , and renewable energy is expected to be an increasing part of the portfolio .

the major benefit of most renewable power sources is that they do not need a fuel to generate electricity , and thus there is no variable cost component of generation resulting from fuel costs .

prepa's draft plan proposed a number of actions to modernize its infrastructure including public - private partnerships , increased use of renewable energy and distributed generation , making "smart grid" improvements , and initiating a short - term maintenance program for its transmission and distribution systems .

improving safety , reliability , and resiliency are also stated goals .

prepa maintains that the proposal "commits prepa to fiscal responsibility and implements urgently needed infrastructure modernization," while allowing for "revised fuel prices , distributed generation trends , [and] urgent infrastructure investments for needed efficiencies. .

however , the draft plan recognized that prepa faced major challenges ahead as falling customer demand could mean a 23% drop in energy sales through the forecast period ( i.e. , from 2016 to 2026 ) .

this means that revenues needed for modernization from electricity rates were likely to fall ( and likely to be exacerbated by posthurricane migration ) , and as such , would likely not be available to help fund the proposed plan .

the extent of damage from hurricanes irma and maria has slowed the restoration of electric power in puerto rico .

the hurricanes knocked out of service over 2,400 miles of transmission lines ( including 1,375 miles of subtransmission lines operating at 38 kv ) , and 30,000 miles of distribution lines , representing almost the entire transmission and distribution infrastructure of the island .

recovery efforts have focused primarily on restoring electricity to hospitals , water treatment plants , and some industries .

however , restoration of the electricity transmission and distribution systems will be key to the overall recovery of the island from the disaster .

in some instances , especially in rural areas , the estimation of the total cost of power restoration is still ongoing .

however , the extent to which the restored infrastructure in puerto rico is rebuilt to current electrical standards will be important to the necessary modernization efforts that will follow .

in addition to considerations of federal disaster assistance for restoration , congress may consider comprehensive energy planning to address the vulnerabilities of puerto rico's electric power system to hurricanes and extreme weather events .

energy planning assesses current and future energy supply and demand , examines existing energy policies , and identifies potential challenges and opportunities in meeting future needs cost - effectively and sustainably .

under 48 u.s.c .

§1492 , congress authorized comprehensive energy planning , demonstration of cost - effective renewable energy technologies , and financial assistance for projects in insular areas — including puerto rico — related to ener gy efficiency , renewable energy , and building power transmission and distribution lines .

although two energy assessment reports were conducted — a doe report issued in 1982 and a department of the interior ( doi ) report issued in 2006 — only the 1982 report by doe included puerto rico .

the 1982 doe report evaluated options to diversify puerto rico's energy portfolio to decrease reliance on imports .

at the time , imported oil provided 98% of the system's electricity and hydropower provided 2% .

several resources were evaluated to displace oil for electricity generation: wind , hydropower , solar , bioenergy , ocean thermal energy conversion ( otec ) , and cogeneration .

the assessment projected savings in millions of barrels of oil imports , through the year 2000 .

near - term priorities focused on wind and existing hydropower .

the 1982 assessment stated that "the system experiences reliability problems because of its isolation , the large size of several units relative to total system size , limited quick response capability , and maintenance problems. .

puerto rico also directed prepa to prepare an integrated resources plan ( irp ) .

the irp identified potential strategies to meet electricity needs through 2035 .

these included new fossil fuel - fired generation , new renewable generation , retirements of several existing units , and transmission projects .

the irp assumptions reflected conditions as of june 30 , 2015 , including prepa's financial situation .

in february of 2017 , the puerto rico energy commission disapproved the irp , stating the following: the public needs assurance that the paths chosen in reliance upon an irp are going to achieve public policy objectives of least cost , reliability , integration of renewables and lower environmental impacts .

the irp provided by prepa was insufficient in terms of the process and mechanisms chosen for achieving the results contained therein .

therefore , the commission is unable to rely upon the irp filed by prepa .

if the irp cannot be used for its intended purposes , then it is noncompliant .

post - hurricane maria , the operability of the system has changed .

on october 31 , 2017 , the energy commission granted an extension until december 31 , 2017 , citing a need to conclude an investigation into the current state of prepa's electric system .

authority for doe and doi to provide financial assistance to the government of puerto rico and other insular area governments is codified at 48 u.s.c .

1492 .

assistance under doe authority includes financial assistance "to carry out projects to evaluate the feasibility of , develop options for , and encourage the adoption of energy efficiency and renewable energy measures. .

assistance under doi authority includes grants for power line projects designed to protect the system from damage caused by hurricanes and typhoons .

congress may consider providing appropriations to facilitate energy planning or improving system resiliency .

resilient electric systems are able to maintain some level of operations during hurricanes or storms , and quickly recover from storm - related damage .

to promote system efficiency and resilience , many electric utilities have "hardened" exposed power generation and delivery systems .

hardening refers to physically changing the infrastructure to make it less susceptible to damage from extreme wind , flooding , or flying debris .

hardening improves the durability and stability of energy infrastructure , making it better able to withstand the impacts of hurricanes and weather events without sustaining major damage .

resiliency , by contrast , refers to the ability of an energy facility to recover quickly from damage to any of its components or to any of the external systems on which it depends .

resiliency measures do not prevent damage ; rather they enable energy systems to continue operating despite damage and / or promote a rapid return to normal operations when damages / outages do occur .

some question how much more system hardening is appropriate in the context of the perceived risks from climate change and other factors .

grid resilience , a core requirement for climate adaptation , includes hardening , advanced capabilities , and recovery / reconstitution .

although most attention is placed on best practices for hardening , resilience strategies must also consider options to improve grid flexibility and control .

resilience includes reconstitution and general readiness such as pole maintenance , vegetation management , use of mobile transformers and substations , and participation in mutual assistance groups .

while some distribution poles and electric power facilities have been hardened in u.s. coastal areas to withstand a category 3 hurricane , consideration may be warranted for upgrading certain facilities to withstand a more severe event .

in parts of puerto rico , even concrete poles were destroyed by the high category 4 winds of hurricane maria .

this section presents some possible options and alternatives congress may consider for restructuring puerto rico's electricity system , recognizing that any alternative would require agreement from puerto rico .

consideration is given to puerto rico's population distribution , low income levels , and depressed economy in evaluating potential options for restructuring the commonwealth's electric power system .

prepa initially estimated the cost of modernizing puerto rico's electricity system at $4 billion , not including the damage from the 2017 hurricanes .

however , incorporating additional goals , such as resiliency , as well as the hurricane recovery , could result in costs several times that estimate .

the 2017 hurricane season and the resulting destruction in puerto rico have led to an unprecedented disaster for the people of puerto rico .

the ability of the electricity system to deliver power was effectively destroyed , and restoration of electricity services to the majority of puerto rico's people has yet to be achieved , as of the writing of this report .

the reliability of service from the electric utility , prepa , was poor before the hurricane by the utility's own admission .

post - hurricane maria , power restoration is the first priority .

but prepa's subsequent efforts to restore power have been considered questionable by most observers , as contracts to rebuild the system appear to have been hastily arranged without due process , and one large contract was cancelled .

infighting and disputes between the utility , the commonwealth's government , the oversight board , and the energy commission have added to the distress of puerto ricans .

congress may want to consider governance issues or reforms for puerto rico .

some observers have stated that it is time for a new regime to serve the electric power needs of puerto rico .

the destruction of electric infrastructure offers an opportunity to design and build a new , efficient , relatively low - cost electricity system , incorporating renewable electricity and flexible , new natural gas - fired generation ( assuming the fuel can be brought to puerto rico cheaply ) .

some have also suggested that the publicly owned utility prepa should be privatized as a way to modernize and improve electricity services .

congress may also want to consider a federal government corporation to serve these purposes .

however , neither a greater incorporation of renewables and natural gas nor privatization provides a silver bullet solution to the issues facing rebuilding the grid in puerto rico .

renewable electric generation on an increased scale would require modernization of the grid .

the ability of the commonwealth and its citizens to assume the burden of paying for a rebuilt ( and possibly restructured ) electricity system is a key consideration .

privatization , and a potential sale of prepa's aged generation assets ( which might normally generate funds to help modernize the electricity system ) , are also in question given the debt issues .

entities interested in a privatization venture in puerto rico would likely seek recovery of an investment in a "reasonable" amount of time .

such a time frame could potentially lead to a sizable increase in rates based on the recovery period and how rate allocation across customer classes could be accomplished .

given puerto rico's economic condition and falling population , the design of a privatization venture , in whole or part , would likely have to consider socioeconomic factors alongside the financial investment , if it is to achieve success .

