i n the wake of the 2016 election , concerns have been raised with respect to the legal regime governing foreign influence in domestic politics .

the central law concerning the activities of the agents of foreign entities acting in the united states is the foreign agents registration act ( fara or the act ) .

fara generally requires "agents of foreign principals" undertaking certain activities on behalf of foreign interests to register with the u.s. department of justice ( doj ) ; to file copies of informational materials that they distribute for a foreign principal ; and to maintain records of their activities .

the act contains several exemptions to these registration , disclosure , and recordkeeping requirements .

although fara has not been litigated extensively , courts have recognized a compelling governmental interest in requiring agents of foreign principals to register and disclose foreign influence in the domestic political process , resulting in a number of constitutional challenges being rejected over the decades since fara's initial enactment .

this report examines the nature and scope of the current regulatory scheme , including the scope of fara's application to agents of foreign principals ; what the statute requires of those covered under the act ; exemptions available under the statute ; and methods of enforcement .

the report concludes by discussing various legislative proposals to amend fara in the 115th congress .

enacted originally in 1938 to promote transparency with respect to foreign propaganda , fara has evolved in its breadth and application over the course of subsequent decades .

consistently throughout its history , however , the statute has not prohibited representation of foreign interests ( or other related activities ) or limited distribution of foreign propaganda .

instead , the act provides only for public disclosure of any such activities .

fara's legislative history indicates that congress believed such disclosure would best combat foreign influence by informing the american public of the actions taken and information distributed on behalf of foreign sources .

thus , fara addresses the concerns of foreign influence by " bring[ing] the activities of persons engaged in disseminating foreign political propaganda in this country out into the open ... mak[ing] known to the government and the american people the identity of any person who is engaged in such activities , the source of the propaganda and who is bearing the expense of its dissemination in the united states. .

the impetus for fara was the global political dynamics of the 1930s .

specifically , in 1935 , the house of representatives convened a special committee tasked with investigating the existence and effects of nazi and other propaganda efforts in the united states and the use of "subversive propaganda" distributed by foreign countries .

at that time , congress perceived a need to oversee efforts to influence the american government by foreign sources in light of threats that had been posed to governments elsewhere in the world due to the political and economic unrest during the interwar era .

in particular , legislators highlighted concerns about the unfettered distribution of nazi and communist propaganda in the united states by foreign entities .

congress has since amended the statute , shifting its focus toward the promotion of transparency of an agent's lobbying activities on behalf of its foreign client .

as a report issued by the senate committee on foreign relations explained when considering amendments to the act in 1965: the original target of foreign agent legislation — the subversive agent and propagandist of pre - world war ii days — has been covered by subsequent legislation , notably the smith act .

the place of the old foreign agent has been taken by the lawyer - lobbyist and public relations counsel whose object is not to subvert or overthrow the u.s. government , but to influence its policies to the [satisfaction] of his particular client .

in the 1990s , congress again amended fara as part of a broader effort to reform lobbying disclosure laws known as the lobbying disclosure act ( lda ) .

the amendments generally limited fara's registration requirements to agents of foreign governments and foreign political parties and allowed agents of other foreign entities to register under the lda's disclosure requirements .

because fara prohibits a "person" from acting as an "agent of a foreign principal" without first registering with doj , and because fara's disclosure and recordkeeping requirements are imposed on those "persons" required to register under the act , the central issue when considering the application of fara to foreign lobbying is whether a person qualifies as an agent of a foreign principal for purposes of the statute .

fara expressly defines the term person for purposes of the statute to include individuals , partnerships , associations , corporations , organizations , or any other combination of individuals .

identifying whether such individuals or entities are agents of foreign principals involves two determinations: whether that person is acting as an agent and whether the agent is acting for a foreign principal .

in its current form , fara includes three key provisions that generally apply to agents of foreign principals: registration requirements , disclosure requirements , and recordkeeping requirements .

any person who willfully violates fara — including failure to register as an agent of a foreign principal , making false statements of material fact , or omitting material facts or documents — may be subject to civil and criminal penalties upon conviction .

violations may result in fines of up to $10,000 or imprisonment for no more than five years , depending on the violation .

additionally , the attorney general may seek injunctive relief to enjoin actions in violation of the act .

destruction or concealment of an agent's records during the time period for which such recordkeeping is required is unlawful under the statute .

enforcement actions may be undertaken only at the discretion of the attorney general , because the statute does not confer a private right of action for enforcement by private parties .

in 2016 , the office of the inspector general at doj issued a report on doj's enforcement of fara , finding that the agency lacked a comprehensive strategy for enforcement .

among the criticisms highlighted in that report were the lack of enforcement actions brought by doj as well as issues of vagueness in the terms and breadth of the statute .

the report highlighted what doj characterized as a sharp decline in registrations under the act beginning in the mid - 1990s .

some members of congress have introduced legislation to amend fara following the inspector general's report and other allegations that potential misconduct by foreign agents is not currently policed under the statute .

amendments proposed in the 115th congress have addressed a range of issues , including: future representation of foreign principals by political appointees .

h.r .

484 would prospectively bar any individual who has served as a political appointee from serving as an agent of a foreign principal .

in other words , any individual whose political appointment terminates after the bill would be enacted would be subject to a lifetime ban on representing foreign principals in the united states .

breadth of the disclosure requirement .

s. 1679 would expand the applicability of fara's disclosure requirement by requiring agents to file copies of materials transmitted to "any other person. .

furthermore , s. 1679 would require agents to provide additional information when filing any distributed materials with doj , including the name of each original recipient and the original date of distribution .

separately , h.r .

2811 / s. 625 generally would apply the disclosure requirement to electronic transmittals ( eg , email and social media ) and align the filing deadlines of the disclosure requirement with those of the registration requirement .

repeal of the exemption for agents registering under the lda .

h.r .

4170 / s. 2039 would repeal the exemption that currently allows agents of foreign principals in the private sector to register under the lda instead of under fara .

repeal of the exemption for agents representing foreign principals in the private sector would require all activities covered under fara to be subject to the standards of that act , regardless of whether the foreign principal is a government , political party , or individual or entity in the private sector .

for agents of foreign principals whose activities may require registration under fara and the lda , h.r .

4170 / s. 2039 would also align all filing deadlines after the initial registration for fara to coincide with the deadlines of the lda .

provision of civil investigative demand authority .

both the foreign agents registration modernization and enforcement act ( farmea ; h.r .

2811 / s. 625 ) and the disclosing foreign influence act ( dfia ; h.r .

4170 / s. 2039 ) would authorize the attorney general to compel individuals or entities to produce documents relevant to a fara investigation before initiating civil or criminal enforcement proceedings .

such authority would augment doj's authority to investigate potential violations of agents of foreign principals who may be required to register under fara .

availability of civil fines .

s. 1679 would authorize the attorney general to enforce fara violations by means of civil fines based on the number of offenses , as well as providing the attorney general discretion to consider the severity and frequency of the violations .

reporting requirements .

h.r .

2811 / s. 625 would expand the categories of information that doj must submit in its semiannual reports to congress .

fara currently requires doj's reports to identify fara registrations and the nature , sources , and content of materials distributed by agents of foreign principals .

under h.r .

2811 / s. 625 , doj would also report the number of investigations of potential violations involving officers and directors of any entity serving as an agent of a foreign principal and the number of those investigations that were referred to the attorney general for prosecution .

oversight of fara enforcement and administration .

h.r .

4170 / s. 2039 would require the attorney general to "develop and implement a comprehensive strategy to improve the enforcement and administration of [fara]," which would be subject to review by the inspector general of doj and congress .

additionally , it would require the comptroller general to analyze the effectiveness of enforcement and administration of fara within three years of enactment of the legislation .

