"too big to fail" ( tbtf ) is the concept that a financial firm's disorderly failure would cause widespread disruptions in financial markets and result in devastating economic and societal outcomes that the government would feel compelled to prevent , perhaps by providing direct support to the firm .

such firms are a source of systemic risk — the potential for widespread disruption in or even total collapse of the financial system .

although tbtf has been a perennial policy issue , it was highlighted by the near - collapse of several large financial firms in 2008 .

some of these large firms were nonbank financial firms , but a few were depository institutions .

to avert the imminent failures of wachovia and washington mutual , the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) arranged for them to be acquired by other banks without government financial assistance .

citigroup and bank of america were offered additional preferred shares through the troubled asset relief program ( tarp ) and government guarantees on selected assets they owned .

in many of these cases , policymakers justified government intervention on the grounds that the firms were "systemically important" ( popularly understood to be synonymous with too big to fail ) .

some firms were rescued on those grounds once the crisis struck , although the government had no explicit policy to rescue tbtf firms beforehand .

in response to the crisis , the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( hereinafter , the dodd - frank act ; p.l .

111-203 ) , a comprehensive financial regulatory reform , was enacted in 2010 .

among its stated purposes are "to promote the financial stability of the united states… , to end "too big to fail," to protect the american taxpayer by ending bailouts. .

the dodd - frank act took a multifaceted approach to addressing the tbtf problem .

this report focuses on one pillar of that approach — the federal reserve's ( fed's ) enhanced ( heightened ) prudential regulation for all banks that have more than $50 billion in assets .

recent congresses have debated modifying this enhanced regulatory regime , with several proposals to reduce the number of firms subject to the regime .

in the 115 th congress , h.r .

10 , the financial choice act of 2017 , would provide banks with an "off ramp" from enhanced regulation if they maintained a leverage ratio of 10% .

h.r .

3312 , the systemic risk designation improvement act of 2017 , would replace the $50 billion threshold with a case - by - case designation process , while automatically subjecting banks that have been designated as globally - systemically important banks ( g - sibs ) by the financial stability board ( fsb ) , an international forum .

section 401 of s. 2155 , the economic growth , regulatory relief , and consumer protection act , would automatically subject banks that had been designated as g - sibs and banks with over $250 billion in assets to enhanced regulation .

banks with between $100 billion and $250 billion in assets would still be subject to supervisory stress tests , and the fed would have discretion to apply other individual enhanced prudential provisions to these banks if it would promote financial stability or the institution's safety and soundness .

banks with assets between $50 billion and $100 billion would no longer be subject to enhanced regulation , except for the risk committee requirement .

this report begins with a description of enhanced prudential regulation .

it discusses the advantages and disadvantages to this approach to mitigating tbtf .

it then considers whether banks with more than $50 billion in assets are systemically important , and then discusses proposals to modify the current regime , notably the $50 billion threshold .

finally , the report presents its key findings .

enhanced regulation of banks with more than $50 billion in assets is only one facet of the current approach to addressing tbtf .

this report focuses on enhanced regulation and does not analyze other current policies or proposed alternatives to address tbtf .

for an overview of the tbtf issue and policy options , see crs report r42150 , systemically important or "too big to fail" financial institutions , by [author name scrubbed] .

title i of the dodd - frank act creates an enhanced prudential regulatory regime that automatically applies to all bank holding companies with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or more and nonbank financial firms that are designated by the financial stability oversight council ( fsoc ) as systemically important .

title i allows the fed to tailor differing prudential standards by institution or subgroup based on any risk - related factor .

all bank holding companies are subject to long - standing prudential ( safety and soundness ) regulation conducted by the fed .

the novelty in the dodd - frank act was to create a group of specific prudential requirements that apply only to large banks as described in the previous section .

many of these requirements overlap with parts of basel iii , an international agreement reached after the financial crisis to which the united states is a party .

under title i of the dodd - frank act , the fed is responsible for administering enhanced prudential regulation .

it promulgates regulations implementing the regime ( based on recommendations , if any , made by fsoc ) and supervises firms subject to the regime .

the dodd - frank regime is referred to as enhanced or heightened because it involves higher or more stringent standards to banks with more than $50 billion in assets than it applies to smaller banks .

it is a prudential regime because the regulations are intended to contribute toward the safety and soundness of the banks subject to the regime .

the fed's cost of administering the regime is financed through assessments on firms subject to the regime .

the following sections provide more detail on the requirements that title i of the dodd - frank act places on banks with more than $50 billion in assets .

as noted below , some parts of enhanced regulation have still not been implemented through final rules .

u.s. regulators have described the current bank prudential regulatory regime as tiered regulation , meaning that increasingly stringent regulatory requirements are applied as metrics , such as a bank's size , increase .

these different tiers are applied on an ad hoc basis ; in some cases , statute requires a given regulation to be applied at a certain size ; in some cases , regulators have discretion to apply a regulation at a certain size ; and in other cases , regulators must apply a regulation to all banks .

in addition to $50 billion , notable thresholds found in bank regulation are $1 billion , $10 billion , "advanced approaches" banks , and "global systemically important banks" ( g - sibs ) .

prudential requirements for advanced approaches and g - sibs .

in conjunction with the dodd - frank act , bank regulation was reformed after the financial crisis by basel iii , a nonbinding international agreement that the united states is currently implementing .

one tier of enhanced regulation applies to banks subject to the basel iii "advanced approaches" rule , which are those banks with $250 billion or more in assets or $10 billion or more in foreign exposure .

another tier of regulation applies to g - sibs .

since 2011 , the financial stability board ( fsb ) , an international forum that coordinates the work of national financial authorities and international standard - setting bodies , has annually designated g - sibs based on the banks' cross - jurisdictional activity , size , interconnectedness , substitutability , and complexity .

the fsb has currently designated 30 banks as g - sibs , 8 of which are headquartered in the united states .

in addition , several of the foreign g - sibs have u.s. subsidiaries .

u.s. bank regulators have incorporated the advanced approaches and g - sib definitions into u.s. regulation for purposes of applying the following regulations: s upplementary l everage r atio ( slr ) .

leverage ratios determine how much capital banks must hold relative to their assets without adjusting for the riskiness of their assets .

advanced approaches banks must meet a 3% slr , which includes off - balance - sheet exposures .

in april 2014 , the u.s. bank regulators adopted a joint rule that would require the g - sibs to meet an slr of 5% at the holding company level in order to pay all discretionary bonuses and capital distributions and 6% at the depository subsidiary level to be considered well capitalized as of 2018 .

g - sib capital surcharge .

basel iii also required g - sibs to hold relatively more capital than other banks in the form of a common equity surcharge of at least 1% to "reflect the greater risks that they pose to the financial system. .

in july 2015 , the fed issued a final rule that began phasing in this capital surcharge in 2016 .

currently , the surcharge applies to the eight g - sibs , but under its rule , it could designate additional firms as g - sibs , and it could increase the capital surcharge to as high as 4.5% .

the fed stated that under its rule , most g - sibs would face a higher capital surcharge than required by basel iii .

countercyclical capital buffer .

in addition , the banking regulators issued a final rule implementing a basel iii countercyclical capital buffer applied to the advanced approaches banks .

the countercyclical buffer would require advanced approaches banks to hold more capital than other banks when regulators believe that financial conditions make the risk of losses abnormally high .

it is currently set at zero , but can be modified over the business cycle .

because the countercyclical buffer has not yet been in place for a full business cycle , it is unclear how likely it is that regulators would raise it above zero , and under what circumstances an increase would be triggered .

total loss - absorbing capacity ( tlac ) .

to further the policy goal of preventing taxpayer bailouts of large financial firms , the fed issued a 2017 final rule implementing a tlac requirement for u.s. g - sibs and the u.s operations of foreign g - sibs effective at the beginning of 2019 .

the rule requires g - sibs to hold a minimum amount of capital and long - term debt at the holding company level so that these equity - and debt - holders can absorb losses and be "bailed in" in the event of the firm's insolvency .

in addition , the fed tailored some of the title i requirements for banks with more than $50 billion in assets in its implementation so that more stringent regulatory or compliance requirements were applied to advanced approaches banks or g - sibs .

for example , more stringent versions of the lcr , nsfr , and sccl are all applied to advanced approaches banks than to banks with more than $50 billion in assets that are not advanced approaches banks .

the sccl as proposed also includes a third , most stringent , requirement that applies to only g - sibs .

these requirements all determine how the largest banks have to fund all of their activities on a day - to - day basis .

in that sense , these requirements arguably have a larger ongoing impact on banks' marginal cost of providing credit and other services than most of the title i provisions discussed in the last section that impose only fixed compliance costs on banks .

other provisions u sing size thresholds .

as noted in the previous section , two title i requirements in the dodd - frank act ( company - run stress tests and risk committee requirements ) were applied to banks with more than $10 billion rather than $50 billion in assets .

size thresholds are also used in other regulations besides enhanced regulation .

for example , by statute , only banks with more than $10 billion in assets are subject to the durbin amendment , which caps debit interchange fees , and cfpb supervision for consumer compliance .

by regulation , there are additional compliance standards for the volcker rule for firms with more than $10 billion and $50 billion in assets .

executive compensation rules for financial firms pursuant to the dodd - frank act apply to only firms with more than $1 billion in assets by statute , with more stringent requirements for firms with more than $50 billion and $250 billion proposed by regulation .

fear of financial instability being triggered by the failure of large firms led the government to provide extraordinary assistance to prevent the failure of firms , such as bear stearns and aig , during the financial crisis — hence the assertion that large financial firms were "too big to fail. .

in addition to fairness issues , economic theory suggests that expectations that a firm will not be allowed to fail create moral hazard — if the creditors and counterparties of a tbtf firm believe that the government will protect them from losses , they have less incentive to monitor the firm's riskiness because they are shielded from the negative consequences of those risks .

if so , tbtf firms could have a funding advantage compared with other banks , which some call an implicit subsidy .

according to section 165 of the dodd - frank act , the purpose of enhanced regulation is "to prevent or mitigate risks to the financial stability of the united states that could arise from the material financial distress or failure , or ongoing activities , of large , interconnected financial institutions. .

general prudential regulation applying to all banks is intended to be microprudential , focusing mainly on the individual institution's safety and soundness .

enhanced regulation is intended to be macroprudential , focusing mainly on the broader systemic risk posed by large institutions .

enhanced regulation is not necessarily mutually exclusive with other policy approaches to eliminating tbtf , although combining approaches could dilute any single approach's effectiveness .

different parts of the dodd - frank act pursue several different approaches to eliminating tbtf .

one rationale for enhanced prudential regulation holds that restraints on risk - taking at systemically important banks must be in place because eliminating such banks is infeasible or impractical , as is credibly eliminating all expectations of future government support .

in this view , at least a few firms will likely come to dominate certain segments of the financial system due to economic incentives to grow larger , such as achieving economies of scale or increasing market power .

thus , breaking up large banks or eliminating all spillover effects would reduce the efficiency of the financial system .

eliminating tbtf through assurances that large firms would not be bailed out may lack credibility with market participants who witnessed the bailout of firms without a prior commitment to provide assistance in the previous crisis .

if tbtf institutions cannot be eliminated , then enhanced regulation may be the most practical option for containing it .

few claim that prudential regulation can prevent all failures from occurring ; regulated depository institutions have failed throughout u.s. history .

nor is a system without any failures necessarily a desirable one , since risk is inherent in all financial activities .

however , enhanced regulation could potentially prevent large banks from taking greater risks due to moral hazard than their smaller counterparts .

if successful , fewer large failures or market disruptions would occur , creating a more stable financial system and limiting potential taxpayer exposure through fdic - insured losses .

certain observers are skeptical of the ability of the enhanced prudential regulatory regime to successfully increase systemic stability and eliminate the tbtf problem .

critics cite the fact that most large banks have grown or remained the same size in dollar terms since the enactment of the dodd - frank act as evidence that tbtf has not been solved .

some critics argue that in general , more prudential regulation may be counterproductive because it curbs the role of market discipline , resulting from such things as creditors monitoring and disincentivizing risky behavior .

enhanced prudential regulation may arguably have a limited effect on market discipline , however , because it only incrementally increases the regulation of large banks .

although regulation is intended to limit risky behavior , it may inadvertently increase systemic risk by causing greater correlation of losses across firms by encouraging all firms to engage in similar behavior .

for example , one economist testified that "many financial sector experts believe that coordinated supervisory stress tests encourage a 'group think' approach to risk management that may increase the probability of a financial crisis. .

other critics question the effectiveness of regulators to prevent the buildup of excessive risk , pointing out they were arguably unable or unwilling to prevent excessive risk - taking before and during the crisis , including in some cases by large banks they directly regulated .

although regulators have adapted in response to weaknesses raised by the crisis , the next crisis is likely to pose a novel set of problems .

in addition , some critics fear that the enhanced regime is particularly vulnerable to "regulatory capture," the phenomenon in which the regulated exercise influence over their regulators to undermine the intended goals of regulation .

some have argued that large banks are "too complex to regulate," meaning regulators are incapable of identifying or understanding the risks inherent in complicated transactions and corporate structures .

for example , the six largest bhcs had more than 1,000 subsidiaries each , and the two largest had more than 3,000 each in 2012 .

further , their complexity has increased over time — only one bhc had more than 500 subsidiaries in 1990 , and the share of assets held outside of depository subsidiaries has grown over time for the largest bhcs .

arguably , one of the benefits of enhanced regulation is that it provides opportunities ( through living wills , for example ) for the fed and fsoc to better understand the risks institutions pose and the characteristics that could make certain banks systemically important .

enhanced regulation could also fail to reduce systemic risk if problems at large firms during the crisis — such as excessive leverage , a sudden loss of liquidity , concentrated or undiversified losses , and investor uncertainty caused by opacity — were not caused by large firms per se , but were instead inherent in certain financial activities .

if , in fact , they were representative of problems that firms of all sizes were experiencing , policy should directly treat these problems in a systematic and uniform way for all firms .

in other words , prudential regulation could be applied to all firms operating in a given activity or area rather than just large banks , so arguments for and against these policy options do not apply only to their application to large banks .

if systemic risk is caused mainly by activities , not large firms , then enhanced regulation could cause systemic risk to migrate away from large banks to other — potentially less regulated — firms , rather than being reduced .

although systemic importance is not the only rationale provided for enhanced prudential regulation , it is the primary one .

this section reviews data to attempt to determine whether all of the banks subject to enhanced regulation are systemically important .

in particular , critics of the $50 billion threshold distinguish between regional banks ( which tend to be at the lower end of the asset range and , it is claimed , have a traditional banking business model comparable to community banks ) and wall street banks ( a term applied to the largest , most complex organizations that tend to have significant nonbank financial activities ) .

definitively identifying banks that are systemically important is not easily accomplished , in part because potential causes and mechanisms through which a bank could disrupt the financial system and spread distress are numerous and not well understood in all cases .

size is one factor that could make a bank systemically important .

for example , a bank with a large amount of liabilities would inflict larger losses on counterparties in the event of default .

in addition , because such a bank has larger funding needs , if it experienced liquidity problems and was forced to sell assets — often referred to as forced deleveraging — the large selloff could decrease certain asset prices and trigger fire sales .

these are just two examples of how size can cause spillover effects that spread systemic risk more broadly throughout the financial system .

when examining banks' asset sizes , there is substantial variation across a number of bank characteristics , but none that clearly identify a cutoff point at which banks begin or cease to be systemically important .

among banks above the $50 billion threshold , organizations vary greatly in size , and except for the very largest , there are no natural breaking points that clearly distinguish one group of banks from another .

the largest banks hold about 40 times as many assets as those near the threshold ( as shown in table 1 ) , but beyond the largest handful of banks , size decreases fairly incrementally .

although not depicted in the table , the same difficulties are present when analyzing banks near but below the $50 billion threshold — asset size decreases incrementally , with no natural breaking points .

size is not the only potential characteristic through which a bank could disrupt financial stability .

regulators have developed certain methodologies to empirically measure systemic importance .

a prominent example is the "method 1 systemic score" used to determine which institutions are designated as g - sibs .

the scoring methodology uses 12 indicators across five categories to calculate a bank's score .

in addition to size , these categories are as follows: i nterconnectedness .

how interconnected one institution is to other financial companies could lead to contagion effects if its default results in destabilizing losses at other institutions or markets .

interconnectedness is measured in method 1 by a bank's intra - financial system assets and liabilities .

s ubstitutability .

this metric determines whether other banks or financial institutions could perform the critical functions currently performed by the bank in question should it fail .

substitutability is measured in method 1 by a bank's assets under custody , payments activity , and underwriting .

c omplexity .

banks differ substantially across their business models , and certain activities could make them more or less risky and , in the event they experienced distress or failure , more or less likely to destabilize the financial system .

many large bank organizations are engaged in numerous lines of business , including securities trading , insurance , swap dealing , custodial services , credit card issuance , merchant banking , and clearing and settlement services , among others .

these activities may not necessarily be systemically risky ( diversifying business lines could arguably make an individual institution less risky ) , but they may warrant additional regulatory scrutiny because they are outside the traditional prudential regulatory model for commercial banking and increase the number of markets and activities through which an institution could trigger a systemic event or spread systemic risk .

complexity is measured in method 1 by over the counter ( otc ) derivatives , level 3 ( i.e. , illiquid ) assets , and trading and available for sale ( afs ) securities .

c ross - j urisdiction a ctivity .

measured by cross - jurisdictional claims and liabilities , this metric captures the degree to which the bank operates internationally .

the score is a weighted average of each institution's share of a global aggregate of each of the 12 indicators , expressed in basis points .

any institution with a score of more than 130 is determined to be systemically important to the global financial system .

one drawback to using this indicator is that it is intended to measure global systemic importance , whereas the enhanced prudential regime is intended to apply to domestic systemically important banks .

for example , cross - jurisdictional metrics may be more pertinent to global importance than domestic importance .

nevertheless , banks with low scores arguably may not be domestically systemically important .

examining the u.s. banks with more than $50 billion in assets reveals a wide range of scores , as seen in table 2 .

eight banks exceed the 130 threshold .

the rest are not close to this number , and half have a score of less than 15 , including all of the banks with less than $100 billion in assets .

some relatively large banks have low scores .

for example , capital one had $334 billion in assets at the end of 2015 , but a score of 20 .

conversely , state street , the smallest bank by asset size to be designated a g - sib , had assets of $224 billion and a score of 148 .

such scoring may suggest that size alone is not well correlated with systemic importance , and may also support assertions that the $50 billion threshold is set too low .

however , given uncertainty about the relative importance to financial stability of the various indicators that comprise the score , it is useful to observe whether any banks play an outsized role in any individual activity that makes up the score .

table 3 illustrates that some banks with low aggregate scores nevertheless have individual indicators that are at least three times the median value for this group of banks .

for example , five banks with aggregate scores under 15 have three times the median value for the underwriting indicator .

similarly , there are low - aggregate - scoring banks with high concentrations in payments , level 3 assets , and cross - jurisdictional indicators .

overall , 18 banks have three times the median value for multiple indicators , and 4 banks have three times the median for one indicator .

two of the four banks that have high values for one indicator have less than $100 billion in total assets .

if the g - sib indicators accurately correlate with systemic riskiness , it is unlikely that the 12 banks with values below three times the median for all of the indicators are systemically important .

if a higher multiple of the median value is chosen to identify banks that play outsized roles in the activities shown in table 3 , fewer banks would qualify .

for example , if 10 times the median value were used as a threshold , then 11 banks would meet that threshold in multiple categories , and 3 banks would meet it in one category .

fed officials , former representative barney frank , and critics of the dodd - frank act have called for a higher threshold or for replacing the threshold with an alternative method , but no consensus has emerged over what should take its place .

others have called for eliminating enhanced regulation .

the treasury department's june 2017 report on regulatory relief for banks ( hereafter , the treasury report ) "recommends that congress amend the $50 billion threshold under section 165 of dodd frank for the application of enhanced prudential standards to more appropriately tailor these standards to the risk profile of bank holding companies," but does not contain a specific proposal for how it should be altered .

this section reviews proposals to alter which banks are subject to enhanced regulation .

it does not cover legislative proposals that would revise or eliminate specific provisions of enhanced regulation , such as stress tests or living wills .

the specific requirements of enhanced regulation are well - targeted to problems in the financial crisis , but overlap exists between individual provisions that may create excessive regulatory burden .

mitigating systemic risk is not the only rationale for enhanced regulation , but it is the primary one .

thus , if banks that do not pose systemic risk are subject to enhanced regulation , costs are imposed on those banks without yielding the primary benefit .

the current system is tiered , so regulatory burden is lower in absolute terms for banks near the threshold , but may be higher in relative terms .

proponents of enhanced regulation see it as the only realistic option for coping with the risks posed by very large banks , which are a necessary and inevitable feature in financial markets .

although enhanced regulation raises costs , higher costs could theoretically increase economic efficiency if tbtf banks are taking excessive risk as a result of the moral hazard problem .

opponents fear that regulation will be ineffective , and it will increase moral hazard by reducing market discipline .

however , any effect enhanced prudential regulation has on market discipline is arguably marginal , because large banks were already subject to a rigorous prudential regulation regime .

another possibility is that systemic risk is mainly caused by certain activities , not institutions .

enhanced regulation may not be effective if this is true , and could even exacerbate systemic risk if those activities migrate to less regulated institutions ( "shadow banks" ) .

many economists believe that systemic risk is caused by banks that are too interconnected to fail or too complex to fail , as opposed to too big to fail .

if size is well correlated with interconnectedness or complexity , then an asset threshold is a simple , inexpensive , and transparent way to determine who is subject to enhanced regulation .

data presented in this report indicate size is not perfectly correlated with interconnectedness or complexity .

some g - sibs are relatively small by asset size , and some relatively large banks have relatively low systemic risk indicator scores .

no bank with less than $200 billion receives a high score , but banks under that size have significant activities in at least one of the 12 indicators that make up the score .

it is difficult to find an asset threshold value that is "just right. .

set too high , and the threshold would exclude banks that are systemically important .

set too low , and it would include banks that are not systemically important .

a case - by - case designation process is an alternative to a size threshold .

a designation process defers to regulators' judgment and is inherently more subjective .

designation also risks a greater market perception of official tbtf status .

a designation process has been used to designate non - banks as systemically important .

that process has proven slow , reversible , and subject to legal challenges in practice .

currently , one firm is designated .

a hybrid regime that mixes an automatic threshold with a case - by - case designation process reduces — but does not eliminate — some drawbacks to both .

congress could consider various modifications to the regime .

for example , the regime could be extended to automatically capture types of depositories that are highly similar to bank holding companies such as thrift holding companies and banks without a parent holding company .

today , there are examples of both w $50 billion in assets , and there are examples of the former that are complex and predominantly engaged in nonbank activities .

looking back , aig , lehman brothers , and washington mutual were all thcs at the center of the financial crisis .

the specific requirements of enhanced regulation are well - targeted to problems in the financial crisis , but overlap exists between individual provisions that may create excessive regulatory burden .

mitigating systemic risk is not the only rationale for enhanced regulation , but it is the primary one .

thus , if banks that do not pose systemic risk are subject to enhanced regulation , costs are imposed on those banks without yielding the primary benefit .

the current system is tiered , so regulatory burden is lower in absolute terms for banks near the threshold , but may be higher in relative terms .

proponents of enhanced regulation see it as the only realistic option for coping with the risks posed by very large banks , which are a necessary and inevitable feature in financial markets .

although enhanced regulation raises costs , higher costs could theoretically increase economic efficiency if tbtf banks are taking excessive risk as a result of the moral hazard problem .

opponents fear that regulation will be ineffective , and it will increase moral hazard by reducing market discipline .

however , any effect enhanced prudential regulation has on market discipline is arguably marginal , because large banks were already subject to a rigorous prudential regulation regime .

another possibility is that systemic risk is mainly caused by certain activities , not institutions .

enhanced regulation may not be effective if this is true , and could even exacerbate systemic risk if those activities migrate to less regulated institutions ( "shadow banks" ) .

many economists believe that systemic risk is caused by banks that are too interconnected to fail or too complex to fail , as opposed to too big to fail .

if size is well correlated with interconnectedness or complexity , then an asset threshold is a simple , inexpensive , and transparent way to determine who is subject to enhanced regulation .

data presented in this report indicate size is not perfectly correlated with interconnectedness or complexity .

some g - sibs are relatively small by asset size , and some relatively large banks have relatively low systemic risk indicator scores .

no bank with less than $200 billion receives a high score , but banks under that size have significant activities in at least one of the 12 indicators that make up the score .

it is difficult to find an asset threshold value that is "just right. .

set too high , and the threshold would exclude banks that are systemically important .

set too low , and it would include banks that are not systemically important .

a case - by - case designation process is an alternative to a size threshold .

a designation process defers to regulators' judgment and is inherently more subjective .

designation also risks a greater market perception of official tbtf status .

a designation process has been used to designate non - banks as systemically important .

that process has proven slow , reversible , and subject to legal challenges in practice .

currently , one firm is designated .

a hybrid regime that mixes an automatic threshold with a case - by - case designation process reduces — but does not eliminate — some drawbacks to both .

congress could consider various modifications to the regime .

for example , the regime could be extended to automatically capture types of depositories that are highly similar to bank holding companies such as thrift holding companies and banks without a parent holding company .

today , there are examples of both w $50 billion in assets , and there are examples of the former that are complex and predominantly engaged in nonbank activities .

looking back , aig , lehman brothers , and washington mutual were all thcs at the center of the financial crisis .

