congress first authorized user fees for brand - name animal drug review in 2003 in response to the same concerns from animal drug sponsors that had spurred establishment of a user fee program for human drugs a decade earlier .

given the years of research and cost involved in animal drug development , sponsors argued for these fees to counter increasing review backlogs , which delayed market entry and therefore — they believed — compromised both animal health and future drug development .

current law authorizes the collection of four types of user fees for brand - name animal drugs , and sets the total amount of revenue for each fee type for each covered fiscal year , to be adjusted annually for inflation and workload , as specified .

adufa iii provided for a final year adjustment , allowing the secretary to increase fee amounts to provide for up to three months of operating reserves of carryover user fees for reviewing nadas in the first three months of fy2019 , unless fda has carryover balances in excess of three months of such operating reserves .

the four types of brand - name animal drug user fees are as follows .

application and supplement fee .

a one - time fee for each nada or supplement a sponsor submits ( 20% of estimated revenue ) .

product fee .

an annual fee for each new animal drug product a sponsor has submitted an application for , including approved and pending nadas and supplemental applications ( 27% of estimated revenue ) .

establishment fee .

an annual fee for each establishment that manufactures an animal drug product named in an approved or pending nada or supplemental application during the given fiscal year ( 26% of estimated revenue ) .

sponsor fee .

an annual fee for each sponsor of an approved or pending nada , supplemental application , or inad submission ( 27% of estimated revenue ) .

the statutory fee revenue amounts for fy2014-fy2018 , as established by adufa iii , are listed in table 1 .

the law requires the secretary to set and publish in the federal register annual fees , based on the statutory revenue amounts and adjustments , 60 days before the start of each fiscal year .

the secretary may waive or reduce fees if he or she determines ( 1 ) assessment of the fee would present a significant barrier to innovation ; ( 2 ) the fees to be paid will exceed expected review costs ; ( 3 ) the animal drug is intended to be used in a medicated feed ; ( 4 ) the animal drug is intended solely for a mums indication ; or ( 5 ) the sponsor is a small business ( defined as having fewer than 500 employees ) submitting its first animal drug application .

information about the numbers and value of waivers and reductions granted and used is provided in fda's annual adufa financial reports .

to ensure that user fees supplement , rather than replace , appropriated funds , the law includes three funding "triggers" that prohibit fda from collecting user fees for animal drug review unless certain conditions are met each year .

fda may collect and use fees only if the nonuser fee appropriations , both for the activities involved in the review of animal drug applications and for fda activities overall , remain at a level at least equal ( adjusted for inflation ) to fy2003 .

the third trigger prohibits fda from collecting user fees in excess of the amount specified in annual appropriations or otherwise made available for obligation that fiscal year .

adufa requires the secretary to submit to congress , not later than 120 days before the end of each fiscal year for which fees are collected , a performance report concerning fda's progress in achieving the performance goals identified in the adufa agreement letter , and a financial report on the implementation of the user fee authority and the use of fees collected during that fiscal year .

in fy2011 fda released an electronic tool for animal drug review submissions ( called esubmitter ) , in order to improve review efficiency .

in fy2015 and fy2016 , about 70% of all submissions were made electronically .

according to fda's most recent performance report ( for fy2016 ) , the agency exceeded its adufa iii performance goals for fy2015 ( as shown in table 2 ) , and for the first three quarters of fy2016 .

ffdca section 740a ( d ) , as amended by adufa iii , sets forth the process for reauthorization , directing fda to develop recommendations for the following five fiscal years ( i.e. , fy2019-fy2023 ) in consultation with specified congressional committees , scientific and academic experts , veterinary professionals , patient and consumer advocacy groups , and the regulated industry .

prior to negotiations with industry , fda is required to request public input , hold a public meeting , provide a 30-day comment period , and publish public comments on the agency's website .

during negotiations with industry , not less frequently than once every four months , fda must hold discussions with representatives of veterinary , patient , and consumer advocacy groups to receive their suggestions and discuss their views on the reauthorization .

after negotiations with industry are completed , fda is required to present the recommendations to the specified congressional committees , publish the recommendations in the federal register , provide a 30-day public comment period , hold another public meeting to receive views from stakeholders , and revise the recommendations as necessary .

minutes of all negotiation meetings between fda and industry must be posted on the fda website .

fda has published on its website a summary of the adufa iv proposed statutory changes , as well as a notice in the federal register announcing the availability of the adufa iv draft recommendations .

according to the agency's summary , the proposed adufa iv agreement with industry would: require sponsors to submit all applications and other submissions electronically , beginning october 1 , 2018 ; retain all performance goals from adufa iii , with the exception of manufacturing supplemental nadas and supplements with changes being effected , for which a longer review time was agreed upon ( see table 3 ) ; and add performance goals for review of certain medicated feed applications , for conduct of presubmission conferences , and for pilot studies on new test methods to detect drug residues in tissues of food - producing animals .

the draft adufa iv agreement also proposes several changes to adufa iii authority , specifically to: continue the inflation adjustment , and the workload adjustment , as calculated per cvm policy , except to reset the base years to fy2014 through fy2018 , with no workload adjustment for fy2019 .

the proposed fy2019 baseline for adufa iv is $30,331,240 , which includes a $400,000 one - time cost for information technology enhancement .

for fy2020- fy2023 , annual statutory revenue amounts would be further adjusted for inflation and workload , and would include $900,000 per year for research on tissue testing methods ; eliminate the final year offset provision and make any excess collections available to "enhance the review process in real time ; " and authorize the secretary , when setting fees , to reduce a calculated workload adjustment , as specified .

the total five - year revenue planned for adufa iii was $114 million .

it is estimated that the total five - year revenue for adufa iv would be $150 million .

the fee revenue distribution in adufa iv would remain the same as adufa iii: 20% from application fees ; 27% from product fees ; 26% from establishment fees ; and 27% from sponsor fees .

according to the agency's section by section summary of the proposed statutory changes , the proposed adufa iv , in addition to codifying several of the proposals in the draft agreement , would amend ( 1 ) the definition of "animal drug application" to include an application for conditional approval under ffdca section 571 , and ( 2 ) the definition of "process for the review of animal drug applications" to include certain activities related to implementation of the us - european union gmp mutual inspection agreement .

the proposed statutory language also would add an exemption from fees for certain labeling supplements ( to add the number of the approved application to the labeling ) .

ffdca section 512 ( c ) ( 1 ) requires fda to review and act on anadas within 180 days of submission .

in congressional testimony in june 2008 , fda reported that in fy2007 , the average review time for anadas was 570 days , and there was a backlog of 446 of these submissions , almost double the number in fy2000 .

at that time , the review of anadas was funded entirely through appropriations , and adufa user fee funds were not authorized to be applied to generic animal drug reviews .

in 2008 , congress passed legislation authorizing fda to assess and collect fees from generic animal drug sponsors to support the review of anadas , supplemental applications , and investigational submissions ( i.e. , generic investigational new animal drug [jinad] submissions ) .

in exchange for the authority to collect user fees , agdufa requires fda to pursue certain performance goals negotiated between the agency and industry .

current law authorizes the collection of three types of user fees , and sets the total amount of revenue for each fee type for each covered fiscal year , to be adjusted annually for workload .

the fee amounts established by agdufa i ( for fy2009-fy2013 ) and agdufa ii ( for fy2014 through fy2018 ) included a fixed 4% inflation adjustment , and provided for a final year adjustment , allowing the secretary to increase fee amounts to provide for up to three months of operating reserves of carryover user fees for reviewing anadas in the first three months of fy2019 , unless fda has carryover balances in excess of three months of such operating reserves .

the three types of generic animal drug user fees are as follows .

abbreviated application fee .

a one - time fee for each anada a sponsor submits ( 25% of estimated revenue ) .

p roduct fee .

an annual fee for each generic new animal drug product a sponsor has submitted an application for , including approved and pending anadas and supplemental applications ( 37.5% of estimated revenue ) .

sponsor fee .

an annual fee for each sponsor of an approved or pending anada , supplemental application , or investigational submission ( 37.5% of estimated revenue ) .

the statutory fee revenue amounts for fy2014-fy2018 , as established by agdufa ii , are listed in table 4 .

the law requires the secretary to set and publish in the federal register annual fees , based on the statutory revenue amounts and adjustments , at least 60 days before the start of each fiscal year .

the secretary may waive or reduce fees if he or she determines that the generic new animal drug is intended solely to provide for a mums indication .

information about the numbers and value of waivers and reductions granted and used is provided in fda's annual agdufa financial reports .

to ensure that user fees supplement , rather than replace , appropriated funds , the law includes three funding "triggers" ( similar to the triggers for the adufa fees ) that prohibit fda from collecting user fees for generic animal drug review unless certain conditions are met each year .

fda may collect and use fees only if the nonuser fee appropriations for fda activities overall remain at a level at least equal ( adjusted for inflation ) to fy2003 , and if the nonuser fee appropriations for activities involved in the review of generic animal drug applications remain at a level at least equal ( adjusted for inflation ) to fy2008 .

the third trigger prohibits fda from collecting user fees in excess of the amount specified in annual appropriations or otherwise made available for obligation that fiscal year .

agdufa requires the secretary to submit to congress , not later than 120 days before the end of each fiscal year for which fees are collected , a performance report concerning fda's progress in achieving the performance goals identified in the agdufa agreement letter and a financial report on the implementation of the user fee authority and the use of the fees collected during that fiscal year .

agdufa i eliminated a backlog of 680 submissions , reduced submission review times from 700 days to 270 days , and met performance goals for all years with the exception of one goal ( for jinad protocols ) in 2009 .

agdufa i phased in more challenging review goals over a five - year period ( see table 5 ) .

agdufa ii continued the review performance goals from fy2013 , but added flexibility with a shortened review - time process for certain submissions , developed electronic submission capability , added a preapproval foreign inspection goal , and developed a question - based review for bioequivalence , among other things .

according to fda's most recent performance report ( for fy2016 ) , the agency exceeded its agdufa ii performance goals for fy2015 ( as shown in table 6 ) and was on track to exceed all performance goals for fy2016 .

ffdca section 742 ( d ) , as amended by agdufa ii , sets forth the process for reauthorization of agdufa ii , directing fda to develop recommendations for the following five fiscal years in consultation with specified congressional committees , scientific and academic experts , veterinary professionals , patient and consumer advocacy groups , and the regulated industry .

prior to negotiations with industry , fda is required to request public input , hold a public meeting , provide a 30-day comment period , and publish public comments on the agency's website .

during negotiations with industry , not less frequently than once every four months , fda must hold discussions with representatives of veterinary , patient , and consumer advocacy groups to receive their suggestions and discuss their views on the reauthorization .

after negotiations with industry are completed , fda is required to present the recommendations to the specified congressional committees , publish the recommendations in the federal register , provide a 30-day public comment period , hold another public meeting to receive views from stakeholders , and revise the recommendations as necessary .

minutes of all negotiation meetings between fda and industry are required to be posted on the fda website .

fda has published on its website a summary of the agdufa iii proposed statutory changes and proposed bill language , as well as a notice in the federal register announcing the availability of the agdufa iii draft recommendations .

the draft agdufa iii agreement proposes to continue several commitments from agdufa ii: fda will continue to allow two - phased chemistry , manufacturing , and controls technical section submissions under the jinad process ; fda and industry remain committed to improving the review and business processes to facilitate the scheduling and conducting of preapproval inspections ( pais ) ; and fda and industry agree to the importance of using both formal meetings and informal communication to ensure high quality submissions so that performance goals can be achieved .

the draft agdufa iii agreement also proposes several changes to agdufa ii , specifically to: require all submissions to be electronic beginning in fy2019 ; modify the inflation adjuster from a fixed 4% to a variable inflation adjuster calculated using payroll cost and benefits and the consumer price index less food and energy ; continue using the workload adjustment , as calculated per cvm policy , except to reset the base years to fy2014 through fy2018 , with no workload adjustment for fy2019 .

the proposed fy2019 baseline for agdufa iii is $18,336,340 .

for fy2020-fy2023 , annual statutory revenue amounts would be further adjusted for inflation and workload ; eliminate the final year offset provision and making any excess collections available to "enhance the review process in real time ; " and authorize the secretary , when setting fees , to reduce a calculated workload adjustment , as specified .

according to the draft agreement , the planned total five - year revenue for agdufa iii is $95 million , compared to $38.1 million for agdufa ii and $27.1 million for agdufa i .

table 7 shows the proposed agdufa iii performance goals compared to agdufa ii .

according to the agency's section by section summary of the proposed statutory changes , the proposed agdufa iii , in addition to codifying several of the proposals in the draft agreement , would amend the definition of the "process for the review of abbreviated applications for generic new animal drugs" to include processing of freedom of information act requests , and would add an exemption from fees for certain labeling supplements ( to add the number of the approved application to the labeling ) .

appendix a. fda animal drug user fee programs: selected legislative history appendix b .

user fees and appropriations appendix c. animal drug program activitie .

