the national voter registration act of 1993 ( nvra ) requires that states follow certain voter registration requirements for federal elections .

nvra does not set requirements for state or local elections .

the stated purposes of nvra are to establish procedures to increase the number of eligible citizens registered to vote in federal elections ; enable enhanced voter participation in federal elections ; protect the integrity of the electoral process ; and ensure accurate voter registration records .

nvra was not the first piece of federal legislation addressing state electoral activities , but it did create a more significant federal presence in voter registration activities .

nvra may be viewed as an extension of the voting rights act of 1965 ( vra ) and other federal legislation that sought to create uniformity across state electoral processes in order to expand voter enfranchisement and ensure constitutionally protected voter rights .

nvra is sometimes referred to as the motor - voter bill , since one of its provisions requires that eligible citizens must be able to simultaneously apply for voter registration when they apply within a state for a motor vehicle driver's license or other personal identification document issued by a state department of motor vehicles .

in addition to these motor - voter registration opportunities , nvra requires that states establish mail - based voter registration processes and accept a federal mail - in registration form .

states must also provide in - person voter registration opportunities at the designated , residence - based voter registration sites , in accordance with state law , and at designated federal , state , or nongovernmental offices , including state agencies providing public assistance or services to persons with disabilities .

in addition to voter registration methods , nvra included procedural requirements for states to follow when performing voter registration list maintenance or when adding , removing , or modifying records for registered voters .

nvra further required that the federal election commission ( fec ) provide guidance to the states for implementing nvra .

nvra also directed the fec to publish a biennial election report assessing the impact of the act on federal election administration and offering recommendations for improvements to federal and state procedures , forms , and other matters affected by nvra .

these fec responsibilities were transferred to the u.s. election assistance commission ( eac ) following enactment of the help america vote act ( hava ) in 2002 .

nvra , as amended by hava , provides much of the framework for federal voter registration policy .

the first portion of this report provides a brief background on the federal role in voter registration and the passage of nvra , followed by a discussion of the key components of nvra .

the implementation of nvra , subsequent modifications to its provisions , and ongoing considerations related to federal voter registration are also discussed .

the final sections of this report provide descriptions of types of common legislative proposals addressing voter registration , with a full list of related bills introduced in the 115 th congress provided in the appendix .

many elements of election administration remain under the domain of state and local governments , but the federal government has become more involved in some election aspects since the 1960s .

the voting rights act of 1965 ( vra ) and several subsequent federal laws , including nvra , reflect congressional initiatives to increase voter participation across the states .

various proposals were introduced in the 1970s and 1980s to create national standards for voter registration , but the enactment of nvra in 1993 marked the first comprehensive federal policy addressing voter registration .

the house and senate considered measures during multiple congresses in the 1970s , for example , that would have created a postcard - based national voter registration form administered by the census bureau .

in the 95 th congress ( 1977-1978 ) , congressional attention turned toward creating national standards for same - day voter registration , but neither chamber passed related legislation .

congress considered other voter registration measures between 1983 and 1988 , but no proposals appear to have reached the floor in either the house or senate .

previous versions of nvra were introduced in the 101 st congress ( 1989-1990 ) and 102 nd congress ( 1991-1992 ) before similar legislation was ultimately signed into law on may 20 , 1993 .

two laws enacted prior to nvra , the voting accessibility for the elderly and handicapped act of 1984 ( vaeha ) and the uniformed and overseas citizens absentee voting act of 1986 ( uocava ) , may be viewed as legislative predecessors to nvra .

primarily , these laws focused on voting access , but they also contained provisions that addressed voter registration .

vaeha and uocava represented extensions of the federal government's role in some electoral activities that had traditionally been the domain of state and local governments .

vaeha required that states make polling places more accessible for persons who are elderly or disabled ; provide absentee ballots for handicapped voters with no notarization or medical certification required ; and offer voting aids for elderly or disabled individuals to use in federal elections .

with regards to voter registration , vaeha also required that states establish "a reasonable number of accessible permanent registration facilities," and offer registration aids for elderly or handicapped individuals to use in federal elections .

uocava required each state to permit uniformed servicemembers , their spouses and dependents , and overseas citizens who do not maintain a residence in the united states to vote absentee in federal elections using a federal write - in absentee ballot or a state absentee ballot approved by the presidential designee and made available at least 60 days before an election .

uocava also required states to accept and process any valid voter registration applications received at least 30 days prior to a federal election from military or overseas voters and created an official postcard form states would accept for these individuals containing both a voter registration application and an absentee ballot application .

nvra's shorthand name , the motor - voter bill , refers to one of its more well - known provisions — the requirement that states establish procedures for eligible individuals to register to vote in federal elections , or to update their voter registration records , simultaneously with their applications for motor vehicle driver's licenses or for any other form of personal identification provided by the state's department of motor vehicles ( dmvs ) .

under nvra , states must also establish other in - person voter registration locations , including at federal , state , or nongovernmental offices that primarily provide public assistance or services to persons with disabilities , and at other locations as described in section 7 of nvra .

in addition to specifying locations for voter registration opportunities , nvra also contains criteria for states' voter registration forms and requires states to accept a national mail - based registration form created by the fec .

states must also meet certain procedural requirements when adding , removing , or modifying records in their voter registration lists .

today , the eac provides states with guidance for implementing nvra and publishes a biennial election report assessing the impact of nvra on federal election administration and providing recommendations , if necessary , for improvements to federal and state procedures , forms , and other matters affected by nvra .

many of nvra's requirements were designed to be implemented through state - level policy changes , if existing state laws were not already in compliance with its provisions .

six states were exempt from nvra at the time of its enactment because they either had no voter registration requirement or provided voter registration at polling places on election day .

the other 44 states were tasked with implementing nvra by january 1 , 1995 ; however , if something in a state's constitution precluded compliance , nvra allowed for a later enactment date to allow for the state's constitutional amendment process .

nvra provided no federal funding to the states to carry out any of its prescribed requirements .

states are , however , eligible to use reduced mailing rates from usps for voter registration mailings .

each state was required to designate a state officer or employee to serve as the chief state election official and coordinate state responsibilities related to nvra .

nvra also created specific roles for the fec and made the department of justice ( doj ) responsible for civil enforcement of its provisions .

the fec was responsible for providing information to states about their responsibilities under nvra ; developing a mail - based federal voter registration form ; and producing a biennial report to congress , in consultation with states' chief election officers .

within the fec , the office of election administration ( oea ) carried out its nvra responsibilities , until the passage of hava in 2002 transferred these responsibilities to the eac .

the initial nvra report from the fec noted that "[nvra] is something of an experiment in governance in that the federal responsibilities for its proper implementation are divided between two separate federal agencies," meaning the fec and doj .

in early guidance to states regarding nvra implementation , the fec stated it "does not have legal authority either to interpret the act or to determine whether this or that procedure meets the requirements of the act," noting that such activities would fall under the doj's civil enforcement responsibilities .

while nvra was under consideration by congress , some were concerned about the costs it could impose upon states , since the bill contained a number of requirements for state election officials and other state agencies but no funding to carry them out .

as states began to implement nvra , however , costs were not cited in the fec reports as a significant impediment , and implementation generally proceeded without many reported complications .

in the 1995-1996 nvra report , for example , the fec said that the motor vehicle provisions "appeared to be the easiest for states to implement," and that states reported "relatively few problems" with implementing the mail registration provisions .

the fec attributed this , in part , to the fact that 26 of the 43 states responding to the survey had already enacted some form of motor voter registration prior to nvra , and that 25 of the responding states already had voter registration by mail prior to nvra .

voter registration rates did increase in the years following the passage of nvra , as compared to the years immediately preceding its passage .

some have suggested , however , that it is difficult to isolate the particular effect nvra had on this increase , due to a number of other factors that could lead voters to register or to not register .

in its 1993-1994 nvra report , the fec noted that statewide computerization of voter registration "greatly facilitates the implementation of nvra," and that "even larger networks linking motor vehicle , public assistance , vital statistics , and courts to the voter registration system" could further assist with intake and verification of voter records .

at the time , fec found varying degrees of computerized record systems across states , and noted that in some states , the record systems used by different local jurisdictions were incompatible with one another .

states were granted some latitude to comply with other provisions in nvra that were not as strictly specified by the legislation , such as the designation of voter registration agencies and state procedures for voter list maintenance ; as a result , the ways in which they approached these provisions varied .

as one example , for nvra's requirement that states designate other offices as voter registration agencies , the fec's 1995-1996 report found four states had not designated any agencies , and the 21 other states that responded had selected "a wide variety of agencies. .

regarding voter list maintenance , the fec stated that "[a]s one might expect , [the] states covered by this report approached the rather technical and detailed problems of list maintenance quite differently and unevenly. .

the help america vote act ( hava ) was enacted in 2002 and serves as another key piece of federal election policy , addressing a number of election administration elements in light of issues revealed during the 2000 presidential election .

this section focuses only on the parts of hava that affected nvra or voter registration in federal elections , namely , the computerization of state voter lists ; changes to the federal mail - based voter registration form ; and transferring the fec's role to a newly created election assistance commission ( eac ) .

hava has many additional components , however , and more comprehensive information on it can be found in crs report rs20898 , the help america vote act and election administration: overview and selected issues for the 2016 election .

in the years preceding hava , the fec's biennial nvra reports contained a number of recommendations related to the voter registration and list maintenance requirements set forth by nvra .

hava incorporated several of these recommendations , some as its own provisions and others as amendments to nvra .

notably , hava established requirements for states to utilize computerized statewide voter registration lists , which the fec had frequently suggested in its nvra reports .

hava also provided funding to help states carry out this requirement and its other objectives , many of which were related to modernizing voting equipment and generally improving federal election administration across all the states .

hava required four specific additions to the nvra mail - based voter registration form: ( 1 ) a question asking whether the registrant was a citizen , with corresponding answer check boxes ; ( 2 ) a question asking whether the registrant would be 18 years of age or older by the next election , with corresponding answer check boxes ; ( 3 ) a statement that if the registrant had answered "no" to either of the preceding questions , that he or she was to stop filling out the form and not register ; and ( 4 ) a statement alerting the registrant to submit copies of appropriate documentation with his or her application , if he or she is a first - time registrant , and the completed forms are submitted through the mail , or else he or she may be required to provide such documentation when voting for the first time .

prior to hava , the fec's office of election administration ( oea ) carried out federal activities related to election administration .

hava created the election assistance commission , an independent , bipartisan agency , which absorbed the oea's responsibilities in addition to carrying out other new requirements .

the eac's responsibilities included carrying out payment and grant programs related to federal elections ; testing and certifying voting systems ; studying election issues ; and issuing guidelines and other guidance related to voting systems and implementation of hava's requirements , in consultation with election officials and other stakeholders .

since the passage of hava in 2002 , the biennial eac reports have often contained further recommendations related to voter registration and election administration .

many of these recent recommendations pertain to modernizing data collection and improving data sharing practices within and among states .

the recommendations are typically broad - based and use generalized language ; they serve only as suggestions to the states , or possibly to congress , since the eac lacks the authority to require states to take any action related to voter registration .

table 2 presents a summary of nvra recommendations contained in the eac reports since 2004 .

 table 1 ( earlier in report ) provides information on the sources of voter registration applications for states covered by nvra during 1995-1996 , 2005-2006 , and 2015-2016 .

these data include new voter registration applications and applications requesting an update or modification for an existing registered voter .

nationwide , dmv offices have remained the most common source among those covered by nvra for voter registration applications received by state election officials .

mail - based forms are consistently the second - most common source for voter registration applications .

the eac notes that online voter registration has grown in recent years , accounting for 17.4% of new voter registration applications for the 2016 election .

for the 2014 election , 6.5% of voter registration applications were submitted online , and for the 2012 election , 5.3% of voter registration applications were submitted online .

bills that address voter registration are routinely introduced in congress .

table a - 1 in the appendix lists 66 pieces of legislation that were introduced in the 115 th congress related to voter registration or to other elements of election administration covered by nvra .

often , these bills sought to expand the ways in which individuals can register to vote or to update the technologies states use to share and store voter registration data .

some of these bills were narrowly tailored to address a particular part of voter registration , whereas other bills proposed broader policies affecting a number of components of election administration .

the sections below categorize some of the common types of policy proposals related to nvra and federal voter registration .

given the variety and quantity of measures typically before congress , this is not meant to be a comprehensive discussion of all available voter registration policy options .

voter registration has remained a subject of interest to congress in the years since the enactment of nvra .

many proposals addressing federal voter registration have been introduced in congress , but federal policies have remained largely unchanged , with the notable exception of revisions made by hava in 2002 .

many individuals believe that providing widespread access to voter registration opportunities is a worthy objective and in keeping with protecting the constitutional right to vote .

in addition to providing voters with access to registration , state election officials face the continuing challenges of updating and maintaining accurate voter registration lists .

technological advancements in the years since nvra have made it somewhat easier for election officials to keep up - to - date voter records , but the increased reliance on computer systems has also introduced new challenges regarding data security .

some individuals may also question whether it is necessary to expand existing federal voter registration requirements for states , believing that existing provisions are sufficient , or that the perceived benefits of voter registration policy changes must be weighed against other considerations .

it can be challenging , for example , to impose uniform regulations across states , which have each developed their own system of election laws .

many federal policy proposals regarding voter registration tend to mirror initiatives that have already been enacted across several states , which may provide lessons for broader implementation , if enacted .

other proposals may prioritize measures to protect election integrity or other areas of election administration , outside of voter registration .

