[f]or any speech or debate in either house , [the senators and representatives] shall not be questioned in any other place .

u.s. const .

art i , § 6 cl .

 .

the constitution's speech or debate clause ( clause ) represents a key pillar in the american separation of powers .

the clause , which derives its form from the language of the english bill of rights and has deep roots in the historic struggles between king and parliament , serves chiefly to protect the independenc e , integrity , and effectiveness of the legislative branch by barring executive or judicial intrusions into the protected sphere of the legislative process .

these prohibited intrusions may take various forms , and , judicial interpretation of the clause's relatively ambiguous language has developed along several related lines of cases .

first and foremost , the clause has been interpreted as providing members of congress ( members ) with general immunity from liability for all "legislative acts" taken in the course of their official responsibilities .

this "cloak of protection" shields members from "intimidation by the executive" or a "hostile judiciary" by protecting against either the executive or judicial powers from being used to improperly influence or harass legislators through retaliatory litigation .

this overarching immunity principle has traditionally been viewed as advancing the primary purpose of the clause: that of preserving the independence of the legislative branch .

the clause has also been said to serve a good governance role , barring judicial or executive processes that may constitute a "distraction" or "disruption" to a member's representative or legislative role .

the court has cited this "distraction" principle , and the clause's broad proscription that members not be "questioned in any other place," as justification for extending the clause's immunity protection beyond criminal actions initiated by the executive branch — which clearly implicate the separation of powers — to private civil suits initiated by members of the public — which generally implicate the separation of powers only to a lesser degree .

even when absolute immunity is not appropriate — for example , when a charge or claim does not arise directly out of a legislative act but is rather entangled with protected and unprotected acts — the clause appears to provide members with complementary evidentiary and testimonial privileges which may be invoked by a member to protect against the introduction of specific "legislative act" evidence .

although not explicitly articulated by the supreme court , lower federal courts have generally viewed these component privileges as a means of effectuating the protections afforded by the clause by barring the introduction of specific documentary evidence of protected legislative acts for use against a member and protecting a member from being questioned regarding those same acts .

some appellate opinions have recognized that the clause must also include a broad documentary nondisclosure privilege to protect members from the perils and burdens of revealing written legislative materials , even when the documents are not used as evidence against the member .

although this nondisclosure privilege has not been adopted by the supreme court , it has been utilized to extend the protections of the clause to prohibit the compelled disclosure of documents in various circumstances , including during searches conducted as a part of a criminal investigation .

some courts , however , have rejected this reasoning , considering it an undue expansion of the clause .

these courts have instead held that , at least in criminal cases , the clause prohibits only the evidentiary use of privileged documents , not their mere disclosure to the government for review as part of an investigation .

the clause has also been interpreted to protect congress's ability to obtain and use information without interference from the judiciary .

these cases tend to emphasize the structural aspects of the clause's role in the separation of powers and , more specifically , the proper relationship between congress and the courts .

for example , courts have generally read the clause as prohibiting the judicial branch from invalidating or blocking a congressional subpoena , or from interfering with how congress , and its members , choose to use information within the legislative sphere .

in fashioning an evolving interpretation , the supreme court has described the clause as a provision in which the text simply cannot be interpreted literally .

"deceptively simple" phrases such as "shall not be questioned," "speech or debate," and even "senators and representatives" have been the subject of significant debate .

while there appears to be much about the clause that is unclear , it is well established that the clause seeks to secure the independence of legislators by providing members with immunity from criminal prosecutions or civil suits that stem from acts taken within the legislative sphere .

this general immunity principle forms the core of the protections afforded by the clause .

the supreme court has consistently and repeatedly suggested the clause's immunity principle should be interpreted "broadly" to effectuate the purpose of maintaining an independent legislature .

once it is determined that the clause applies to a given action , the resulting protections from liability are "absolute," and the action "may not be made the basis for a civil or criminal judgment against a member. .

unlike some constitutional provisions , the clause does not require a court to engage in a balancing of interests .

the clause's general immunity principle is perhaps best understood as complemented — and effectuated — by two component privileges that courts have viewed as emanating from the clause .

the evidentiary component of the clause prohibits evidence of legislative acts from being introduced for use against a member .

similarly , the testimonial component of the clause generally may be invoked when a member is questioned about his legislative acts , either in a trial , before the grand jury , or in a deposition , and , in some courts , to block the compelled disclosure of documents pursuant to a subpoena or a warrant .

the supreme court has not explicitly framed the protections of the clause by reference to these two independent component privileges , but has instead used language that implies only their existence .

as such , these privileges are neither clearly established nor described , and , especially in regard to the testimonial privilege , relatively unsettled .

nevertheless , in understanding the speech or debate clause , it would seem prudent to describe the clause as composed of a general immunity principle , complemented by component evidentiary and testimonial privileges .

although there appears to be some agreement on the existence of the immunity principle and the evidentiary and testimonial privileges , the supreme court's relatively ambiguous treatment of the interactions between the different aspects of the clause has led to significant disagreement among the lower courts .

for example , the court's silence on the scope of the testimonial component of the clause , combined with the inherent confusion surrounding what constitutes a "testimonial" disclosure in other areas of federal law , has led to a deep split among the federal appellate courts as to whether the clause protects against nonevidentiary disclosures of written legislative materials — for example , disclosures made in response to discovery subpoenas or search warrants — or , to the contrary , whether such disclosures are covered only by the evidentiary component of the clause , and therefore disclosure of such documents is protected only when used for evidentiary purposes .

despite the doctrinal uncertainty , it would appear that the different aspects of the clause may be best summarized in the following way .

first , the immunity principle of the clause acts as a jurisdictional bar to legal actions seeking to hold a member liable , either civilly or criminally , for protected legislative acts .

when the claim itself does not require proof of a legislative act , but rather arises from nonlegislative or unprotected activity , the member is not immune , and the criminal or civil action may go forward .

second , during the course of the litigation , the member may nonetheless assert the evidentiary privilege to block the introduction of specific evidence reflecting protected legislative acts .

third , the testimonial privilege may be invoked in a variety of circumstances in order to protect the member from compelled testimony , or in some courts from disclosing documents , about those acts .

viewing the clause holistically , it becomes apparent that whether a court chooses to address a speech or debate case by reference to the general immunity principle , or the evidentiary and testimonial privileges , in some cases the ultimate result may be the same .

for example , a member may avoid liability that may have otherwise attached to his actions either because the court relies on the clause's immunity principle , or because the party initiating the legal action is unable to prove his case without resort to evidence and testimony that is protected by the evidentiary and testimonial privilege components of the clause .

as a result of the breadth of these protections , the clause seemingly makes it more difficult for the executive branch to prosecute members for unlawful acts committed in the context of legislative activity , including those offenses directly related to corruption .

this impact on executive enforcement of the law was fully understood at the time the clause was adopted , and considered a necessary consequence of protecting legislators from undue influence or intimidation .

the clause does not , however , turn members into "supercitizens" by providing them with a blanket exemption from legal liability for any and all illegal acts .

rather , the clause immunizes or protects only a certain class of actions , known as "legislative acts," that are undertaken as part of the legislative process .

not all actions taken by a member in the course of his congressional duties are considered legislative acts .

in fact , many acts that may otherwise be considered "official," in that they relate to governmental duties , are not covered by the protections of the clause .

the clause protects only those acts that are an "integral part of the deliberative and communicative processes" through which members engage either in "the consideration and passage or rejection of proposed legislation" or "other matters which the constitution places within the jurisdiction of either house. .

the legislative act limitation and other aspects of the clause are discussed in greater detail below .

although the precise scope of the protections afforded by the clause have not been clearly articulated by the supreme court , there appears to be some agreement among the lower courts that the clause provides immunity from direct liability for legislative acts ; prohibits the use of legislative - act evidence in the course of litigation ; and protects a member from being compelled to respond to questioning regarding his legislative acts .

there is stark disagreement , however , as to whether the clause encompasses a general documentary "non - disclosure privilege" that applies unrelated to whether such documents are introduced into evidence .

when accepted , this privilege appears to be included within the testimonial component of the clause , and may apply in a variety of situations , including protecting members from compelled compliance with an administrative or civil discovery subpoena for legislative - act documents , or from disclosures reflecting legislative acts that occur during a search executed as part of a criminal investigation .

the d.c .

circuit has established the documentary nondisclosure privilege .

in a series of opinions , the circuit court determined that the clause bars any compelled disclosure — not just the evidentiary use — of written materials that fall "within the sphere of legitimate legislative activity. .

according to the d.c .

circuit , this privilege is broad and "absolute," and applies with equal "vigor" as the other aspects of the clause .

the u.s. court of appeals for the ninth circuit ( ninth circuit ) and the third circuit have rejected this documentary nondisclosure privilege , considering it an undue expansion of the clause .

instead , these courts have held , at least in criminal cases , that the clause prohibits only the evidentiary use of privileged documents , not their mere disclosure to the government for review as part of an investigation .

the disagreement has not been addressed by the supreme court .

the d.c .

circuit position is perhaps best exemplified by two cases: brown & williamson tobacco corporation v .

williams and united states v. rayburn house office building .

brown & williamson arose when a former employee of a law firm disclosed to a congressional committee stolen documents that were obtained while the firm was representing brown & williamson .

the law firm brought an action against the former employee in state court , and during that proceeding , the court issued subpoenas to two members of the committee requiring the return of the stolen documents .

the case was removed to federal court , where the members sought to quash the subpoenas on speech or debate grounds .

the court agreed with the members , blocking the subpoenas and extending the clause to include a general nondisclosure privilege .

in doing so , the court rejected three conclusions that had been reached by the third circuit in an earlier case .

first , the court rebuffed the idea that a member must be named as a party to the suit in order for litigation to "distract them from their legislative work. .

"discovery procedures" in any civil case , the court reasoned , "can prove just as intrusive" as being a party to a case .

the court similarly disagreed with the assertion that the testimonial component of the clause applies only when members or their aides are "personally questioned," suggesting instead that "documentary evidence can certainly be as revealing as oral communications. .

finally , the court dismissed the assertion that when applied to documents , the clause's protection "is one of nonevidentiary use , not of nondisclosure. .

instead , noting the antidistraction purpose of the clause , the court held that "the nature of the use to which documents will be put ... is immaterial if the touchstone is interference with legislative activities. .

the court concluded that "a party is no more entitled to compel congressional testimony — or production of documents — than it is to sue a congressman. .

the d.c .

circuit later extended the nondisclosure privilege to scenarios in which the government executes a search warrant as part of a criminal investigation of a member .

in united states v. rayburn house office building , a member sought the return of documents seized by the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) during a search of the member's office , arguing the search — which was pursuant to a warrant for nonlegislative , unprotected documents — was executed in a way that violated the clause .

in order to distinguish between protected and unprotected documents , the warrant permitted fbi agents to review "all of the papers in the congressman's office. .

the d.c .

circuit held that the search violated the clause because the executive's procedures "denied the congressman any opportunity to identify and assert the privilege with respect to legislative materials before their compelled disclosure to executive agents. .

the court noted that despite the limited scope of the warrant , the fbi's review of the member's papers to determine which were responsive "must have resulted in the disclosure of legislative materials to agents of the executive. .

that compelled disclosure was inconsistent with the protections of the clause .

in reaching this conclusion , the court reaffirmed the nondisclosure privilege articulated in brown & williamson , and then extended it to the criminal context , concluding that "there is no reason to believe that the bar does not apply in the criminal as well as the civil context. .

the court also reaffirmed its view of the absolute nature of the nondisclosure privilege , noting that the "non - disclosure privilege of written materials ... is [] absolute , and thus admits of no balancing. .

the court carefully distinguished between the lawfulness of searching a congressional office pursuant to a search warrant — which the court held was clearly permissible — and the lawfulness of the way the search was executed .

the court declined , however , to expressly delineate acceptable procedures that could avoid future violations , noting only that there appears to be "no reason why the congressman's privilege under the speech or debate clause cannot be asserted at the outset of a search in a manner that also protects the interests of the executive in law enforcement. .

the d.c .

circuit's legal reasoning in rayburn has been rejected by both the ninth and third circuits .

in united states v. renzi , the ninth circuit held that the clause does not prohibit the compelled disclosure of legislative documents to the government in the course of executing a warrant in a criminal investigation , at least when the underlying criminal action is not itself barred by the immunity prong of the clause .

renzi involved a speech or debate clause challenge brought by a former member to portions of a 48-count indictment that included charges that he agreed to provide certain legislative favors in exchange for personal benefits .

specifically , the member relied on the nondisclosure privilege articulated in rayburn to argue , in part , that the government's unlawful review of privileged documents allowed it to obtain evidence that was used against him .

the ninth circuit rebuffed renzi's argument , as well as the reasoning in rayburn , instead finding that the clause does not encompass a documentary nondisclosure privilege .

after noting that the supreme court has not recognized the existence of a general nondisclosure privilege , the renzi court laid out the three principal reasons that led it to disagree with the d.c .

circuit's reasoning .

first , the court objected to the d.c .

circuit's reliance on the notion that "distraction" from a member's legislative duty , on its own , can serve "as a touchstone for application of the clause's testimonial privilege. .

instead , the court reasoned that because "legislative distraction is not the primary ill the clause seeks to cure," that rationale must be "anchored" to a barred action — for example , an investigation into a protected act — before it can preclude inquiry .

in cases where the underlying action is not precluded , the court stated that "other legitimate interests exist" and must be taken into account , most notably "the ability of the executive to adequately investigate and prosecute corrupt legislators for non - protected activity. .

second , the circuit court indicated that previous decisions by the supreme court have suggested that the executive branch may review legislative materials as part of an investigation .

for example , in united states v. helstoski , the supreme court reasoned that the executive branch could redact "legislative" aspects of certain documents so that the "remainder of the evidence would be admissible. .

from this language , the circuit court noted that: because the executive would be hard pressed to redact a document it was constitutionally precluded from obtaining or reviewing , we see no tenable explanation for this caveat except that the clause does not blindly preclude disclosure and review by the executive of documentary "legislative act" evidence .

third , the court determined that any interpretation of the clause that permitted the courts , but not the executive branch , to review protected legislative documents would be inconsistent with the separation - of - powers rationale that undergirds the clause .

the clause , the court noted , is a "creature born of separation of powers" and thus must apply "in equal scope and with equal strength to both the executive and the judiciary. .

the court specifically criticized the d.c .

circuit's opinion in rayburn on the grounds that it prohibited "'any executive branch exposure to records of legislative acts' ... while noting that the judiciary could review evidence claimed to be privileged. .

"such a distinction," the court stated , "cannot exist. .

the precise holding of renzi appears to be that the clause does not prohibit the government from reviewing protected legislative documents as part of the execution of a warrant connected to an investigation into nonlegislative acts .

however , the opinion suggests that there may be times when the testimonial component of the clause would create a nondisclosure privilege in response to a subpoena for documents .

citing to the concurrence in rayburn , the ninth circuit indicated that execution of a warrant has no testimonial aspects since the member is not required to "respond" in any way .

however , the court reasoned that "it is entirely true that sometimes the very disclosure of documentary evidence in response to a subpoena duces tecum may have some testimonial import. .

this language would appear to suggest that the ninth circuit has not foreclosed the idea of the existence of some form of documentary nondisclosure privilege — for instance , one more intimately connected to the testimonial privilege component — that may apply in situations where a subpoena is issued for legislative documents .

the central focus for the court appears to have been whether the disclosure is "testimonial," and therefore more directly implicating the "question[ing]" prohibited by the clause .

the third circuit similarly rejected the existence of a documentary nondisclosure privilege during criminal investigations in in re fattah .

there , a member challenged a warrant , served on google , authorizing the government to search his email on the grounds that such a search was barred by the clause .

specifically , the member asserted that the privilege created by the clause was "one of non - disclosure. .

the court rejected this argument , holding that "it cannot be ... that the privilege prohibits disclosure of evidentiary records to the government during the course of an investigation. .

the court rested its decision primarily on the effect such a broad privilege would have on criminal prosecutions , noting that a nondisclosure privilege during criminal investigations would "shelter" members from criminal responsibility and "eradicate the integrity of the legislative process" by "unduly amplify[ing] the protections" of the clause .

the court ultimately refused to extend the testimonial component of the clause to documentary disclosures , concluding that: ... while the speech or debate clause prohibits hostile questioning regarding legislative acts in the form of testimony to a jury , it does not prohibit disclosure of speech or debate clause privileged documents to the government .

instead , as we have held before , it merely prohibits the evidentiary submission and use of those documents .

how , and whether , the supreme court resolves this ongoing disagreement over the existence of a documentary nondisclosure privilege could have a significant impact on the protections afforded to members by the clause .

for example , if the court were to adopt the position of the third and ninth circuits , that ruling would directly limit a member's ability to invoke the clause as a shield against the disclosure of documents to the executive branch during a criminal investigation .

more generally , however , the disagreement between the d.c .

circuit and the third and ninth circuits is one relating to the fundamental purpose of the clause .

the opinions in renzi and fattah appear to have adopted a legal reasoning that minimizes the role of the "distraction" rationale in defining the scope of the clause .

were the supreme court to embrace that reasoning , it could potentially lead to a narrowing of the clause's protections , especially in scenarios in which information is sought from a member in a proceeding to which he is not a party .

a final line of cases relates to speech or debate clause protections for the acquisition and use of information by congress .

these cases typically arise from lawsuits in which a party asks a court to invalidate or block a congressional subpoena , or to direct congress or its members in how they may use information that is within their possession .

generally , a court will not interfere with lawful efforts by congress to exercise its subpoena power , nor will a court act to limit the ability of members to use or distribute information within the legislative sphere .

in some sense , these cases tend to emphasize the structural and institutional aspects of the clause's role in the separation of powers .

in eastland v. united states serviceman's fund , the supreme court concluded that the clause acts as a significant barrier to judicial interference in congress's exercise of its subpoena power .

in this case , a private nonprofit organization filed suit against the chairman of a senate subcommittee asking the court to enjoin a congressional subpoena issued to a bank for the nonprofit's account information .

the subpoena was issued as part of an investigation into alleged "subversive" activities harmful to the u.s. military conducted by the organization .

the court held that because the "power to investigate and to do so through compulsory process plainly" constitutes an "indispensable ingredient of lawmaking," the clause made the subpoena "immune from judicial interference. .

eastland is generally cited for the proposition that the clause prohibits courts from entertaining preenforcement challenges to congressional subpoenas .

as a result , the lawfulness of a subpoena usually may not be challenged until congress seeks to enforce the subpoena through either a civil action or contempt of congress .

while it is generally true that courts will not interfere in valid congressional attempts to obtain information , especially through the exercise of the subpoena power , the concurrence in eastland and a subsequent appellate court decision suggests that the restraint exercised by the courts in deference to the separation of powers is not absolute .

justice marshall's concurrence in eastland clarified that the clause "does not entirely immunize a congressional subpoena from challenge. .

rather , according to justice marshall , the clause requires only that a member "may not be called upon to defend a subpoena against constitutional objection. .

thus , justice marshall implied that if a challenge to the legitimacy of a subpoena is directed not at congress or its members , it may be permitted to proceed .

such a claim arose , however , in the case of united states v. at&t .

in that case , a congressional subcommittee subpoena was issued to at&t for all letters sent to the company by the department of justice ( doj ) that had identified certain phone lines the doj wished to monitor .

doj filed suit , seeking to enjoin at&t from complying with the subpoena , citing national security concerns .

the subcommittee chairman intervened in the case , asserting that judicial interference in the subcommittee's investigation was barred by the clause .

after the court's attempts to initiate a settlement between the parties failed , the d.c .

circuit ultimately rejected the chairman's argument , noting generally that the clause "was not intended to immunize congressional investigatory actions from judicial review. .

instead , the court concluded , the clause "is personal to members of congress" such that when members or their aides are not "harassed by personal suit against them , the clause cannot be invoked to immunize the congressional subpoena from judicial scrutiny. .

the court went on to establish an exception to the general prohibition on preenforcement interference with congressional subpoenas .

when a party is "not in a position to assert its claim of constitutional right by refusing to comply with a subpoena," because the subpoena was issued to a neutral third party , the clause "does not bar the challenge so long as members of the subcommittee are not , themselves , made defendants in a suit to enjoin implementation of the subpoena. .

once information is in the possession of congress , courts generally will not curtail the ability of members to use or distribute that information within the legislative sphere .

for example , in doe v. mcmillan , a case dealing with the inclusion of specific students' names in a committee report on the d.c. public schools , the supreme court noted that "[a]lthough we might disagree with the committee as to whether it was necessary , or even remotely useful , to include the names of individual children in the ... committee report , we have no authority to oversee the judgment of the committee in this respect ..." the d.c .

circuit has also issued a series of opinions protecting congress's authority to freely and independently assess and use information within its possession , no matter how it was obtained .

in hearst v. black , the court concluded that it was not within its authority to tell a senate committee that it was barred from "keeping" or "making any use of" certain unlawfully obtained documents .

similarly , in mcsurely v. mcclellan , a case involving the receipt of documents by a committee that were obtained pursuant to an unlawful search by a congressional investigator , the court noted that "the law is clear that even though material comes to a legislative committee by means that are unlawful or otherwise subject to judicial inquiry the subsequent use of the documents by the committee staff in the course of official business is privileged legislative activity. .

finally , in brown & williamson , the court suggested that the clause supplied congress with the "privilege to use materials in its possession without judicial interference. .

these principles were applied recently in the case of senate permanent subcommittee on investigations v. ferrer , in which a senate subcommittee initiated a civil action to enforce a subpoena issued to the chief executive officer ( ceo ) of an online advertising website for documents relating to sex trafficking .

as part of that proceeding , the ceo asked the d.c .

circuit to order that the subcommittee destroy or return certain documents he had produced in response to the subpoena .

the court refused to comply with that request , citing to the aforementioned cases , and reasoning that "[t]o circumscribe the committee's use of material in its physical possession would ... 'destroy[]' the independence of the legislature and 'invade[]' the constitutional separation of powers. .

the court ultimately held that "the separation of powers , including the speech or debate clause , bars this court from ordering a congressional committee to return , destroy , or refrain from publishing the subpoenaed documents. .

the speech or debate clause is perhaps the greatest constitutional bulwark against inappropriate executive or judicial intrusions into both the functioning of congress as an institution and the representative role of individual members .

the clause seeks to ensure an independent legislature by providing members with immunity from liability for legislative acts in both criminal and civil cases .

that immunity appears to be complemented by both an evidentiary and a testimonial privilege that protects against the compelled disclosure of information reflecting those acts .

however , the scope of those privileges , especially with regard to the disclosure of documents for nonevidentiary purposes , is subject to debate among the federal courts .

the issue would appear to be ripe for supreme court review .

