this report provides an overview of fy2018 appropriations actions for accounts traditionally funded in the appropriations bill for the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies ( lhhs ) .

this bill provides discretionary and mandatory appropriations to three federal departments: the department of labor ( dol ) , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , and the department of education ( ed ) .

in addition , the bill provides annual appropriations for more than a dozen related agencies , including the social security administration ( ssa ) .

discretionary funds represent less than one - quarter of the total funds appropriated in the lhhs bill .

nevertheless , the lhhs bill is typically the largest single source of discretionary funds for domestic non - defense federal programs among the various appropriations bills ( the department of defense bill is the largest source of discretionary funds among all federal programs ) .

the bulk of this report is focused on discretionary appropriations because these funds receive the most attention during the appropriations process .

the lhhs bill typically is one of the more controversial of the regular appropriations bills because of the size of its funding total and the scope of its programs , as well as various related social policy issues addressed in the bill , such as restrictions on the use of federal funds for abortion and for research on human embryos and stem cells .

congressional clients may consult the lhhs experts list in crs report r42638 , appropriations: crs experts , for information on which analysts to contact at the congressional research service ( crs ) with questions on specific agencies and programs funded in the lhhs bill .

this report is divided into several sections .

the opening section provides an explanation of the scope of the lhhs bill ( and hence , the scope of this report ) and an introduction to important terminology and concepts that carry throughout the report .

next is a series of sections describing major congressional actions on fy2018 appropriations and ( for context ) a review of the conclusion of the fy2017 appropriations process .

this is followed by a high - level summary and analysis of enacted and proposed appropriations for fy2018 , compared to fy2017 funding levels .

the body of the report concludes with overview sections for each of the major titles of the bill: dol , hhs , ed , and related agencies .

these sections provide selected highlights from fy2018 enacted and proposed funding levels compared to fy2017 .

 ( note that the distribution of funds is sometimes illustrated by figures , which in all cases are based on the fy2018 enacted version of the lhhs bill. ) .

finally , appendix a provides a summary of budget enforcement activities for fy2018 .

this includes information on the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) and sequestration , as well as action associated with the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( bba 2018 ; p.l .

115-123 ) , the fy2018 budget resolution , subcommittee spending allocations , and current - year spending levels .

this is followed by appendix b , which provides an overview of the lhhs - related floor amendments that were offered in the house during its consideration of h.r .

3354 , an omnibus appropriations measure that was ultimately not taken up by the senate .

 table 1 provides a timeline of major legislative actions , and the remainder of this section provides additional detail on these and other steps toward full - year fy2018 lhhs appropriations .

 table 2 displays fy2018 discretionary and mandatory lhhs budget authority provided or proposed , by bill title , along with fy2017 enacted levels .

the amounts shown in this table reflect total budget authority provided in the bill ( i.e. , all funds appropriated in the bill , regardless of the fiscal year in which the funds become available ) , not total budget authority available for the current fiscal year .

 ( for a comparable table showing current - year budget authority , see table a - 2 in appendix a . ) .

figure 2 displays the fy2018 enacted discretionary and mandatory lhhs funding levels , by bill title .

 ( while the dollars and percentages discussed in this section were calculated based on the fy2018 enacted amounts , they are generally also illustrative — within several percentage points — of the share of funds directed to each bill title in fy2017 and under the other fy2018 proposals. ) .

as this figure demonstrates , hhs accounts for the largest share of total fy2018 lhhs appropriations: $848 billion , or 84.4% .

this is due to the large amount of mandatory funding included in the hhs appropriation , the majority of which is for medicaid grants to states and payments to health care trust funds .

after hhs , ed and the related agencies represent the next - largest shares of total proposed lhhs funding , accounting for 7.4% and 6.8% , respectively .

 ( the majority of the ed appropriations each year are discretionary , while the bulk of funding for the related agencies goes toward mandatory payments and administrative costs of the supplemental security income program at the social security administration. ) .

finally , dol accounts for the smallest share of total lhhs funds , 1.4% .

when looking only at discretionary appropriations , however , the overall composition of lhhs funding is noticeably different .

hhs accounts for a comparatively smaller share of total discretionary appropriations ( 47.3% ) , while ed accounts for a relatively larger share ( 38.0% ) .

together , these two departments represent the majority ( 85.3% ) of discretionary lhhs appropriations .

dol and the related agencies account for a roughly even split of the remaining 14.7% of discretionary lhhs funds .

note that all amounts in this section are based on regular lhhs appropriations only .

amounts in this section do not include mandatory funds provided outside of the annual appropriations process ( eg , direct appropriations for unemployment insurance benefits payments ) .

all amounts in this section are rounded to the nearest million or billion ( as labeled ) .

the dollar changes and percentage changes discussed in the text are based on unrounded amounts .

for consistency with source materials , amounts do not reflect sequestration or re - estimates of mandatory spending programs , where applicable .

note that all amounts in this section are based on regular lhhs appropriations only ; they do not include funds for hhs agencies provided through other appropriations bills ( eg , funding for the food and drug administration ) or outside of the annual appropriations process ( eg , direct appropriations for medicare or mandatory funds provided by authorizing laws , such as the patient protection and affordable care act [aca , p.l .

111-148 ] ) .

all amounts in this section are rounded to the nearest million or billion ( as labeled ) .

the dollar changes and percentage changes discussed in the text are based on unrounded amounts .

for consistency with source materials , amounts do not reflect sequestration or re - estimates of mandatory spending programs , where applicable .

note that amounts in this section are based on regular lhhs appropriations only .

they do not include mandatory funds provided outside of the annual appropriations process ( eg , direct appropriations for the federal direct student loan program and the federal pell grant program ) .

amounts are rounded to the nearest million or billion ( as labeled ) .

the dollar and percentage changes discussed are based on unrounded amounts .

for consistency with source materials , amounts do not reflect sequestration or re - estimates of mandatory spending programs , where applicable .

note that all amounts in this section are based on regular lhhs appropriations only ; they do not include funds provided outside of the annual appropriations process ( eg , mandatory appropriations for old - age , survivors , and disability insurance benefit payments by the social security administration ) .

all amounts in this section are rounded to the nearest million or billion ( as labeled ) .

the dollar changes and percentage changes in the text are based on unrounded amounts .

for consistency with source materials , amounts do not reflect sequestration or re - estimates of mandatory spending programs , where applicable .

 table 10 displays fy2018 proposed and enacted funding levels for lhhs related agencies , along with fy2017 levels .

in general , discretionary funds constitute about 20% of total appropriations for lhhs related agencies each year .

although discretionary appropriations for related agencies would have been reduced by all three earlier proposals , the fy2018 omnibus increased that funding by about 2.8% .

 ( the house appropriations committee bill would have decreased discretionary funding by 1.1% , the senate committee bill by 3.6% , and the president's budget by 11.1%. ) .

the largest share of funding appropriated to related agencies in the lhhs bill consistently goes to the social security administration ( ssa ) .

when taking into account both mandatory and discretionary funding , ssa usually represents roughly 97% of total appropriations to related agencies in the lhhs bill .

the bulk of mandatory funding provided to ssa from the lhhs bill supports the supplemental security income ( ssi ) program , which provides means - tested cash assistance to disabled adults and children and to seniors aged 65 or older .

when looking exclusively at discretionary funding , ssa received 84.8% of discretionary appropriations for lhhs related agencies in the fy2018 omnibus .

most of ssa's discretionary funding is used by the agency to administer the social security and ssi programs and to support cms in administering portions of medicare .

after ssa , the next - largest related agency in terms of appropriations is usually the corporation for national and community service ( cncs ) , which accounted for about 1.6% of total lhhs appropriations to related agencies in fy2018 .

typically , each of the remaining related agencies receives less than $1 billion from the annual lhhs appropriations bill .

for more information , see table 11 .

the following sections highlight fy2018 appropriations issues for selected related agencies .

table 11 tracks funding levels for these related agencies .

the cncs is an independent federal agency that administers a variety of national and community service programs , such as americorps and the national senior volunteer corps .

the fy2018 omnibus provided $1.1 billion in total cncs funding , a $34 million ( +3.3% ) increase over fy2017 .

the fy2018 president's budget had requested only $135 million ( - 86.9% ) for this agency , noting that these funds would be used to execute an orderly shutdown of cncs operations , with the agency's closure slated to be complete by the end of fy2018 .

both the house and senate committee bills rejected this proposal , with the house proposing to retain cncs funding at its fy2017 level of $1.0 billion , while the senate committee bill would have modestly reduced agency funding by $11 million ( - 1.1% ) .

the ssa lae account , which provides nearly all of ssa's administrative funding , consists mainly of funds that are used by the agency to administer the social security and ssi programs , and also to support cms in administering portions of medicare .

the account also contains funds that are specifically set aside for certain program integrity activities , such as continuing disability reviews ( cdrs ) and ssi non - medical redeterminations .

the fy2018 omnibus provided $12.9 billion to the lae account , which was an increase of $388 million ( +3.1% ) over the fy2017 enacted level .

the president's request would have provided about $28 million less ( - 0.2% ) for the lae account relative to fy2017 .

the house committee bill would have decreased lae funding by $92 million ( - 0.7% ) compared to fy2017 , while the senate committee bill would have decreased lae funding by $492 million ( - 3.9% ) .

of the $12.9 billion provided to the lae account for fy2018 , more than $1.7 billion ( 13.5% ) was dedicated to program integrity activities .

the program integrity portion of the lae account included $273 million in "base" funding subject to the discretionary spending caps established by the budget control act of 2011 , as well as additional funding that was effectively exempt from those caps and subject to an annual limit ( "cap adjustment funding ; " see appendix a for further information ) .

the fy2018 omnibus provided $1.5 billion in cap adjustment funding , which was the maximum amount permitted for fy2018 .

however , because federal law allowed more cap adjustment funding for fy2017 than for fy2018 , the combined amount of program integrity funding enacted for fy2018 was $84 million ( - 4.6% ) less than the combined amount enacted for fy2017 .

all three proposals would have also provided the maximum amount of cap adjustment funding permitted for fy2018 .

the nlrb is an independent board that enforces provisions in the national labor relations act ( nlra ) .

the fy2018 omnibus maintained the fy2017 funding levels for the nlrb of $274 million .

the house committee bill would have decreased funding for the nlrb by $25 million ( - 9.2% ) , while the senate committee bill would have provided the same amount as fy2017 .

the fy2018 omnibus retained a provision that has been included in the lhhs bill since fy2012 that prohibits any funds appropriated to the nlrb in the bill , or any prior appropriations act , from being used to issue a directive or regulation to provide employees a means of voting through any electronic method in an election determining representation for collective bargaining ( §407 ) .

the fy2018 omnibus , however , did not include several nrlb - related provisions proposed by the house committee bill that would have prohibited any funds made available by the bill from being used to enforce the nlra against any indian tribe ( §407 of h.r .

3358 ) ; prohibited any funds made available by the bill from being used to issue , enforce , or litigate any administrative action related to changing the interpretation or application of the "joint employer" standard in effect as of january 1 , 2014 ( §408 of h.r .

3358 ) ; and prohibited any funds made available by the bill from being used in any way to change the standard for initial bargaining unit determination that differs from the standard set in a recent court decision ( §409 of h.r .

3358 ) .

appendix a .

budget enforcement activities the framework for budget enforcement under the congressional budget process has both statutory and procedural elements .

the statutory elements include the discretionary spending limits and mandatory spending sequester derived from the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) and the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 ( bbedca ; p.l .

99-177 ) .

the procedural elements are primarily associated with the budget resolution and limit both total discretionary spending and spending under the jurisdiction of each appropriations subcommittee .

readers should note that the statutory budget enforcement requirements that apply to discretionary spending under the bca were altered during the fy2018 appropriations cycle by the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( bba 2018 ; p.l .

115-123 ) , which was enacted on february 9 , 2018 .

this law increased the defense and nondefense discretionary spending limits for fy2018 and fy2019 , and extended mandatory spending sequestration through fy2027 .

however , the initial lhhs spending limits associated with the budget resolution ( referred to as "302 ( b ) suballocations" ) were made in light of the lower statutory discretionary spending limits that were in effect at that time .

budget control act and sequestration the bca provides budget process mechanisms to reduce mandatory spending and further reduce discretionary spending over an extended period .

for mandatory spending , reductions are to occur through sequestration in each of fiscal years between fy2013-fy2027 .

for discretionary spending , reductions occurred through sequestration in fy2013 , but are to be achieved through lower discretionary spending limits for each of the fiscal years between fy2014-fy2021 .

the bca does not require a sequester of discretionary spending in fy2014-fy2021 unless one or both of the statutory discretionary spending limits ( defense and nondefense ) is breached .

only discretionary spending subject to a given spending limit is affected by a breach of that limit , and the lhhs bill only includes funding in the nondefense category .

fy2018 on may 23 , 2017 , concurrent with the release of the president's budget , president trump issued the required fy2018 sequestration order , calling for nonexempt mandatory spending to be reduced on october 1 , 2017 .

the office of management and budget ( omb ) estimated that the fy2018 sequestration percentages would equal 2% of nonexempt medicare spending and 6.6% of other nonexempt nondefense mandatory spending , for a total reduction of $17 billion in fy2018 .

 ( omb also estimated an 8.9% reduction , totaling $724 million , in nonexempt defense mandatory spending , which does not affect lhhs funds. ) .

with regard to discretionary spending , the fy2018 statutory spending limits were presented in the omb fy2018 sequestration preview report that was also released on may 23 , 2017 .

these limits were based on current law at the time and calculated to be $549 billion for defense spending and $516 billion for nondefense spending .

on february 9 , 2018 , the bba 2018 was enacted ( h.r .

1892 ; p.l .

115-123 ) .

in addition to providing the fy2018 supplemental appropriations that were discussed earlier in this report , the act extended the mandatory spending sequester through fy2027 .

it also increased the statutory discretionary spending limits for fy2018 and fy2019 .

the new fy2018 limits were $629 billion for defense spending ( +80 billion ) and $579 billion for nondefense spending ( +$63 billion ) .

once the fy2018 omnibus was enacted and allowable adjustments to the spending limits were made , omb determined that the omnibus did not violate either the defense or the nondefense limit .

cap adjustments , exemptions , and special rules the bca allows for certain adjustments to the discretionary spending limits for fy2012-fy2021 .

for lhhs , the bca as originally enacted allowed increases to the nondefense limit ( up to a point ) to accommodate new budget authority for specified program integrity initiatives at hhs and the social security administration ( ssa ) .

the bipartisan budget act of 2015 amended the list of ssa activities that may be covered by this "cap adjustment" to include costs associated with work - related continuing disability reviews , cooperative disability investigations , and fraud prosecutions by special assistant u.s .

attorneys .

the bipartisan budget act of 2015 also revised the amount of the allowable ssa adjustment amounts to be more generous in fy2017-fy2019 compared to what was previously allowed , but less generous in fy2021 .

the bba 2018 added a new cap adjustment that also involves a lhhs activity .

this new cap adjustment allows increases to the nondefense limit ( up to a point ) to accommodate new budget authority for the dol to help fund the reemployment services and eligibility assessments conducted by the states related to unemployment compensation .

separate from these cap adjustments , the 21 st century cures act ( cures act , p.l .

114-255 ) , which was enacted on december 13 , 2016 , included additional budget enforcement procedures related to the discretionary spending limits .

these procedures apply to two accounts within the scope of the lhhs bill: the nih innovation account and the account for the state response to the opioid abuse crisis .

the cures act created these accounts and authorized appropriations from them for specific fiscal years ( fy2017-fy2026 for the nih innovation account and fy2017-fy2018 for the account for the state response to the opioid abuse crisis ) .

the cures act further provided that subsequent discretionary appropriations from these accounts ( up to the amounts authorized for each fiscal year ) are to be subtracted from any cost estimates provided for purposes of budget controls .

the cures act ensured that appropriations from these accounts will not count against any spending limits , such as the statutory discretionary spending limits imposed by the bca ; that is , the amounts appropriated from these accounts will be considered to be outside those limits .

in addition , although sequestration largely consists of automatic , across - the - board spending reductions , the law exempts a limited number of programs from sequestration and subjects others to special rules .

the lhhs bill contains several programs that are exempt from sequestration , including medicaid , payments to health care trust funds , supplemental security income , special benefits for disabled coal miners , retirement pay and medical benefits for commissioned public health service officers , foster care and adoption assistance , and certain family support payments .

the lhhs bill also contains several programs that are subject to special rules under sequestration , such as unemployment compensation , certain student loans , health centers , and portions of medicare .

budget resolution and 302 ( b ) suballocations the procedural elements of budget enforcement generally stem from requirements under the congressional budget act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-44 ) that are associated with the adoption of an annual budget resolution .

through this process , the appropriations committee in each chamber receives a procedural limit on the total amount of discretionary budget authority for the upcoming fiscal year , referred to as a 302 ( a ) allocation .

the appropriations committee subsequently divides this allocation among its 12 subcommittees .

these subcommittee - level spending limits are referred to as 302 ( b ) suballocations .

the 302 ( b ) suballocations restrict the amount of budget authority available to each subcommittee for the agencies , projects , and activities under its jurisdiction , effectively acting as a cap on each of the 12 regular appropriations bills .

enforcement of the 302 ( a ) allocation and 302 ( b ) suballocations occurs through points of order .

for the fy2018 appropriations cycle , the house and the senate did not adopt a budget resolution prior to the start of the fiscal year .

in the absence of a budget resolution , the house appropriations committee chose to adopt "interim 302 ( b ) suballocations" for the appropriations bills as those bills were marked up in full committee .

the lhhs suballocation was adopted on july 19 , 2017 .

similarly , the chair of the senate appropriations committee released "funding guidance" on july 20 , 2017 , indicating the amount of funding that was to be assumed for each of the fy2018 appropriations bills in the senate .

the funding guidance and interim suballocations were not procedurally enforceable as the appropriations bills were being considered prior to fy2018 .

ultimately , a budget resolution for fy2018 ( h.con.res .

71 ) was adopted in the senate on october 19 , 2017 , and in the house on october 26 , 2017 .

however , neither the senate nor the house appropriations committees reported 302 ( b ) suballocations at that time .

instead , the senate appropriations committee reported out its suballocations ( s.rept .

115-219 ) on march 22 , 2018 , after final overall funding levels for fy2018 had been negotiated .

no fy2018 suballocations have been reported by the house appropriations committee as of the date of this report .

for current - year lhhs discretionary funding , table a - 1 displays fy2017 enacted levels , house and senate fy2018 interim discretionary spending levels , the senate's current 302 ( b ) , and enacted fy2018 lhhs appropriations .

the table shows that the house initially would have decreased regular lhhs appropriations by about $5.0 billion , whereas the senate would have increased those appropriations by about $3.0 billion relative to fy2017 .

however , final enacted appropriations were about $16.1 billion higher than the prior year .

the table also displays funding for which adjustments may be made to the discretionary spending limits under the bca , including funding for certain lhhs program integrity activities and emergency requirements , where applicable .

the "adjusted appropriations" total includes this funding .

note that compliance with discretionary spending allocations is evaluated based on budget authority available in the current fiscal year , adjusted for scorekeeping by cbo .

as such , totals shown in this table may not be comparable to other totals shown in this report .

current - year budget authority totals exclude advance appropriations for future years , but include advance appropriations from prior years that become available in the current year .

 ( advance appropriations are provided to selected lhhs accounts , generally in order to manage specific planning concerns and ensure continuity of operations at the start of a new fiscal year. ) .

current - year budget authority table a - 2 displays the total lhhs current - year budget authority , by title .

the amounts shown in this table reflect total budget authority available for obligation in the fiscal year , regardless of the year in which it was first appropriated .

amounts in the fy2017 enacted column include fy2017 budget authority provided by the fy2016 omnibus ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

similarly , the fy2018 president's budget , house committee , senate committee , and enacted columns include fy2018 budget authority provided by the fy2017 omnibus ( p.l .

115-31 ) .

 ( for a comparable table showing total budget authority in the bill , rather than current - year budget authority , see table 2 in the body of this report. ) .

as mentioned above , it is current - year budget authority ( adjusted for scorekeeping by cbo ) that is used to determine compliance with discretionary spending allocations .

appendix b .

house floor amendments offered to h.r .

3354 while the house committee - reported version of the lhhs bill ( h.r .

3358 ) did not receive floor consideration , the text of this measure ( with minor alterations ) was included in an omnibus appropriations bill ( h.r .

3354 ) that was amended on the floor and passed by the house on september 14 , 2017 .

no further congressional action occurred with regard to h.r .

3354 .

the timing of the fy2018 appropriations process and the manner in which lhhs appropriations were considered was affected by multiple factors .

one factor is that the release of the fy2018 president's budget was delayed by more than three months due to the presidential transition from the administration of president barack h. obama to the administration of president donald j. trump .

 ( the full fy2018 president's budget request was ultimately released on may 22 , 2017. ) .

in addition , final fy2017 appropriations were not enacted until may 5 , 2017 ( p.l .

115-31 ) , roughly seven months into the fiscal year .

as a result , final fy2017 appropriations levels were largely unknown as the fy2018 president's budget was being formulated and consideration of fy2018 appropriations began shortly after final fy2017 appropriations were determined .

due to the condensed timeline available for considering appropriations prior to the start of fy2018 , the house decided to consider and amend the 12 appropriations bills on the floor in the form of two omnibus packages .

the first of these packages , the make america secure appropriations act , 2018 ( h.r .

3219 ) , which contained 4 of the 12 appropriations acts ( none of which were the lhhs act ) was passed by the house on july 27 , 2017 .

the second of these packages , the make america secure and prosperous appropriations act , 2018 ( h.r .

3354 ) , was used to consider and amend the remaining eight appropriations acts , including lhhs .

 ( the text of the lhhs appropriations act that was included in division f of h.r .

3354 was virtually identical to the text of h.r .

3358 as reported from committee. ) .

the lhhs - related amendments to h.r .

3354 were considered under the terms of a special rule ( h.res .

504 ) .

of the 52 llhs amendments that were offered , 35 were adopted , 15 were rejected , and 2 were withdrawn .

these amendments and their dispositions are listed in table b - 1 below .

readers should note that a number of these amendments would have increased funding for certain activities while decreasing funding for administration at the department level .

for example , nine amendments were adopted that would have reduced the amount of funds in the hhs general department management account .

in total , these amendments would have reduced the funds in the bill for that account from $293 million to $39 million .

in addition , six amendments to the ed program administration account within departmental management would have collectively reduced the funds for that account from $431 million to $286 million .

because these types of accounts provide appropriations to administer the lhhs activities under the purview of the bill , cuts of this magnitude , if they had been enacted , could have had direct or indirect effects on how those activities were carried out .

