recent flood disasters have raised congressional and public interest in not only reducing flood risks , but also improving flood resilience , which is the ability to adapt to , withstand , and rapidly recover from floods .

congress has established various federal programs that may be available to assist u.s. state , local , and territorial entities and tribes in reducing flood risks .

among the most significant current federal programs assisting communities with improvements to reduce their flood risks and improve their flood resilience are ( 1 ) programs that assist with infrastructure to reduce flood risks and other flood mitigation activities , and ( 2 ) programs of the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) that provide incentives to reduce flood risks .

this report provides information about these federal programs ; it is organized into the following sections: primer on flood policy and federal flood - related activities ; descriptions of selected federal assistance programs ; introduction to flood insurance and related programs ; and policy considerations .

in the united states , flood - related responsibilities are shared .

states and local governments have significant discretion in land use and development decisions ( eg , building codes , subdivision ordinances ) , which can be factors in determining the vulnerability to and consequence of hurricanes , storms , extreme rainfall , and other flood events .

flood events , particularly hurricane katrina in 2005 and subsequent events , have generated concern about the nation's and the federal government's financial exposure to flood losses , as well as the economic , social , and public health impacts on individuals and communities .

congress and other policymakers may be faced with various policy questions related to flood policy , federal programs , and federalism , including the following: are federal programs providing cost - effective assistance to state and local entities to reduce flood risks not only in areas that recently experienced floods , but also other areas at risk of flooding ? .

could changes to how federal assistance programs or the nfip are implemented and funded result in long - term net benefits in terms of avoided federal disaster assistance , lives lost , and economic disruption associated with floods ? .

do federal programs provide incentives or disincentives for state and local entities to prepare for floods and manage their flood risks ? .

although this report covers a broad range of federal programs that may be able to assist with reducing community flood risk and improving flood resilience , it is not comprehensive .

multiple aspects of flood policy and specialized federal programs are not addressed herein .

this report is largely an overview of existing federal programs with a brief description of some policy considerations as context for these programs and the nation's flood challenge .

congress has created various federal programs that may be able to assist state , local , territorial , and tribal entities with flood risk reduction and flood resilience improvements for communities .

table 1 summarizes some of these federal programs .

each program shown in table 1 was created for a specific purpose and has statutory limitations .

for example , some programs are triggered only after certain declarations or actions ; others are part of regular agency operations .

discussions later in this report provide more information on each of the programs listed in table 1 .

although the subsequent discussions examine geographic eligibility generally , some programs may not be eligible in certain areas designated under the coastal barrier resources act .

table 1 provides information on regular funding for fy2018 ( i.e. , annual discretionary appropriations for some programs ) and supplemental appropriations provided in fy2017 and fy2018 .

additional information is provided in the more detailed discussions about each program , including for most programs in the trump administration's budget request for fy2019 .

the first set of assistance programs shown in table 1 are those that provide assistance targeted specifically at flood - related improvements .

the second set addresses not only flood but also other hazard mitigation and resilience activities .

the third set includes broader programs that include flood - risk reduction , resilience , or stormwater activities among multiple eligible activities .

in some instances , a state may carry out some activities supported by the programs shown in table 1 in a coordinated manner .

each state has a state hazard mitigation officer who helps to compile a state mitigation plan , administers certain mitigation funding , and generally has knowledge of the state's existing mitigation resources and its history of programs and funding awards in this area .

also , a few federal programs allow for funds provided through them to be used to satisfy the nonfederal cost - sharing requirement for another federal program ( eg , see entry for cdbg in table 12 ) .

the below sections and accompanying tables discuss the programs shown in table 1 discussions of the programs are grouped by the federal agency or department administering them .

the order followed is fema , usace , usda , noaa , epa , and hud .

table 1 .

selected federal programs that support flood resilience and risk reduction improvement .

the nfip is the primary source of flood insurance coverage for residential properties in the united states .

the nfip has two main policy goals: ( 1 ) to provide access to primary flood insurance , thereby allowing for the transfer of some of the financial risk of property owners to the federal government ; and ( 2 ) to mitigate and reduce the nation's comprehensive flood risk through the development and implementation of floodplain management standards .

a longer - term objective of the nfip is to reduce federal expenditure on disaster assistance after floods .

as of march 2018 , the nfip had 5.025 million flood insurance policies providing nearly $1.28 trillion in coverage , with over 22,000 communities in 50 states and 6 other jurisdictions participating .

as a public insurance program , the goals of the nfip are very different from the goals of private - sector companies , as it encompasses social goals to provide flood insurance in flood - prone areas to property owners who otherwise would not be able to obtain it and reduce government's cost after floods .

the nfip also engages in many "noninsurance" activities in the public interest: it identifies and maps flood hazards , disseminates flood risk information through flood maps , requires community land - use and building - code standards , contributes to community resilience by providing a mechanism to fund rebuilding after a flood , and offers grants and incentive programs for household - and community - level investments in flood risk reduction .

recent major flood events have renewed concerns about the nation's and the federal government's financial exposure to flood losses , as well as the economic , social , and public health impacts of floods on individuals and communities .

part of the challenge for congress and other policymakers in reducing flood risks and improving resilience is the distribution of responsibilities among local , state , territorial , tribal , and federal entities .

there exists some tension between the broader federal interest in reducing the federal government's exposure to costs for disaster response and recovery , and nonfederal ( including private ) roles in shaping how structures and facilities are built in coastal areas , floodplains , and elsewhere .

local and state governments in the united states have the primary responsibility for managing flood risk and resilience , including through guiding land use in floodplains , establishing and enforcing building codes and ordinances , and construction of public works to protect communities .

at the same time , as discussed in this report , the federal government has elected to become involved in some aspects of flood resilience and risk reduction ( eg , nfip ) and disaster response and recovery .

consequently , although the federal government does not participate in many nonfederal decisions affecting flood risk , the federal government is affected by actions by local governments , states , tribes , and territories that reduce or exacerbate flood risk .

no authoritative national estimate of the financial consequences of all types of flooding — riverine floods , coastal storms , tidal flooding , flash floods , intense precipitation , stormwater — is available .

also , the current overall level of federal and nonfederal investments to reduce flood risk is unknown .

consequently , it is not possible to determine how current government investment in flood resilience and risk reduction compares to the national damage and disruption caused by flooding or to government spending on response and recovery .

potential questions for the 115 th congress and other policymakers include the following: do federal programs provide incentives or disincentives for u.s. states , local governments , territories , and tribes to prepare for flood and manage their flood risks ? .

are the level , type , and geographic distribution of federal actions for flood resilience and risk reduction cost - effective ? .

are there changes to how federal flood - related assistance programs and the nfip are implemented or funded that could result in long - term net benefits in avoided federal disaster assistance , lives lost , and economic disruption ? .

in addressing the nation's flood risk and resilience , policymakers may choose to prioritize some federal roles over others , increase or redistribute activities and funding across existing federal programs , reorient or eliminate existing programs , or establish new programs .

crs report r40763 , agricultural conservation: a guide to programs , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42854 , emergency assistance for agricultural land rehabilitation , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r43315 , water infrastructure financing: the water infrastructure finance and innovation act ( wifia ) program , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34537 , fema's pre - disaster mitigation program: overview and issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r43520 , community development block grants and related programs: a primer , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r43990 , fema's public assistance grant program: background and considerations for congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r44593 , introduction to the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r44632 , sea - level rise and u.s .

coasts: science and policy considerations , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r44963 , wastewater infrastructure: overview , funding , and legislative developments , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r45185 , army corps of engineers: water resource authorization and project delivery processes , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30478 , federally supported water supply and wastewater treatment programs , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs in focus if10859 , the coastal barrier resources act ( cbra ) , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

