this is a brief discussion of the law associated with the mandatory minimum sentencing provisions of federal controlled substance ( drug ) laws and drug - related federal firearms and recidivist statutes .

the se mandatory minimums , however , are not as mandato ry as they might appear .

the government may elect not to prosecute the underlying offenses .

federal courts may disregard otherwise applicable mandatory sentencing requirements at the behest of the government .

the federal courts may also bypass some of them for the benefit of certain low - level , nonviolent offenders with virtually spotless criminal records u nder the so - call ed " safety valve " provision .

finally , in cases where the mandatory minimums would usually apply , the p resident may pardon offenders or commute their sentences before the minimum term of imprisonment has been served .

be that as it may , sentencing in drug cases , particular ly mandatory minimum drug sentencing , has contributed to a n explosion in the federal prison population and attendant costs .

thu s , t he federal inmate population at the end of 1976 was 23,566 , and at the end of 1986 it was 36,042 .

on january 4 , 2018 , the federal inmate population was 18 3 , 493 .

as of september 30 , 2016 , 49.1% of federal inmates were drug offenders and 72.3% of those were convicted of an offense carrying a mandatory minimum .

in 1976 , federal prisons cost $183.914 million ; in 1986 , $550.014 million ; and in 2016 , $6.751 billion ( est .

 ) .

federal mandatory minimum sentencing statutes have existed since the dawn of the republic .

when the first congress assembled , it enacted several mandatory minimums , each of them a capital offense .

the drug mandatory minimums are of more recent origins .

the first arrived in 1914 , when congress established a mandatory minimum of five years for the manufacture of opium for smoking purposes .

shortly after mid - century , congress began adding to the number of drug - related mandatory minimums .

prior to enactment of the controlled substances act and the controlled substances import and export act in 1970 , federal law included mandatory minimums for violations of the narcotics or marijuana tax regimes ; smuggling narcotics or marijuana ; distributing heroin to a child ; possession of narcotics aboard a u.s. vessel ; and violations of federal drug laws using communications facilities .

the 1970s legislation eliminated them all .

left in their place were only the mandatory minimums in the continuing criminal enterprise ( drug kingpin ) section .

then , in 1984 , congress enacted the sentencing reform act that created the united states sentencing commission and authorized it to promulgate then binding sentencing guidelines .

in many instances , the resulting guidelines operated essentially , but briefly , to establish a mandatory minimum term of imprisonment where none had existed before .

soon thereafter , congress began to repopulate federal drug laws with mandatory minimums , the bulk of which congress inserted using the anti - drug abuse act of 1986 .

the 1986 legislation , however , included substantial assistance provisions which allow the courts to disregard the mandatory minimums in the case of cooperative defendants .

in addition , shortly thereafter , congress instructed the sentencing commission to provide it with a detailed report on federal mandatory minimum statutes .

the commission's 1991 report observed that from 1984 to 1990 four drug - related statutes accounted for roughly 94% of the mandatory minimum offenses regularly prosecuted .

the commission's initial report was quickly followed by a department of justice study that concluded that a substantial number of those sentenced under federal mandatory minimums were nonviolent , first - time , low - level drug offenders .

congress responded with the safety valve provisions of 18 u.s.c .

§ 3553 ( f ) , under which the court may disregard various drug mandatory minimums and sentence an offender within the applicable sentencing guideline range as long as the offender was a low - level , nonviolent participant with no prior criminal record who has cooperated fully with the government .

the hate crime legislation enacted in 2009 directed the u.s .

sentencing commission to submit a second report on federal mandatory minimums .

the commission presented its second report in october 2011 .

a number of things had changed between the first and second commission reports .

sentencing under the guidelines had been in place for only a relatively short period of time when the first report was written .

by the time of the second report , the number of defendants sentenced by federal courts had grown to almost three times the number sentenced under the guidelines when the commission wrote its first report .

the judicial landscape has changed as well .

when the commission issued its first report , the guidelines were considered binding upon sentencing judges .

after the supreme court's booker decision and its progeny , the guidelines became but the first step in the sentencing process .

in addition , the fair sentencing act , passed in 2010 , reduced the powder cocaine - crack cocaine ratio from 100 to 10 to roughly 18 to 1 .

the second commission report recommended that congress consider expanding eligibility for the safety valve , and adjusting the scope , severity , and the prior offenses that trigger the recidivist provisions under firearm statute and the two principal drug statutes , ( 21 u.s.c .

§§ 841 and 960 ) .

in october 2017 , the commission issued a third report devoted exclusively to mandatory minimum penalties for drug offenses , in which it made no recommendations .

instead , the report provided an extensive statistical analysis , summarized in ten findings: 1 .

drug mandatory minimum penalties continued to result in long sentences in the federal system .

2 .

mandatory minimum penalties continued to have a significant impact on the size and composition of the federal prison population .

3 .

offenses carrying a drug mandatory minimum penalty were used less often , as the number and percentages of offenders convicted of an offense carrying a mandatory minimum penalty has decreased since fiscal year 2010 .

4 .

while fewer offenders were convicted of an offense carrying a mandatory minimum penalty in recent years , the offenses of those who were tended to be more serious .

5 .

drug mandatory minimum penalties applied more broadly than congress may have anticipated .

6 .

statutory relief plays a significant role in the application and impact of drug mandatory minimum penalties , and results in significant reduced sentences when applied .

7 .

additionally , drug mandatory minimum penalties appear to provide criminal defendants with a significant incentive to provide substantial assistance to the government pursuant to 18 u.s.c .

§ 3553 ( e ) and the related guideline provisions of ussg §5k1.1 .

8 .

however , neither the statutory safety valve provision at 18 u.s.c .

§ 3553 ( f ) , nor the substantial assistance provision of 18 u.s.c .

§ 3553 ( e ) fully ameliorate the impact of drug mandatory minimum penalties on relatively low - level offenders .

9 .

there were significant demographic shifts in the data relating to mandatory minimum penalties .

10 .

although likely due in part to an older age at release , drug trafficking offenders convicted of an offense carrying a drug mandatory minimum penalty had a lower recidivism rate than those drug trafficking offenders not convicted of such an offense .

although each house devoted considerable attention to mandatory minimum sentencing and associated issues , the 114th congress ended without consensus .

several proposals introduced in the 115th congress address some of the same issues .

 table 1 below describes the mandatory minimum sentencing provisions for various drug and drug - related offenses .

low - level drug offenders can escape some of the mandatory minimum sentences for which they qualify under the safety valve found in 18 u.s.c .

§ 3553 ( f ) .

congress created the safety valve after it became concerned that the mandatory minimum sentencing provisions could have resulted in equally severe penalties for both the more and the less culpable offenders .

the safety valve is available to qualified offenders convicted of violations of the possession - with - intent , simple possession , attempt , or conspiracy provisions of the controlled substances or controlled substances import and export acts .

the safety valve is not available to avoid the mandatory minimum sentences that attend other offenses , even those closely related to the covered offenses .

section 860 ( 21 u.s.c .

§ 860 ) , which outlaws violations of section 841 near schools , playgrounds , or public housing facilities and sets the penalties for violation at twice what they would be under section 841 , is not covered .

those charged with a violation of section 860 are not eligible for relief under the safety valve provisions .

in addition , safety valve relief is not available to those convicted under the maritime drug law enforcement act , even though the act proscribes conduct closely related to the smuggling and trafficking activities punished under sections 960 and 963 ( 21 u.s.c .

§§ 960 , 963 ) .

for the convictions to which the safety valve does apply , the defendant must convince the sentencing court by a preponderance of the evidence that he satisfies each of the safety valve's five requirements .

he may not have more than one criminal history point .

he may not have used violence or a dangerous weapon in connection with the offense .

he may not have been an organizer or leader of the drug enterprise .

he must have provided the government with all the information and evidence at his disposal .

finally , the offense may not have resulted in serious injury or death .

upon motion of the government , the court shall have the authority to impose a sentence below a level established by statute as a minimum sentence so as to reflect a defendant's substantial assistance in the investigation or prosecution of another person who has committed an offense .

such sentence shall be imposed in accordance with the guidelines and policy statements issued by the sentencing commission pursuant to section 994 of title 28 , united states code .

the substantial assistance provision was enacted with little fanfare in the twilight of the 99th congress as part of the wide - ranging anti - drug abuse act of 1986 , legislation that established or increased a number of mandatory minimum sentencing provisions .

the section passed between the date authorizing the sentencing guidelines and the date the guidelines became effective .

rather than replicate the language of section 3553 ( e ) , the guidelines contain an overlapping section which authorizes a sentencing court to depart from the minimum sentence called for by the guidelines .

a motion asking the court to sentence a defendant beneath the statutory mandatory minimum must be filed under section 3553 ( e ) ; a motion under section 5k1.1 of the guidelines alone is insufficient .

the government has at least a year to file its motion for substantial assistance .

defendants sentenced to mandatory minimum terms of imprisonment have challenged their sentences on a number of constitutional grounds beginning with congress's legislative authority and ranging from cruel and unusual punishment through ex post facto and double jeopardy to equal protection and due process .

each constitutional provision defines outer boundaries that a mandatory minimum sentence and the substantive offense to which it is attached must be crafted to honor .

the federal government is a creature of the constitution ; it enjoys only such powers as can be traced to the constitution .

among the powers which the constitution bestows upon congress are the powers to define and punish felonies committed upon the high seas , to exercise exclusive legislative authority over certain federal territories and facilities , to make rules governing the armed forces , to regulate interstate and foreign commerce , and to enact legislation necessary and proper for the execution of those and congress's other constitutionally granted powers .

it also grants congress authority to enact legislation necessary and proper to the execution of those powers which it vests in any officer or department of the federal government .

many of the federal laws with mandatory minimum sentencing requirements were enacted pursuant to congress's legislative authority over crimes occurring on the high seas or within federal enclaves , or to its power to regulate commerce .

when a statute falls for want of legislative authority , the penalties it would impose fall with it .

this has yet to occur in the area of mandatory minimum sentences relating to controlled substances .

"the congress shall have power ... to regulate commerce with foreign nations , and among the several states , and with indian tribes. .

this clause vests congress with authority to regulate three broad categories of interstate commerce .

in the words of united states v. lopez , "[f]irst , congress may regulate the use of the channels of interstate commerce.... second , congress is empowered to regulate and protect the instrumentalities of interstate commerce , or persons or things in interstate commerce , even though the threat may come only from intrastate activities... .

finally , congress's commerce authority includes the power to regulate those activities having a substantial relation to interstate commerce. .

applying these standards , the lopez court concluded that the commerce clause did not authorize congress to enact a particular statute which purported to outlaw possession of a firearm on school property .

because the statute addressed neither the channels nor instrumentalities of interstate commerce , its survival turned upon whether it came within congress's power to regulate activities that have a substantial impact on interstate commerce .

here , the statute was found wanting .

"[b]y its terms" it had "nothing to do with commerce or any sort of economic enterprise. .

it "contain[ed] no jurisdictional element which would ensure , through case - by - case inquiry , that the firearm possession in question affect[ed] interstate commerce. .

its impact on commerce was so remote that to credit it would envision a virtually boundless power and one reserved to the states , the court explained .

a few years later , the court in united states v. morrison reiterated "that congress may [not] regulate noneconomic , violent criminal conduct based solely on that conduct's aggregate effect on interstate commerce .

the constitution requires a distinction between what is truly national and what is truly local. .

yet purely intrastate activities may have a sufficient impact on interstate commerce to bring them within the reach of congress's commerce clause power .

so it is in the case of the controlled substances act .

the court concluded in gonzales v. raich that: given the enforcement difficulties that attend distinguishing between marijuana cultivated locally and marijuana grown elsewhere and concerns about diversion into illicit channels , we have no difficulty concluding that congress had a rational basis for believing that failure to regulate the intrastate manufacture and possession of marijuana would leave a gaping hole in the csa [controlled substances act] .

thus ... when it enacted comprehensive legislation to regulate the interstate market in a fungible commodity , congress was acting well within its authority to 'make all laws which shall be necessary and proper' to 'regulate commerce ... among the several states. .

that the regulation ensnares some purely intrastate activity is of no moment. .

the constitution grants the president authority to negotiate treaties and the senate the authority to approve them in the exercise of its advice and consent prerogatives .

almost a century ago , the court observed that "[i]f the treaty is valid there can be no dispute about the validity of the statute under article i , § 8 , as a necessary and proper means to execute the powers of the government. .

the controlled substances act might be considered implementation of various treaties of the united states relating to controlled substances .

in fact , the controlled substances act begins with the congressional finding and declaration that "[t]he united states is a party to the single convention on narcotic drugs , 1961 , and other international conventions designed to establish effective control over international and domestic traffic in controlled substances. .

congress was even more explicit in the psychotropic substances act of 1978 when it declared , "[i]n implementing the convention on psychotropic substances , the congress intends that , consistent with the obligations of the united states under the convention , control of psychotropic substances in the united states should be accomplished within the framework of the procedures and criteria for classification of substances provided in the comprehensive drug abuse prevention and control act of 1970. .

the constitution empowers congress "to define and punish piracies and felonies committed on the high seas , and offenses against the law of nations. .

the courts have held that the maritime drug law enforcement act ( mdlea ) , which includes mandatory minimum sentencing requirements , constitutes a valid exercise of congress's authority under the high seas felonies clause .

"the congress shall have power ... to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers , and all other powers vested by this constitution in the government of the united states , or in any department or officer thereof. .

it has never been thought that the necessary and proper clause empowers only those laws that are absolutely necessary .

instead , "[l]et the end be legitimate , let it be within the scope of the constitution , and all means which are appropriate , which are plainly adapted to that end , which are not prohibited , but consist[ent] with the letter and spirit of the constitution , are constitutional. .

thus , the necessary and proper clause makes possible those statutes that are rationally related to the implementation of another constitutional power .

the court in united states v. c omstock provided a hint of the scope of necessary and proper clause .

the statute there authorized the attorney general to continue to hold a federal inmate , pending a civil commitment determination , after his scheduled date of release .

the court analyzed the breadth of the power without any explicit reference to any other constitutional power , deciding that: [t]he statute is a "necessary and proper" means of exercising the federal authority that permits congress to create federal criminal laws , to punish their violation , to imprison violators , to provide appropriately for those imprisoned , and to maintain the security of those who are not imprisoned but who may be affected by the imprisonment of others .

justice scalia , in his raich concurrence , saw the necessary and proper clause as a necessary commerce clause supplement for legislation like the controlled substances act that purports to regulate purely in - state activity .

moreover , as noted above , at least one lower federal appellate court considers the necessary and proper clause the implementing vehicle for enactment of the maritime drug law enforcement act under congress's treaty - making powers .

the constitution both grants and limits congress's legislative authority .

in the area of mandatory minimum sentences for controlled substance violations , the constitutional challenges have arisen largely under the eighth amendment's cruel and unusual punishment clause ; the equal protection element of the fifth amendment ; the fifth and sixth amendment components awakened by apprend i v. new jersey and its progeny ; and the separation - of - powers doctrine .

mandatory minimums implicate considerations under the eighth amendment's cruel and unusual punishment clause .

the clause bars mandatory capital punishment statutes and mandatory imposition on a juvenile of life imprisonment without the possibility of parole .

although the case law is somewhat uncertain , it seems to condemn punishment that is "grossly disproportionate" to the misconduct for which it is imposed , a standard which a sentence imposed under a mandatory minimum statute might breach only under extreme circumstances .

the supreme court decision in ha r melin v. michigan seems to make a defendant's eighth amendment arguments in a controlled substances case more difficult .

the defendant in ha r melin was a first - time offender convicted of possession of 672 grams of cocaine , enough for possibly as many as 65,000 individual doses .

under the laws of the state of michigan , the conviction carried with it a mandatory sentence of life imprisonment without the possibility of parole .

the court splintered over the question of whether harmelin's mandatory sentence offended the eighth amendment because it was grossly disproportionate to his offense .

five members of the court concluded that it did not .

two members , justice scalia and chief justice rehnquist , simply refused to recognize an eighth amendment proportionality requirement , at least in noncapital cases .

justices kennedy , o'connor , and souter concluded the eighth amendment does in fact forbid "extreme sentences that are grossly disproportionate to the crime. .

they explained , however , that harmelin's sentence was not grossly disproportionate to the severity of his crime – that is , a crime whose "pernicious effects ... demonstrate that the ... legislature could with reason conclude that the threat posed to the individual and society by possession of this large an amount of cocaine — in terms of violence , crime , and social displacement — is momentous enough to warrant the deterrence and retribution of a life sentence without parole. .

decisions of the lower federal courts seem to confirm that the eighth amendment precludes a mandatory term of imprisonment in drug trafficking cases only in those exceptionally rare cases when the punishment is grossly disproportionate to the offense .

the equal protection clause of the fourteenth amendment condemns statutory classifications invidiously based on race , or constitutionally suspect factors .

moreover , "[d]iscrimination on the basis of race odious in all aspects is especially pernicious in the administration of justice. .

these prohibitions apply with equal force under the equal protection component of the fifth amendment's due process clause .

an explicit racial classification scheme can survive only under the most exceptional circumstances .

a statute , racially neutral on its face but discriminatory in its impact , cannot survive if racially motivated .

the circumstances surrounding the passage of a legislative measure with discriminatory impact may provide evidence of improper racial motivation .

at one time , possession with intent to distribute crack cocaine ( cocaine base ) was punished 100 times more severely than possession with intent to distribute cocaine in powdered form .

defendants claimed the distinction had a racially disparate impact .

the claim was almost universally rejected .

the constitution demands that no person "be held to answer for a capital or otherwise infamous crime , unless on a presentment or indictment of a grand jury" and that "[i]n all criminal prosecutions , the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial , by an impartial jury. .

moreover the supreme court's in re winship decision explained that due process requires that the prosecution prove beyond a reasonable doubt "every fact necessary to constitute the crime" with which an accused is charged .

after winship , the question arose whether a statute might authorize or require a more severe penalty for a particular crime based on a fact — not included in the indictment , not found by the jury , and not proven beyond a reasonable doubt .

pennsylvania passed a law under which various serious crimes ( rape , robbery , kidnapping , and the like ) were subject to a mandatory minimum penalty of imprisonment for five years , if the judge after conviction found by a preponderance of the evidence that the defendant had been in visible possession of a firearm during the commission of the offense .

had the pennsylvania statute created a new series of crimes ? .

for example , had it supplemented its crime of rape with a new crime of rape while in visible possession of a firearm ? .

and if so , did the fact of visible possession have to be proven to the jury beyond a reasonable doubt ? .

the supreme court concluded that visible possession of a firearm under the statute was not an element of a new series of crimes , but was instead a sentencing consideration that had been given a legislatively prescribed weight .

as such , the pennsylvania statutory scheme neither offended due process nor triggered any right to a separate jury finding .

there followed a number of state and federal statutes under which facts that might earlier have been treated as elements of a new crime were simply classified as sentencing factors .

in some instances , the new sentencing factor permitted imposition of a penalty far in excess of that otherwise available for the underlying offense .

for instance , the supreme court found no constitutional defect in a statute which punished a deported alien for returning to the united states by imprisonment for not more than 2 years , but which permitted the alien to be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than 20 years upon a post - trial , judicial determination that the alien had been convicted of a serious crime following deportation .

perhaps uneasy with the implications , the court soon made it clear in app r endi that , "under the due process clause of the fifth amendment and the notice and jury trial guarantees of the sixth amendment , any fact ( other than prior conviction ) that increases the maximum penalty for a crime must be charged in an indictment , submitted to a jury , and proven beyond a reasonable doubt. .

side opinions questioned the continued vitality of mcmillan 's mandatory minimum determination in light of the apprendi .

initially unwilling to extend apprendi to mandatory minimums in harris v. united states , the court did so in alleyne v. united states .

alleyne was convicted under the statute that imposes a series of mandatory minimum penalties upon defendants who carry a firearm during and in furtherance of a crime of violence ( 5 years for carrying ; 7 years for brandishing ; 10 years for discharging ) .

the jury found him guilty of carrying ; the trial court judge concluded the gun had been brandished .

the sixth amendment requires that the question of brandishing had to be found by the jury , the court declared: harris drew a distinction between facts that increase the statutory maximum and facts that increase only the mandatory minimum .

we conclude that this distinction is inconsistent with our decision in apprendi and with the original meaning of the sixth amendment .

any fact that , by law , increases the penalty for a crime is an element that must be submitted to the jury and found beyond a reasonable doubt .

mandatory minimum sentences increase the penalty for a crime .

it follows , then , that any fact that increases the mandatory minimum is an element that must be submitted to the jury .

neither apprendi nor alleyne limits congress's authority to establish mandatory minimum sentences or limits the authority of the courts to impose them .

they simply dictate the procedural safeguards that must accompany the exercise of that authority .

thus , the lower federal appellate courts have held that the neither the fifth nor sixth amendment requires that "facts that determine whether a defendant is eligible under the safety valve for a sentence below the statutory minimum" need be found by the jury beyond a reasonable doubt .

while "it remains a basic principle of our constitutional scheme that one branch of the government may not intrude upon the central prerogatives of another," the supreme court has observed that "congress has the power to define criminal punishments without giving the courts any sentencing discretion. .

thus , the lower federal courts have regularly upheld mandatory minimum statutes when challenged on separation - of - powers grounds , and the supreme court has denied any separation - of - powers infirmity in the federal sentencing guideline system , which at the time might have been thought to produce its own form of mandatory minimums .

