wildfire ( or wildland fire ) , an unplanned and unwanted fire , can have beneficial and harmful impacts on human , historical , cultural , and ecological resources .

wildfires can reduce fuel loads , increase ecosystem health and functioning , and restore fire - adapted ecosystems .

at the same time , wildfires can damage timber resources and soils and degrade water quality and watershed functions .

wildfires also can damage communities , destroy homes , and lead to loss of human life .

wildfire management is a series of coordinated activities undertaken by federal , state , and local authorities to prepare for , resolve , and recover from wildfire events .

these activities generally are categorized as fuel reduction , preparedness , suppression , and site rehabilitation .

a number of federal , state , and local agencies can and do respond to wildfires .

states are responsible for responding to wildfires that begin on nonfederal ( state , local , and private ) lands , except for lands protected by federal agencies under cooperative agreements .

the federal government is responsible for responding to wildfires that begin on federal lands .

the u.s. department of agriculture's forest service ( fs ) carries out wildfire response and management across the 193 million acres of national forests and national grasslands .

the department of the interior ( doi ) carries out wildfire management and response on more than 400 million acres of national parks , wildlife refuges and preserves , indian reservations , and other public lands .

sometimes more than one agency may respond , depending on where the fire occurs and spreads , the potential threats , and the expertise required .

in these cases , the national interagency fire center ( nifc ) coordinates the national mobilization of resources for wildfire and other incidents throughout the united states .

both fs and doi receive annual discretionary appropriations for wildfire management activities through the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bills .

wildfire management funding for doi is provided to the office of wildland fire ( a department - level office ) , which then allocates the funding to four doi agencies — bureau of land management ( blm ) , bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) , national park service ( nps ) , and u.s .

fish and wildlife service ( fws ) .

congress also provides funding for wildfire - related activities through the federal emergency management agency , such as emergency financial assistance for some nonfederal wildfires through fire management assistance grants and the disaster relief fund ; those funds and activities are discussed in other crs products .

wildfire management appropriations began to increase in the late 1990s and rose significantly after fy2000 , beginning with the severe 2000 fire season ( see figure 1 ) .

since then , wildfire appropriations have varied between a low of $2.9 billion in fy2012 and a high of $5.2 billion in fy2008 ( as measured in constant fy2017 dollars ) .

the majority of wildfire management appropriations go to fs .

from fy1994 to fy2017 , fs received around 71% of the total wildfire management appropriations annually on average and doi received 29% .

fs has received a slightly larger share more recently , though , receiving 76% annually on average over the past 10 years ( while doi's share has decreased to 24% over that time period ) .

fs wildfire management appropriations constitute a relatively large portion of total fs discretionary funding .

for example , over the past 10 years , wildfire appropriations have made up approximately 50% of the agency's discretionary funds , on average ( see figure 2 ) , although not all of those funds counted against discretionary spending limits .

in comparison , wildfire appropriations account for about 8% of doi's total discretionary appropriations , on average .

table 1 displays annual total wildfire management appropriations for the past 10 years , from fy2008 to fy2017 .

over that time period , combined fs and doi wildfire management appropriations have averaged $3.7 billion .

doi and fs each have two similarly structured accounts for wildfire funding: a wildland fire management ( wfm ) account and a federal land assistance , management , and enhancement act ( flame ) account .

flame is a reserve fund for wildfire suppression that requires certain conditions to be met to transfer funding from the flame account to the wfm account .

programs within these accounts generally correspond to the different categories of wildland fire management activities .

the wfm appropriation is distributed among two programs: fire operations and other fire operations .

the fire operations program receives the bulk of the wfm appropriation and funds two activities: preparedness and suppression .

the other fire operations program funds hazardous fuels reduction activities , joint fire research and science programs ( eg , nifc operations ) , and programs to provide financial and technical assistance for state and volunteer wildfire management .

prior to fy2017 , appropriations to fs and doi wildfire accounts typically were designated by congress to remain available until expended , meaning those funds were "no - year" appropriations ( i.e. , appropriations without fiscal year limitations ) available in future years .

the fy2017 appropriations law ( p.l .

115-31 ) specified that funds in many fs accounts — including the wfm account but excluding the flame account — were to remain available through the end of fy2020 .

doi's wfm and flame accounts were designated as no - year appropriations .

congress is debating several issues related to federal funding for wildfire management .

issues under debate include the level of federal spending on wildfire management as well as the effectiveness of that spending ( eg , whether the funding is allowing agencies to meet wildfire management targets ) .

wildfire spending has increased considerably since the 1990s ( see figure 1 ) .

a significant portion of that increase is related to rising suppression costs , even during years of relatively mild wildfire activity , although the costs vary and are difficult to predict in advance .

congress also is debating the level of appropriations dedicated for certain wildfire management activities .

questions include whether the rising cost of suppression should compete with funding other agency programs and activities and whether investing more in hazardous fuel reduction activities may help to reduce wildfire costs in the future .

in the past , when wildfire suppression funding was exhausted during a fiscal year , the agencies sometimes have had to transfer funds from non - wildfire management suppression accounts .

this practice may impact the performance of the activities under those other accounts .

in such cases , congress faces a decision as to whether to reimburse the accounts from which funding was transferred or to otherwise provide supplemental appropriations .

the reimbursement or supplemental appropriation often is provided in the following fiscal year .

fire transfers often may disrupt the regular budget cycle and complicate discussions about how much suppression funding is needed for the current fiscal year .

after providing funds for wildland fire management for each fiscal year , congress has enacted additional funds in 5 of the last 10 years .

three of the five occasions occurred after the establishment of the flame accounts ( fy2013 , fy2014 , and fy2016 ) .

this may lead to questions regarding the structure of wildfire funding and wildfire suppression budgeting methods .

wildfire suppression funding estimates depend on multiple factors ( eg , weather , fuel load , nearby dwellings , access to wildfire site ) .

various reasons have been given as to why suppression estimates have at times not accurately forecasted suppression expenses , with estimates typically underestimating suppression spending .

wildfire suppression is complicated , and both the efficiency of resources used for wildfire suppression and the federal protocol for wildfire management have an impact on wildfire suppression costs .

analyzing trends in wildfire management funding could provide insights useful to congress during these debates .

however , analyzing wildfire funding trends over time — particularly prior to fy2001 — is challenging for many reasons .

the agencies' account structures have changed over time , with different activities funded through different programs and new accounts created .

for example , after the establishment of the flame account in fy2010 , appropriations that previously had gone entirely to wfm suppression were dispersed between two different accounts .

a further complication is that costs for one wildfire season ( i.e. , a calendar year ) often extend into appropriations for two fiscal years , and sometimes appropriations are enacted in one fiscal year to cover costs incurred in previous fiscal years .

