the economic growth , regulatory relief , and consumer protection act ( s. 2155 ) was reported out by the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs on december 18 , 2017 .

it was then passed by the senate on march 14 , 2018 , following the inclusion of a manager's amendment that added a number of provisions to the bill as reported .

the house passed p.l .

115-174 on may 22 , 2018 , and president donald trump signed it into law on may 24 , 2018 .

p.l .

115-174 changes a number of financial regulations ; its six titles alter certain aspects of the regulation of banks , capital markets , mortgage lending , and credit reporting agencies .

many of the provisions can be categorized as providing regulatory relief to banks and certain companies accessing capital markets .

others are designed to relax mortgage lending rules and provide additional protections to consumers , including protections related to credit reporting , veterans' mortgage refinancing , and student loans .

some p.l .

115-174 provisions amend the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ; p.l .

111-203 ) , regulatory reform legislation enacted following the 2007-2009 financial crisis that initiated the largest change to the financial regulatory system since at least 1999 .

other provisions amend certain rules implemented by bank regulators under existing authorities and which closely adhere to the basel iii accords — the international bank regulation standards - setting agreement .

finally , other provisions address long - standing or more recent issues not directly related to dodd - frank or basel iii .

proponents of the legislation assert it provides targeted financial regulatory relief that eliminates a number of unduly burdensome regulations , fosters economic growth , and strengthens consumer protections .

opponents of the legislation argue it needlessly pares back important dodd - frank safeguards and protections to the benefit of large and profitable banks .

prior to passage of p.l .

115-174 , the house and the administration had also proposed wide - ranging financial regulatory relief plans .

in terms of the policy areas addressed , some of the changes in p.l .

115-174 are similar to those proposed in the financial choice act ( fca ; h.r .

10 ) , which passed the house on june 8 , 2017 ( see appendix b ) .

however , the two bills generally differ in the scope and degree of proposed regulatory relief .

the fca calls for widespread changes to the regulatory framework across the entire financial system , whereas p.l .

115-174 is more focused on the banking industry , mortgages , capital formation , and credit reporting .

likewise , many of the provisions found in p.l .

115-174 parallel regulatory relief recommendations made in the treasury department's series of reports pursuant to executive order 13772 , particularly the first report on banks and credit unions .

the treasury reports are more wide - ranging than p.l .

115-174 , however , and more focused on changes that can be made by regulators without congressional action .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimated that p.l .

115-174 would reduce the budget deficit by $23 million over 10 years .

cbo estimated that only one provision would reduce the deficit — section 217 requires the federal reserve ( fed ) to transfer $675 million from its surplus account to the treasury , where it is added to general revenues .

cbo estimated that this provision would increase revenues by $478 million on net over 10 years .

cbo assumed when making the estimate that the fed would finance the transfer by selling treasury securities , which otherwise would have earned $177 million in income that would have been remitted to the treasury in the next 10 years .

thus , the provision can be thought of as shifting fed remittances from the future to the present , as opposed to representing new economic resources available to the federal government .

various other provisions are forecast to increase the deficit , with the three provisions with the largest effect on the deficit being the community bank leverage ratio ( section 201 ) , changes to the enhanced regulation threshold ( section 401 ) , and changes to the supplementary leverage ratio for custody banks ( section 402 ) .

this report summarizes p.l .

115-174 as enacted and highlights major policy proposals of the legislation .

most changes proposed by p.l .

115-174 , as passed , can be grouped into one of five issue areas: ( 1 ) mortgage lending , ( 2 ) regulatory relief for "community" banks , ( 3 ) consumer protection , ( 4 ) regulatory relief for large banks , and ( 5 ) regulatory relief in securities markets .

the report provides background on each policy area , describes the p.l .

115-174 provisions that make changes in these areas , and examines the prominent policy issues related to those changes .

in its final section , this report also provides an overview of provisions that do not necessarily relate directly to these five topics .

this report also includes a contact list of crs experts on topics addressed by p.l .

115-174 , a summary of various exemption thresholds created or raised by p.l .

115-174 in appendix a , and a list of provisions in p.l .

115-174 that address similar issues as a number of house bills in appendix b .

title i of p.l .

115-174 is intended to reduce the regulatory burden involved in mortgage lending and to expand credit availability , especially in certain market segments .

following the financial crisis , in which lax mortgage standards are believed by certain observers to have played a role , new mortgage regulations were implemented and some existing regulations were strengthened .

some analysts are now concerned that certain new and long - standing regulations unduly impede the mortgage process and unnecessarily restrict the availability of mortgages .

to address these concerns , several provisions in p.l .

115-174 are designed to relax mortgage rules , including by providing relief to small lenders and easing rules related to specific mortgage types or markets .

other analysts argue that market developments have contributed to a tightening of mortgage credit and , though some changes to regulations may be desirable , the regulatory structure in place prior to the enactment of p.l .

115-174 generally provided important consumer protections .

title ii of p.l .

115-174 is focused on providing regulatory relief to c ommunity bank s .

although small banks qualify for various exemptions from certain regulations , whether the regulations have been appropriately tailored is the subject of debate .

certain title ii provisions raise previous asset thresholds or create new ones at which banks and other depositories are exempt from regulation or otherwise qualify for reduced regulatory obligations .

title iii , title vi , and section 215 of title ii are intended to address various consumer protection challenges facing the credit reporting industry and borrowers in certain credit markets , such as active duty servicemembers , veterans , student borrowers , and borrowers funding energy efficiency projects .

title iv is intended to provide regulatory relief to certain large banks .

in general , there is widespread agreement that the largest , most complex financial institutions whose failure could pose a risk to the stability of the financial system should be regulated differently than other institutions .

however , identifying which institutions fit this description and how their regulatory treatment should differ are subjects of debate .

title v of p.l .

115-174 is focused on providing regulatory relief to participants of capital markets .

certain provisions of title v provide streamlined registration and disclosure requirements for certain securities issuers as well as market intermediaries ( eg , asset managers and stock exchanges ) .

these provisions allow for reduced regulatory obligations in relation to selected aspects of capital formation .

the economic growth , regulatory relief , and consumer protection act contains a number of provisions that do not necessarily pertain directly to the issue areas examined above , including the following: deposits in u.s. territ or ies .

section 208 extends the applicability of expedited funds availability act ( p.l .

100-86 ) requirements ( which relate to how quickly deposits , once made , are available to account holders ) to american samoa and the north mariana islands .

small public housing agencies .

section 209 classifies public housing agencies administering 550 housing units or fewer that predominately operate in rural areas as small public housing agenc ies ( sphas ) and reduce administrative requirements faced by such agencies , including less frequent inspections and reduced environmental review requirements .

in addition , section 209 creates a process for corrective action to be undertaken for troubled sphas and an incentive program for sphas to reduce energy consumption .

insurance .

section 211 creates an "insurance policy advisory committee on international capital standards and other insurance issues" at the federal reserve made up of 21 members with expertise on various aspects of insurance .

it requires an annual report and testimony from the federal reserve and the department of the treasury on the ongoing discussions at the international association of insurance supervisors through 2022 , and a report prior to supporting any specific international insurance standards .

n ational c redit u nion a dministration budget .

section 212 requires the national credit union administration to publish a draft of its annual budget in the federal register and hold public hearings on the draft .

federal reserve surplus .

the fed's capital comprises paid - in capital issued to member banks and retained earnings deposited in its surplus account .

section 217 reduces the statutory cap on the fed's surplus account from $7.5 billion to $6.825 billion and requires funds in excess of that amount to be remitted to treasury as general revenues .

cbo estimated that this provision would increase revenues by $478 million on net over 10 years .

cbo assumed that the fed would finance the transfer by selling treasury securities , which otherwise would have earned $177 million in income that would have been remitted to the treasury in the next 10 years .

thus , the provision can be thought of as shifting fed remittances from the future to the present , as opposed to representing new economic resources available to the federal government .

remediating lead and asbestos hazards .

section 305 directs the secretary of the treasury to use loan guarantees and credit enhancements to remediate lead and asbestos hazards in residential properties backing mortgages acquired by the treasury .

family self sufficiency program .

section 306 makes alterations to the family self sufficiency program ( fss ) , an asset - building program for residents of public and assisted housing .

the changes are designed to harmonize separate fss programs into one , unified program ; expand the range of services that can be provided to participating residents ; and make other technical changes to the program .

overpayments to the sec .

section 505 permits national securities exchanges that have made overpayments to the sec in excess of their required fees to offset those payments against future fees owed within 10 years of the overpayment .

studies and best practices .

section 216 requires a treasury report on cyber threats to financial institutions and capital markets .

section 308 requires a government accountability office ( gao ) report on consumer reporting .

section 311 requires a gao report on foreclosures in puerto rico .

section 312 requires a department of housing and urban development report on lead - based paint hazard prevention .

section 502 requires an sec report on algorithmic trading in capital markets .

section 503 amends the small business investment incentive act of 1980 ( sbiia ; p.l .

96-477 ) by requiring the sec to release ( 1 ) a public assessment of the findings and recommendations of the annual government - business forum on small business capital formation ; and ( 2 ) a public report on what actions , if any , it will be taking to address those findings and recommendations .

section 603 directs the financial literary and education commission to establish best practices for institutions of higher learning regarding methods to teach financial literacy skills and to provide information to students at those institutions to assist them when making financial decisions .

appendix a .

asset size and other thresholds in  p.l .

115-174 table a - 1 lists provisions in p.l .

115-174 that create or change size - based threshold criteria that alter the regulatory treatment of certain institutions or activities .

appendix b .

similar policy issues in selected house bills p.l .

115-174 addresses a number of policy issues that are also addressed by the financial choice act ( h.r .

10 ) , which was passed by the house on june 8 , 2017 , and other house bills that have seen legislative action in the 115 th congress .

table b - 1 lists such policy issues and identifies the sections of p.l .

115-174 , the sections of h.r .

10 , and house bills that have seen action that propose changes in those areas .

it should be noted , however , that while certain issues addressed in the various pieces of legislation are similar , how the bills address them may differ to varying degrees , some quite significantly .

an examination and discussion of how the various proposals differ across the each piece legislation is beyond the scope of this report .

