the department of defense ( dod ) relies extensively on contractors to equip and support the u.s. military in peacetime and during military operations .

contractors design , develop , and build advanced weapon and business systems , construct military bases around the world , and provide services such as intelligence analysis , logistics , and base support .

congress has long been frustrated with perceived cost overruns , waste , mismanagement , and fraud in defense acquisitions , and has spent significant effort attempting to reform and improve the process .

since the 1970s , there have been numerous efforts to comprehensively reform defense acquisition .

congress generally sets acquisition policy for the dod through the annual national defense authorization acts ( ndaas ) as well as through stand - alone legislation , such as the defense acquisition workforce improvement act of 1990 , federal acquisition streamlining act of 1994 , clinger - cohen act of 1996 , and weapon system acquisition reform act of 2009 .

this report provides a brief overview of selected acquisition - related provisions found in the ndaas for fy2016 ( p.l .

114-92 ) , fy2017 ( p.l .

114-328 ) , and fy2018 ( p.l .

115-91 ) .

this report also has a section on some of the more controversial and extensive changes in recent years: the changes to the role of the chiefs of the military services and the commandant of the marine corps ( collectively referred to as the service chiefs ) in the acquisition process , the breakup of the office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics ( usd [at&l] ) , and the shift of authority from the office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) to the military departments .

in recent years , congress has generally exercised its legislative powers to affect defense acquisitions through title viii of the ndaa , entitled acquisition policy , acquisition management , and related matters .

in some years , the ndaa also contains titles specifically dedicated to aspects of acquisition , such as title xvii of the fy2018 ndaa , entitled small business procurement and industrial base matters .

congress has been particularly active in legislating acquisition reform over the last three years .

for fy2016-fy2018 , ndaa titles specifically related to acquisition reform contained an average of 82 provisions ( 247 in total ) , compared to an average of 47 such provisions ( 466 in total ) in the ndaas for the preceding 10 fiscal years ( see appendix a and appendix b ) .

historically , the military services were responsible for virtually all aspects of acquisition and osd played a limited role .

in the early 1980s a number of major defense acquisition programs experienced dramatic cost overruns that increased the defense budget by billions of dollars but resulted in the production of the same number of , or in some cases fewer , weapons than originally planned .

in 1985 , president ronald reagan established the president's blue ribbon commission on defense management , chaired by former deputy secretary of defense david packard .

in 1986 , the commission issued a final report that contained far - reaching recommendations "intended to assist the executive and legislative branches as well as industry in implementing a broad range of needed reforms. .

the commission's work , and the recommendations found in the final report , led to the ultimate establishment of the office of the usd ( at&l ) .

one of the recommendations of the packard commission was to create the position of under secretary of defense ( acquisition ) to "set overall policy for procurement and research and development ( r&d ) , supervise the performance of the entire acquisition system , and establish policy for administrative oversight and auditing of defense contractors. .

the report stated that the motivation for establishing this position was as follows: responsibility for acquisition policy has become fragmented .

there is today no single senior official in the office of the secretary of defense working full - time to provide overall supervision of the acquisition system... .

in the absence of such a senior osd official , policy responsibility has tended to devolve to the services , where at times it has been exercised without the necessary coordination and uniformity .

worse still , authority for executing acquisition programs — and accountability for their results — has become vastly diluted .

later that year , congress established the position of under secretary of defense for acquisition ( renamed the under secretary of defense for acquisition and technology in the fy1994 ndaa and finally the under secretary of defense [at&l] in the fy2000 ndaa ) .

the goldwater - nichols act further consolidated centralized civilian control over acquisitions within osd , as did other acts enacted in subsequent years .

even with these changes , the service chiefs retained influence over acquisitions .

as gao stated in 2014 ( prior to the fy2016 ndaa ) : existing policies and processes for planning and executing acquisition programs provide multiple opportunities for the service chiefs to be involved in managing acquisition programs and to help ensure programs meet cost , schedule , and performance targets .

whether the service chiefs are actively involved and choose to influence programs is not clear .

in 2015 , a number of analysts and officials , including former deputy secretary of defense john hamre ( currently ceo of the center for strategic and international studies ) , and then - army chief of staff general ray odierno , called for reversing course and giving the services and the chiefs more authority over acquisitions .

john hamre argued the following: no one assumes that the service chiefs are not responsible for weapon systems ; they play a central role in establishing military requirements and resourcing decisions .

moreover , every time a program gets in trouble , it is the service chief who is called up for a grilling before congress .

yet the service chief is not in the acquisition chain of command .

we get in trouble in the defense department when authority and accountability are fractured .

giving the service chiefs responsibility for requirements and budgets but not acquisition makes no sense .

many other analysts took the opposite view , and the obama administration strongly objected to such changes , arguing that if enacted , they would reduce the secretary of defense's ability to guard against unwarranted cost optimism and prevent excessive risk - taking .

the senate initiated a number of provisions that enhanced the role of the chiefs and the military services .

commenting on the provisions in the senate version of the ndaa , the statement of administration policy stated that if enacted , the senate provisions would significantly reduce the secretary of defense's ability — through the under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics usd ( at&l ) — to guard against unwarranted optimism in program planning and budget formulation , and prevent excessive risk taking during execution — all of which is essential to avoiding overruns and costly delays .

much of the substance of the provisions in the senate bill was incorporated into the fy2016 ndaa .

the fy2017 ndaa refined the swing back to the services and also initiated a large - scale reorganization of the office of the usd ( at&l ) , a reorganization that continued in the fy2018 ndaa .

according to the joint explanatory statement accompanying the fy2016 ndaa , section 802 was intended to "enhance the role of chiefs of staff in the defense acquisition process. .

the section opens with the policy statement that the purpose of defense acquisition is to "meet the needs of its customers in the most cost - effective manner practicable. .

the customer is defined as the military service with primary responsibility for fielding the system or systems acquired , represented by "the secretary of the military department concerned and the chief of the armed force concerned" with regard to major defense acquisition programs .

section 802 goes on to amend 10 u.s.c .

2547 ( a ) by assigning the chiefs the responsibility to assist the secretary of the military department in making decisions regarding balancing resources and priorities , and associated trade - offs among cost , schedule , technical feasibility , and performance on major defense acquisition ; and the management of career paths in acquisition for military personnel .

section 802 also required the joint requirements oversight council to "seek , and strongly consider , the views of the chiefs of staff of the armed forces" and for major defense acquisition programs , the chiefs to advise the decision authority for milestones a and b on cost , schedule , technical feasibility , and performance trade - offs .

section 825 requires that , generally , the service acquisition executive be the milestone decision authority for major defense acquisition programs .

a number of other sections in the ndaa aim at strengthening the role of the services in acquisitions , including requiring the milestone a and milestone b decision authority to get concurrence on the cost , schedule , technical feasibility , and performance trade - offs of a program from the relevant service secretary and chief ( §§823-824 ) ; requiring configuration steering boards for major programs to ensure that the relevant chief , in consultation with the service secretary , "approves of any proposed changes that could have an adverse effect on program cost or schedule'' ( §830 ) ; and giving the chiefs a role in establishing policies on the development , assignment , and employment of the acquisition workforce ( §842 ) .

this section does not include the future usd ( a&s ) in the chain of command in establishing such policies .

the fy2017 ndaa does not directly shift more acquisition authority to the military services .

however , some of the sections in the bill could have the effect of adjusting acquisition authority in favor of the services .

section 901 , while not directly affecting the balance of authority between osd and the services , significantly affects osd's role in defense acquisition .

most notably , the section breaks up at&l into the usd ( research and engineering ) and usd ( acquisition and sustainment , a&s ) .

according to the conference report [t]hree broad priorities framed the conference discussions: ( 1 ) elevate the mission of advancing technology and innovation within the department ; ( 2 ) foster distinct technology and acquisition cultures to better deliver superior capabilities for the armed forces ; and ( 3 ) provide greater oversight and management of the department's fourth estate .

section 807 of the fy2017 ndaa requires that before funds are obligated for technology development , systems development , or production of an mdap , the secretary of defense must establish goals for the milestone decision authority , including for cost , schedule , and technology maturation .

notably , the responsibility to establish these goals " may be delegated only to the deputy secretary of defense . .

given that the decision authority is generally the service acquisition authority , and the requirement to set goals cannot be delegated below the deputy secretary of defense , this section does not include the future usd ( a&s ) in the chain of command , potentially eroding the influence of the usd ( a&s ) .

a number of other sections in the ndaa appear to strengthen the role of the services in acquisitions , including the following: requiring the director of operational test and evaluation to submit the annual report to the secretaries of the military departments ( §845 ) .

previously , the annual report was submitted to the secretary of defense , usd ( at&l ) , and congress .

granting the service acquisition authority the ability to waive tenure requirements in certain circumstances ( §862 ) .

previously , only the secretary of defense could do so .

authorizing the military departments to establish service - specific funds for acquisition programs using certain rapid fielding and prototyping authorities ( §897 ) .

the fy2018 ndaa included a number of provisions conforming and clarifying the roles of usd ( a&s ) .

as it relates to mdaps , the act also amended 10 u.s.c .

2547 ( b ) , requiring that the relevant service chief concur with the need for a material solution ( as identified in the material development decision review ) ; the cost , schedule , technical feasibility , and performance trade - offs before milestone a is approved ; the cost , schedule , technical feasibility , and performance trade - offs before milestone b is approved ; and the requirements , cost , and fielding timeline before milestone c is approved .

appendix a .

title viii provisions in the fy2006-fy2018 ndaas appendix b .

title viii provisions in the fy2016-fy2018 ndaas , by subtitle topi .

