the air cargo industry consists of a complex distribution network linking manufacturers and shippers to freight forwarders , off - airport freight consolidators , and airport sorting and cargo handling facilities where shipments are loaded on and unloaded from aircraft .

while only a small fraction of cargo shipments travels by air , items shipped on aircraft generally consist of time - sensitive and high - value commodities .

by weight , air freight comprised only 0.05% of all domestic and international shipments to u.s. points in 2015 , but these accounted for 6.1% of the value of freight shipments .

common examples of air cargo include high - value machine parts and manufacturing equipment , electronic components for manufactured goods , consumer electronics , jewelry , and perishable items such as flowers , fruits , and fresh fish .

specialized freight that requires specific handling — such as unique scientific instruments , highly specialized tools and equipment , and even thoroughbred horses — is also transported as air cargo .

most outbound air cargo packages are consolidated at off - airport facilities and arrive at airports on bulk pallets or in special containers known as unit load devices .

it is estimated that about 75% of all air cargo by weight travels on bulk pallets .

typically , shippers have no foreknowledge of the route or aircraft by which a particular shipment will be transported .

freight forwarders and airlines make such determinations , using logistics software , databases , and computerized flight schedules to optimize the flow of air cargo .

both domestic and international air cargo movements generally rely on a hub - and - spoke network of airports to link origins and destinations .

most international air cargo that enters the u.s. transits through large hub facilities in europe and asia .

while business and consumer demand for the fast and efficient shipment of goods fueled rapid growth in the air cargo industry in the 1980s , 1990s , and early 2000s , the industry saw little growth over the past decade , and it was not until 2017 that air cargo shipments surpassed 2007 levels reached prior to the 2007-2009 recession .

through october 2017 , however , air cargo activity increased more than 10% from 2016 levels , the largest year - over - year growth in more than a decade , with the largest growth seen among international shipments to and from the united states , particularly shipments from europe .

the federal aviation administration ( faa ) forecasts that steady u.s. and world economic growth will drive more modest annual increases of about 3% in air cargo shipments over the next two decades , while boeing notes that e - commerce could spur additional demand for worldwide air freight shipments .

about 22 billion pounds of freight cargo were shipped on domestic flights in 2016 .

of this , fedex transported about 11.6 billion pounds , while ups carried about 6.3 billion pounds .

collectively , these two carriers transported about 81% of all domestic air cargo in 2016 , and were by far the largest two operators in the u.s. air cargo industry .

additionally , in 2016 , approximately 19 billion pounds of international air cargo were transported to and from the united states .

while fedex and ups were the largest carriers by weight carried , combined they transported only about 13.2% of international air cargo to and from the united states .

their comparatively smaller role in the international sector reflects a greater number and diversity of air carriers that transport cargo that originates overseas , including a number of relatively small operators and much greater reliance on passenger air carriers .

passenger aircraft play a greater role in transporting air cargo internationally than within the united states .

on international routes to and from the united states , about 38.5% of air cargo by weight is transported on passenger aircraft .

in the domestic market , on the other hand , only 5.5% of air cargo is carried in the bellies of passenger planes .

this characteristic is of particular interest with respect to potential security vulnerabilities , as cargo shipments could provide a means of placing explosive devices aboard international passenger flights destined for the united states .

security of air cargo shipments within the united states and international shipments to and from the united states is regulated by the transportation security administration ( tsa ) .

additionally , international air cargo shipments entering the united states are regulated by u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) .

over the past decade , particular attention has been devoted to overseeing the security of cargo loaded on passenger aircraft .

in addition to domestic operations at about 450 commercial service airports , nonstop flights from about 140 foreign airports in more than 80 countries transport cargo to the united states .

tsa points out that a large proportion of the cargo shipped to the united states does not originate at these last - point - of - departure airports and is often carried on multiple legs using both passenger and all - cargo aircraft before being loaded onto a u.s. - bound flight .

addressing potential threats requires security measures along the cargo supply chain , with particular attention to ensuring that risk - based evaluation and physical screening of shipments are conducted using techniques and technologies that comply with statutory and regulatory requirements .

despite concern over the potential use of air cargo to introduce an explosive device aboard a passenger aircraft , no such attack has ever been successfully carried out .

concern over this type of threat is largely predicated on the belief that more stringent measures to screen passengers and baggage may cause terrorists to consider the detection of an explosive device in air cargo to be less likely .

in response to these concerns , u.s. policy has shifted from risk - based approaches for vetting cargo placed on passenger aircraft to mandatory 100% physical screening requirements for all air cargo that travels within the united states or to the united states aboard passenger aircraft .

in contrast , all - cargo aircraft have generally been considered less attractive targets for terrorist bombings , and tsa has continued to apply risk - based measures for vetting shipments placed on all - cargo aircraft .

prior to 2010 , one of the few known plots to place a bomb aboard u.s. - bound cargo planes in the mid - 1990s was broken up and did not result in significant policy changes .

ongoing challenges to implementing effective air cargo and supply chain security include fostering international cooperation and effectively engaging with and overseeing industry air cargo security practices .

tsa and cbp generally receive strong cooperation from industry and foreign governments .

however , enforcement overseas is largely up to authorities in other countries .

if they do not concur with the u.s. approach , disagreement over security standards could complicate u.s. foreign relations and could potentially impact foreign trade .

shippers of international air cargo rely on a diverse set of operators and aircraft , including passenger aircraft .

unscheduled charter service accounts for about 13% of u.s. international freight traffic .

although the large majority of international air cargo shipped to the u.s. transits through a relatively small number of major airports overseas and enters the united states at a relatively small number of large freight hub airports , charter flights may carry freight from small airports abroad or to smaller airports in the united states .

security procedures may be more difficult to enforce consistently at airports that see relatively few air freight movements .

the united states currently enforces no general requirement for screening of cargo aboard all - cargo aircraft .

according to industry estimates reported in 2010 , the overall percentage of international shipments screened prior to transit to the united states may be as low as 50% .

while considerable policy attention has been focused on inbound international air cargo since then , the amount of cargo screened that is physically screened may not have increased significantly .

rather , the approach pursued by u.s. policymakers and industry has focused on risk - based measures , relying on vetting protocols based on information provided in cargo manifests to identify and screen only that cargo considered to be high risk prior to its loading aboard aircraft destined for u.s. airports .

so far , these risk - based protocols that trigger physical screening and inspection of cargo prior to loading are voluntary and have not yet been adopted or mandated industry - wide .

tsa concedes that screening international cargo poses unique challenges and constraints due to shippers' limited control over their foreign supply chains , the scale and diversity of worldwide supply chains , and diplomatic considerations .

to address these challenges , tsa's international air cargo workgroup developed a risk - based rating system and scheduling tool to prioritize air cargo facility inspections overseas .

in 2008 , tsa entered into a bilateral agreement with the european union as well as a quadrilateral agreement on air cargo security with the european union , canada , and australia .

more broadly , it has worked closely with the international civil aviation organization ( icao ) to draft worldwide standards for all - cargo security , which were adopted in november 2010 and emphasize more extensive screening of cargo as well as improved standardization of screening equipment .

tsa employs a number of risk - based strategies to evaluate the security risk of air cargo shipments .

assessing risk to prevent transport on passenger aircraft and to target all - cargo shipments for screening involves analysis of data provided on the air cargo waybill , particularly information about the shipper .

by statute , all cargo placed on passenger aircraft must be shipped by a qualified known shipper whose name and address information matches records contained in the transportation security administration's ( tsa's ) known shipper management system .

moreover , 100% of such cargo must undergo physical screening before being loaded on a passenger aircraft .

for targeted screening of shipments placed on all - cargo aircraft , tsa is assessing the effective use of waybill data in its air cargo advance screening ( acas ) pilot program .

in the 115 th congress , the house - passed department of homeland security authorization act ( h.r .

2825 ) as well as the air cargo security improvement act of 2017 ( h.r .

4176 ) contain language directing tsa to fully implement the acas program for all air cargo inbound to the united states .

whereas the air cargo industry has favored risk - based approaches for both cargo planes and cargo placed aboard passenger aircraft , some policymakers have argued that more comprehensive screening of cargo is needed to make cargo security comparable to the screening of airline passengers and baggage .

congress responded to these arguments in a series of enactments since the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks .

initially , these laws mandated incremental increases to the amount of cargo that was physically screened , as the pros and cons of 100% screening requirements for cargo placed on passenger aircraft continued to be an issue of prominent debate .

the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-53 ) , enacted in august 2007 , required 100% physical screening and inspection of all cargo placed on passenger aircraft by august 2010 .

the act specified screening methods acceptable in meeting this requirement , including x - ray systems , explosives detection systems , explosives trace detection , tsa - certified explosives detection canine teams , and physical searches conducted in conjunction with manifest verifications .

additional methods may be approved by tsa .

however , the act provided that cargo documents and known shipper verification , by themselves , are not acceptable screening methods .

the act , however , did not specify who is to conduct the screening .

tsa has interpreted the language to allow airlines , freight forwarders , or , in some cases , shippers , manufacturers , and third - party screening facilities to conduct screening at off - airport locations , so long as they can ensure the security of a shipment until it is loaded onto an aircraft .

tsa maintains that this is the only viable means for meeting the mandate for 100% physical screening , as the agency claims it lacks the resources to screen the volume of cargo placed on passenger aircraft using its own employees .

tsa's approach , implemented through its voluntary certified cargo screening program ( ccsp ) , has pushed much of the operational cost associated with cargo screening and inspection on to airlines , freight forwarders , and shippers .

the extent to which air carriers and freight forwarders have been able to pass along these costs to shippers and consumers may be an issue of interest to congress .

mandatory screening requirements for cargo on passenger flights may place passenger airlines at a competitive disadvantage against all - cargo airlines , so long as all - cargo carriers face less stringent requirements .

in addition , if security screening requirements discourage shipments on passenger flights , some routes may no longer be profitable for airlines .

tsa has approved a number of detection systems for screening air cargo to meet the requirements of the 100% screening mandate .

essentially , these are adaptations of technologies used extensively for screening checked baggage and carry - on items .

however , none of these devices is approved for the screening of palletized or containerized cargo .

procedures stipulate that screening must instead be done on individual cargo items since available technologies , especially explosives detection systems , can only accommodate objects slightly more than 3 feet wide and about 8 feet long , far too small for large cargo items , much less cargo containers and pallets .

the limitations of explosives detection systems in the air cargo environment have led to extensive reliance on explosives trace detection , particularly at airport screening locations , coupled with canine teams .

it is estimated that palletized cargo makes up 75% of all cargo carried on passenger planes .

the lack of an approved technology for screening pallets leaves the industry dependent on work - around solutions , largely involving the off - airport screening of cargo coupled with approved supply - chain security measures to prevent tampering after the item is screened under ccsp procedures .

imaging systems are employed at seaports and border crossings to scrutinize entire trucks and multimodal containers .

these systems , which use a variety of gamma - ray , x - ray , x - ray backscatter , and millimeter wave imaging technologies , are generally not considered suitable in the air cargo domain because they require intensive human observation to detect potential threats .

moreover , they generally do not offer adequate image resolution or automated or assisted threat detection capabilities for identifying relatively small explosive devices capable of bringing down an airliner .

neutron beam technologies offer a potential solution , allowing automated explosives detection capabilities of containerized and palletized cargo .

under a pilot program , a pulsed fast neutron analysis scanner was installed at houston's george bush intercontinental airport in 2005 , at a cost of $8 million .

the unit was touted as a potential means to automatically screen large containers and bulk cargo shipments for explosives , hazardous chemicals , radiological and nuclear materials , and other potential threats based on sub - atomic properties .

in 2007 , the pilot program was suspended , reportedly for financial reasons , despite high detection rates and low false alarm rates across a wide range of threat types and container sizes .

the technology is being used to screen cargo and baggage in singapore and hong kong , and to screen truck containers at a border checkpoint in el paso , tx .

however , the high cost and large footprint of the machines have been significant deterrents to their use in the air cargo industry .

absent a suitable technology for screening palletized and containerized cargo at airport facilities , the reliance on off - airport cargo screening under ccsp and the logistic demands of the air cargo industry pose unique challenges for maintaining security throughout the supply chain .

current efforts appear to be focused on expanding the size of a single box that can be screened using available technology and improving the throughput of this equipment .

h.r .

4176 would establish a two - year pilot program to test the expanded use of computed tomography ( ct ) technology for screening air cargo and would require tsa to develop a plan for integrating ct technology in domestic and international air cargo operations , including operations at foreign last - point - of - departure airports .

historically , ct systems have had limited application in the air cargo environment because of their cost , large footprint , and limitations on the size of objects they can scan .

alternatively , technologies that rely on chemical analysis of explosive vapors using mass spectrometry may allow for more efficient and cost - effective screening of cargo shipments , but the technology is still being tested .

vapor analysis using mass spectrometry has also been suggested as a means to study canine detection of explosives and improve the training methods and operational procedures for canine explosives detection teams .

tsa has trained over 650 canine explosives detection teams that local law enforcement agencies deploy at airports and other transportation facilities .

under cooperative agreements , tsa pays for the training , certification , and maintenance of the dogs and partially reimburses law enforcement agencies for handler salaries and other costs .

these teams devote about 25% of their time to air cargo screening .

in addition , tsa has about 166 of its own multimodal canine teams that , among other duties , screen cargo at the 20 busiest airports .

these teams focus on large bulk cargo configurations that cannot be efficiently screened using currently available technologies .

in addition , tsa has established a national explosives detection canine security program recognition under which it evaluates and approves explosives detection canine teams in foreign countries for use in aviation security , including the screening of air cargo .

so far , canine programs in the netherlands , france , south africa , and new zealand have attained this recognition by tsa .

there is considerable policy interest in the certification and deployment of tsa - approved third - party explosives detection canine teams to screen air cargo .

while many in industry support the approach , tsa had put this concept on hold after results from a 2011 pilot project failed to demonstrate reliable conformity to tsa performance standards .

tsa is currently exploring options to reevaluate the concept .

both h.r .

2825 and h.r .

4176 would direct tsa to develop standards for the use of third - party explosives detection canine teams for the primary screening of air cargo carried out by air carriers , foreign air carriers , freight forwarders , and shippers .

air cargo operators and freight forwarders in the united states and at overseas locations that handle u.s. - bound shipments must apply tsa - approved security programs , the details of which are considered sensitive security information .

broadly , these programs include access control measures , site surveillance and physical security , mandatory background checks and security threat assessments of air cargo workers , and employee security training and awareness: major passenger airlines must implement tsa's aircraft operator standard security program , including detailed security measures for transported cargo .

all - cargo operators that operate any aircraft weighing roughly 100,000 pounds ( 45,000 kg ) or more , such as fedex , ups , and operators of large freight aircraft , are covered under the full all - cargo aircraft operator standard security program .

cargo operators and charter operators that also consign cargo shipments aboard aircraft that are larger than 12,500 pounds but less than roughly 100,000 pounds must implement a tsa - approved twelve - five standard security program .

domestic freight forwarders must implement an indirect air carrier standard security program ( iacssp ) .

other components of the air cargo network , such as shippers , third - party logistics companies , and independent air cargo consolidation and screening facilities , may voluntarily participate in the certified cargo screening program ( ccsp ) .

various supply chain security measures provide options for preventing and detecting tampering and maintaining the integrity of cargo shipments .

these measures include tamper - evident and tamper - resistant packaging , cargo tracking technologies , and identifiers to designate screened cargo .

in - flight air cargo security options address the primary perceived vulnerabilities of a potential hijacking of an all - cargo flight or the bombing of a passenger aircraft using an explosive device carried in a cargo shipment .

protecting access to the cockpit and arming all - cargo pilots have been viewed as the primary in - flight options to reduce the vulnerability of all - cargo aircraft to potential hijackings .

blast - resistant cargo containers are being considered as an option to protect passenger airliners from explosives .

in addition to the various ongoing challenges of monitoring domestic and international air cargo from a security perspective , recent managerial changes and budget reductions to tsa's air cargo program have raised some concerns regarding oversight of both domestic and international air cargo security programs as well as tsa's ability to maintain effective outreach and engagement with the air cargo industry .

language in the air cargo security improvement act of 2017 ( h.r .

4176 ) calls for the creation of an air cargo security office headed by a senior level executive and staffed by at least four full - time - equivalent positions .

budget pressures and competing security priorities may impact tsa's ability to effectively regulate and oversee air cargo security and work with industry .

fy2017 funding for air cargo security totaled about $91 million , considerably less than the $123 million appropriated for this activity in fy2010 and the $115 million enacted in fy2011 .

tsa staffing for air cargo stands at about 615 full - time equivalent positions , more than 100 below the fy2014 level of 739 .

this workforce is primarily comprised of tsa air cargo inspectors , who are responsible for overseeing about 300 domestic aircraft operators and foreign air carriers , more than 4,400 regulated freight forwarders , and more than 1,000 facilities that participate in the ccsp .

tsa reports that it conducts almost 3,000 random security inspections each month , in addition to completing cargo vulnerability assessments at major cargo airports and other selected airports .

the scope and depth of random site inspections and audits of air cargo security may be issues of particular interest to congress as it assesses the degree to which deficiencies in regulatory compliance are being identified and corrected .

while some of the decrease in funding and staffing for air cargo operations reflects cost - saving measures and efficiencies , the decrease also reflects a shift to other priorities , mainly passenger screening .

in contrast to passenger screening , where tsa has a direct operational responsibility , air cargo screening is largely carried out by industry , and industry directly bears the associated direct costs of this screening .

tsa's role is to ensure regulatory compliance among air carriers and freight forwarders , as well as among shippers that voluntarily participate in the certified cargo screening program ( ccsp ) .

reducing the security - related costs to industry poses a particular challenge .

legislative language addressing lower - cost screening alternatives , including low cost technologies and the use of canines , could potentially address persistent concerns over the private sector's costs of complying with cargo security mandates .

also in the 115 th congress , the department of homeland security authorization act ( h.r .

2825 ) , as passed by the house , includes language that would require cbp to establish a formal air cargo advance screening ( acas ) program based on the ongoing pilot program and would require tsa to develop standards for third - party canine cargo screening .

the language would mandate the physical inspection of all air cargo identified as high - risk under the criteria established by the acas program prior to loading aboard a u.s. - bound aircraft or at an earlier point in the supply chain .

h.r .

4176 contains similar language that would also mandate a full acas program and establish standards for third - party canine explosives detection .

the bill also seeks to establish a formal air cargo security office within tsa to carry out air cargo security policy and engage with industry stakeholders .

the bill would mandate a review of existing regulations governing the ccsp , and would require tsa to report on its findings regarding ccsp program effectiveness , persisting vulnerabilities , and actions to be taken to improve the program .

it would also require tsa to implement a pilot program to test the expanded use of explosives detection technologies using computed tomography ( ct ) to screen air cargo placed on passenger aircraft .

the bill would also require the government accountability office to review various aspects of tsa's approach to air cargo security and carry out a comprehensive review and security assessment of the known shipper program .

