banks differ from each other across numerous aspects of their business models , including balance sheet size , breadth of products and services offered , funding sources , and risk appetite , among others .

policymakers and experts generally agree that bank regulation should be tailored to account for these differences between institutions .

as result , regulations are generally applied to banks based on meeting or not meeting some criteria .

these criteria are established on an ad hoc basis , and are often ( but not always ) based on whether the bank is above or below a certain asset size threshold , such as $1 billion , $10 billion , or $50 billion in total assets .

to what degree the application of regulation should vary and how those variations should be designed and implemented are debated issues .

these issues have been prominent in recent years at least in part because legislative and regulatory responses to the financial crisis — such as the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank ; p.l .

111-203 ) and the international agreement known as basel iii accord — have amended or introduced a number of regulations that include tailoring criteria .

bank regulation aims to achieve certain potential benefits ( eg , better - managed risks , increased consumer protection , greater systemic stability ) that justify potential costs of the regulation ( eg , reduced credit availability for certain consumers and businesses , slower economic growth over some period of time ) .

the size of the realized benefits and costs of a regulation for any individual bank or group of banks are likely to depend in part on certain characteristics of that bank or group , such as willingness to take on risk , systemic importance , and ability to absorb compliance costs .

thus , appropriately fitting regulation to banks of different types is an important component of designing effective and efficient regulation .

for illustrative purposes , consider the following simplified example .

a regulation aimed at reducing systemic risk may produce greater benefit when applied to a very large , complex , globally active and interconnected institution than when applied to a single - branch institution making residential and farm loans in a rural community .

in addition , the large institution may have more resources to comply with the regulation .

achieving appropriate tailoring for thousands of diverse banks is more difficult than laid out in the stylized example above .

determining which banks should be regulated similarly to each other , differently from others , and how regulation should differ between groups varies from regulation to regulation .

for example , the dodd - frank mandates enhanced prudential regulation for bank holding companies ( bhcs ) with more than $50 billion in assets and assigns primary consumer compliance supervision of banks with more than $10 billion to the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) .

u.s. regulators have created classifications — largely in adherence to basel iii — designating some large bhcs as advanced approaches banks and globally systemically important banks , subjecting them to stricter capital and liquidity requirements .

classifications are also in place for small banks .

for example , certain banks with less than $1 billion are subject to less frequent examinations , and bhcs below that threshold are exempt from certain requirements involving mergers and capital ratios .

in addition , a popular , but unofficial , terminology — which includes terms such as community bank and wall street — is used during debate related to bank regulation .

an exhaustive examination of all classifications and thresholds and dimensions across which these various types of banks differ is beyond the scope of this report .

instead , this report examines selected classifications of banks , briefly discusses selected legislation that would amend the existing tailoring system , and analyzes three selected characteristics ( size , business activities , and reliance on capital funding ) across which banking organizations may measurably differ .

a potential source of confusion in the debate over tailored regulation is the diversity of both popular terminology describing banks and official statutory and regulatory classifications .

many people conceptually understand ways in which banks differ , and terms that are not specifically or universally defined have developed to describe those popularly understood concepts .

meanwhile , policymakers and regulators must develop specific classification criteria for the practical application of regulations .

in addition , some observers assert the criteria used in the current regulatory classifications could be improved .

this section examines three types of bank classifications: 1 .

unofficial classifications described by popular but often subjective terminology , 2 .

official classifications of banks officially defined in statute or regulation , and 3 .

proposed classifications based on alternative criteria from those used in current statute or regulation .

the various classifications and exemptions involved in bank regulation are intended to appropriately tailor regulation based on each bank's characteristics and risks .

to examine to what degree existing and proposed classifications accomplish this , it is helpful to understand the differences between banks that do or do not meet the classification criteria .

if examined at the depository subsidiary level , idis are relatively homogenous across many characteristics because the commercial banking activities are performed at these subsidiaries , whereas other activities are performed at nonbank subsidiaries .

because the objective of this report is to examine how banking organizations differ , it examines bank holding companies at the consolidated top - parent company level .

the following section analyzes differences in the size , business activities , and capital levels of u.s. bank organizations and makes comparisons between organizations that meet certain criteria and those that do not meet those criteria .

the metrics include total assets , certain balance sheet items that illustrate how involved an organization is in certain activities , and two capital ratios .

for more information about the metrics , see appendix a .

multiple legislative alternatives for greater tailoring of bank regulations are available to congress .

a number of tailoring bills have been introduced and seen action in the current congress and recent congresses .

this section briefly examines such legislation .

the bills covered here do not represent an exhaustive list of all proposed legislation , but rather a selected list of illustrative examples that generally have seen committee or floor action or are frequent subject of debate .

many policymakers and other observers generally agree that bank regulations should be tailored to appropriately apply regulations across banks of different business models and risk profiles , and thus increase the benefits and decreases the costs of regulation .

in addition , they generally further agree over broad characteristics of banks that would warrant greater or lesser regulatory stringency ( eg , small and traditional banks serving the credit needs of a community should be subject to less regulation than large and complex banks operating on a national or global scale ) .

however , determining how tailoring should be achieved is a contentious issue .

policymakers and observers disagree over whether simple "bright line" rules based on certain criteria achieve appropriate tailoring .

in part , this stems from disagreement over the degree to which asset size , business activities , and capital levels are appropriate indicators .

data presented in this report suggests that these characteristics are correlated to each other , as asset size , trading activity , and likelihood of holding significant derivative positions all tend to rise and fall together , whereas capital levels move inversely to those characteristics .

however , these correlations are not perfect as any given bank may not reflect these tendencies .

because there are thousands of banks that can vary in their business models and risk profiles in countless ways , identifying the best possible method for achieving bank regulatory tailoring is likely to continue to be a debated issue .

appendix a .

variable and grouping descriptions appendix b .

traditional banking organization criteria and leverage ratios compared the grouping of banks as traditional banking organizations , or tbos , in this report and the grouping that would occur under fdic vice chairman hoenig's proposal are not necessarily a 1-to - 1 match .

as with all groupings in this report , the data comes from that reported as of june 30 , 2017 , but bank's balance sheets continually change overtime .

in addition , data considerations necessitate altering the criteria for the purposes of this report .

the criteria in fdic vice chairman hoenig's may 2017 proposal to classify banks as a tbo are as follows: 1 .

the bank holds no trading assets or liabilities ( other than permissible derivatives ) ; 2 .

the bank holds no derivative positions other than interest rate and foreign exchange derivatives ; 3 .

the total notional value of all the bank's derivatives exposures — including cleared and non - cleared derivatives — is less than $8 billion ; and 4 .

the bank maintains a ratio of generally accepted accounting principles equity - to - assets of at least 10% ( there is a two - year transition period to meet this ratio ) .

the criteria used in this report to classify banks as tbo are as follows: 1 .

the bank holds no trading assets or liabilities ; 2 .

the bank holds no derivative positions other than interest rate and foreign exchange derivatives ; 3 .

the total notional value of all its derivatives exposures — including cleared and non - cleared derivatives — is less than $8 billion ; and 4 .

the bank maintains a ratio of equity - to - assets ratio ( with equity defined as assets minus liabilities ) of at least 10% ( this ratio is as reported as of june 30 , 2017 ) .

possible discrepancies for qualification under each criteria could occur when ( 1 ) a bank that has trading assets and liabilities exclusively consisting of interest rate and foreign exchange derivatives held for trading or ( 2 ) a bank could report the ratio of equity - to - assets under generally accepted accounting principles differs from the ratio of asset minus liabilities - to - equity and that difference is large enough so that the bank crosses the 10% threshold .

in addition , the leverage ratio data used in this report may be calculated differently than those defined in different proposals .

this report uses the tier 1 leverage ratio reported by bhcs in the y - 9c forms submitted to the federal reserve .

vice chairman hoenig's proposal would use the generally accepted accounting principles equity - to - assets ratio .

the financial choice act ( h.r .

10 ; the fca ) defines the leverage ratio for traditional banking organization as "total assets ( minus any items deducted from common equity tier 1 capital ) as calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and as reported on the traditional banking organization's applicable regulatory filing with the banking organization's appropriate federal banking agency" divided by tangible equity .

for banking organizations that do not qualify as tbos , the fca defines the leverage ratio as the total leverage exposure as calculated by advanced approaches banks in their supplementary leverage ratio requirement divided by tangible equity .

