introduction donald j. trump promised that if elected president , he would instruct federal agencies to reduce their regulations significantly .

because of certain federal rulemaking requirements , agencies must generally undertake rulemaking procedures when they are issuing new regulations and when they are changing or eliminating regulations .

in other words , a change to or elimination of a regulation that was previously issued generally has to go through a rulemaking process — the president or his agency heads cannot unilaterally change or eliminate regulations without following rulemaking procedures .

such a rulemaking process typically requires the agency to issue a proposed rule , provide an opportunity for the public to provide comment , and then issue a final rule .

during the first year of the trump administration , this deregulation was underway in agencies across the federal government .

one way for congress and the public to be informed about this deregulatory activity is to consult the "unified agenda of federal regulatory and deregulatory actions" ( hereinafter unified agenda ) .

the unified agenda is a government - wide publication of rulemaking actions that agencies expect to take in the coming months , and it contains both regulatory actions ( i.e. , new regulations ) and deregulatory actions ( i.e. , reductions in or elimination of current regulations ) .

the trump administration's first edition of the unified agenda , which was issued on july 20 , 2017 , and was referred to by the administration as the "update to the 2017 unified agenda of federal regulatory and deregulatory actions," contains information on many deregulatory actions that the trump administration has undertaken so far and intends to undertake in the coming months .

the subsequent edition is expected to be issued in late 2017 and may contain more detailed information on the implementation of the trump administration's regulatory budget , which was announced on september 7 , 2017 , in addition to serving as an update on the deregulatory actions occurring across federal agencies .

this report provides an overview of the unified agenda , discusses the additional significance of the unified agenda in the trump administration , provides summary information about the first edition of the unified agenda released by the trump administration , and discusses what additional information can be expected in the subsequent edition of the agenda .

the unified agenda is typically published twice each year by the regulatory information service center ( risc ) , a component of the general services administration ( gsa ) , for the office of management and budget's ( omb's ) office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) .

oira is the entity within omb that has primary oversight responsibilities over most agencies' rulemaking activities .

developments in the trump administration have led to two notable aspects of the "update" edition of the unified agenda , which was issued on july 20 , 2017 .

first , the focus on deregulation makes the unified agenda particularly valuable for tracking agency deregulatory activity .

second , the trump administration made public an additional list of regulations that had been established during the obama administration and had previously not been published .

this section provides an overview of the content of 2017 update edition of the unified agenda , including information on active , withdrawn , and long - term actions listed .

the first section below provides summary statistics on the entries listed in the 2017 update .

examples are then provided for each type of action .

examples were selected based on their significant financial or material impact on the economy ( i.e. , they were designated as major and / or economically significant rules ) .

the examples in each section are further categorized as follows: small business impact .

actions that may significantly affect small businesses , governmental jurisdictions , or organizations such as nonprofits .

the rfa generally requires agencies to assess the impact of their regulations on these various small entities .

u nfunded mandates .

actions that may result in expenditures that exceed $100 million in one year by state , local , and tribal governments ( in aggregate ) or the private sector .

the unfunded mandates reform act of 1995 generally requires agencies to assess the anticipated costs and benefits of actions that are expected to exceed the $100 million threshold .

reclassified .

long - term actions that had been classified as active actions in past editions of the unified agenda .

as discussed above , executive order 13771 and subsequent instructions and guidance from omb indicate that the trump administration intends to tie the tracking of agency progress on deregulation with the process of issuing the unified agenda and regulatory plans , as the agencies are required to identify offsets for new regulations in the corresponding unified agenda entry .

it appears that future editions of the unified agenda also could contain information on agencies' implementation of their regulatory budgets .

the regulatory budgets are essentially cost caps for each agency's new regulations , and the caps are to be set by omb for each agency and each fiscal year .

the trump administration first instituted the cost caps in executive order 13771 , in which the administration instructed federal agencies to have a regulatory cost cap of zero for the remainder of fy2017 .

for each fiscal year thereafter , the order stated that agencies will be allowed a "total amount of incremental costs" for "issuing new regulations and repealing regulations for the next fiscal year. .

on september 7 , 2017 , oira administrator neomi rao instructed covered agencies to propose a net reduction in total incremental regulatory costs for fy2018 and stated that the total final incremental cost allowances would be published in conjunction with the fall 2017 unified agenda .

thus , forthcoming editions of the unified agenda may contain further information about the trump administration's implementation of its regulatory budget .

appendix a. glossary of federal entities appendix b .

active major and / or economically significant rulemaking actions in the 2017 update edition of the unified agend .

