each year , in october , the energy information administration ( eia ) publishes the short - term energy and winter fuels outlook ( stewfo ) .

the purpose of the stewfo is to provide fuel - specific estimates of expected average annual heating expenditures in comparison to previous years .

while the stewfo provides estimates of average annual heating expenses , individual expenses may vary regionally: by energy source utilized , home size , energy efficiency , individual temperature preference , market size , and local weather conditions .

average annual heating fuels expenditures depend on the price of the fuel used , with natural gas , heating oil , propane , electricity , and wood products constituting the main heating fuels in the united states .

expenditures also depend on the quantity of fuel used , which is partially based on a variety of individual consumer decisions .

weather conditions , measured by heating degree - days , are the other key factor in determining expenditure levels .

the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) provides winter heating degree - day estimates to the eia for the stewfo .

the stewfo is not a forecast in the statistical sense ; it is a projection based on assumed values of key variables .

if , for example , the underlying fuel price estimates prove to be incorrect , or weather conditions vary from forecast trends , actual average heating expenditures will reflect those differences .

noaa forecasts a 10.6% increase in heating degree - days for the 2017-2018 heating season compared to 2016-2017 for the united states as a whole .

however , the 2016-2017 winter fuel season was warmer than normal .

regional differences in weather , along with regional fuel usage patterns , can cause regional expenditure projections to vary from the u.s. average .

in the northeast , heating degree - days are expected to increase by 3.5% , while in the west they are expected to increase by 2.9% .

estimated heating degree - days are expected to increase by 23.6% in the south , and increase by 13% in the midwest .

on average , the eia projects that u.s. household expenditures on heating fuel for the 2017-2018 heating season will increase for all households irrespective of the heating fuel utilized .

the projected increase in expenditures reflects generally higher prices for all fuels , as well as the increased quantity consumed in light of the forecast of colder weather .

table 1 provides a summary of the percentage changes in the key components of the u.s. average annual heating fuel expenditures by fuel .

regionally , the eia expects expenditures on natural gas to increase most in the midwest at 16.9% , and to increase by 12.1% in the south , 6.9% in the northeast , and 2.4% in the west .

expenditures on heating oil , used primarily in the northeast , are expected to increase by 16.8% .

expenditures on propane are expected to increase by 10.6% in the northeast and by 23.5% in the midwest .

electricity expenditures are expected to increase by 3.4% in the northeast , 7.7% in the midwest , 8.6% in the south , and 3.8% in the west .

due to changing market conditions for primary fuels , the prices assumed in the stewfo can differ from actual prices .

price volatility in the world oil market can have direct effects on the cost of heating oil and propane .

variations in natural gas prices can directly affect those households heating with that fuel , while indirectly affecting electricity prices .

projected consumption levels are likely to be affected by variations in the weather .

if the observed weather is colder , or warmer , than forecast by noaa , or if consumers change their consumption habits at any given price level , or at any given number of heating degree - days , consumption levels would differ from those projected in the stewfo .

while the united states is largely self - sufficient in natural gas , it remains part of a north american regional market and participates in international trade .

most u.s. imports of natural gas come from canada .

small quantities of liquefied natural gas arrive in the united states from trinidad .

the united states exports natural gas by pipeline to mexico and canada , and exports liquefied natural gas to about a dozen nations , with south korea , jordan , and mexico among the largest customers .

domestic consumers of natural gas include households and commercial customers that largely use natural gas for space heating .

electric power generators , especially those that satisfy peak load demand , use natural gas as a primary fuel to power generators .

industrial consumers use natural gas as a raw material , for example in fertilizer production , and as a heat source in industrial processes .

households , commercial customers , and electric power generators are those consumers whose consumption is most likely to be affected by winter weather conditions .

table 2 presents average residential consumer natural gas consumption and price data for the winter heating seasons 2013-2014 through projected values for the winter 2017-2018 .

on a per - household basis , as presented in table 2 , winter consumption shows the effects of the last two relatively warm winters compared to the colder two previous winters .

the winter of 2017-2018 , although projected to generate 10.6% more heating degree - days than last winter , is only an increase compared to the last two warm winters .

approximately 48% of u.s. households heat with natural gas .

natural gas prices are expected to increase somewhat , an increase of about 2% compared to last year .

the observed price - consumption relationship suggests that natural gas demand may be price inelastic in the range presented in table 2 .

price inelasticity implies that consumption might not be expected to respond proportionally to changes in price .

an inelastic demand relationship is likely because home heating is typically considered to be a necessity by consumers .

in addition , existing metering systems do not provide consumers with easy access to real - time price and quantity data .

lack of real - time information could result in consumers making ill - informed decisions with regard to heating usage and expenditures .

income levels and the unemployment rate might also be important in determining natural gas consumption .

the eia projects a 9.7% average increase in expenditures in households heating with natural gas , driven by a 1.9% increase in natural gas prices , coupled with a 7.7% increase in fuel consumption .

compared to last winter , natural gas heating expenditures are expected to rise by 6.9% in the northeast , 16.9% in the midwest , 12.1% in the south , and 2.4% in the west .

average expenditures during the winter of 2017-2018 are expected to be $631 per household , compared to $575 for the winter of 2016-2017 .

the stewfo projects , on average , natural gas to be the lowest - cost heating source for the winter of 2017-2018 .

on the national level , including all consumer groups , total natural gas consumption rose by about 12% from 2011 through 2016 .

over the period , the electric power generating sector's consumption rose by about 40% .

residential and commercial usage showed losses , about - 9% and - 1% respectively .

industrial demand increased by about 10% , while natural gas consumption in vehicles increased by about 40% , albeit from a small base .

the stewfo projects an increase in total natural gas consumption of about 2% over the period 2016 through 2018 .

the stewfo projects an increase in u.s. natural gas production of about 9% over the period 2016 through 2018 .

while during the winter of 2016-2017 the united states was a net importer of natural gas , the eia expects the united states to become a net exporter of natural gas during the winter of 2017-2018 .

this shift is due to increased pipeline capacity to mexico and increased liquefied natural gas export capacity on the gulf coast .

storage levels of natural gas at the beginning of the winter heating season are important because while production is relatively constant over a 12-month period , consumption is subject to seasonal fluctuations .

natural gas in storage is used to smooth out production and consumption differences .

the stewfo projects adequate natural gas in storage for the 2017-2018 heating season .

projected inventories in october 2017 , of about 3.8 trillion cubic feet , were above the five - year average .

home heating oil is a middle distillate , derived from the same part of the oil refining process as diesel fuel .

as a result , the price of home heating oil is closely related to the price of crude oil as well as the price of diesel fuel .

approximately 4.5% of households in the united states heat with oil , and most of these consumers are in the northeast , where about 90% of u.s. heating oil consumption takes place .

the eia expects average home heating oil expenditures per household to increase by $209 , or 16.8% , for the winter of 2017-2018 .

these dollar and percentage increases are relatively large compared to the cost of heating with other fuels identified in the stewfo .

heating oil accounts for the highest average total expenditure for any winter fuel , $1,457 per household .

the projected heating oil expenditure for winter 2017-2018 is more than double the total expenditure for a household heating with natural gas ( $631 ) , and two - thirds higher than a household heating with electricity , $967 .

diesel fuel , a product similar to home heating oil , has been more expensive than gasoline in 2017 , averaging about $0.33 per gallon higher .

home heating oil has averaged about the same premium over gasoline during 2017 .

these price differentials likely result from u.s. refiners' emphasis on gasoline production for the u.s. market , coupled with the relatively high level of world demand for diesel fuel .

the united states has exported about 1.4 million barrels per day of diesel fuel over the first eight months of 2017 .

the costs of gasoline , diesel fuel , and home heating oil are all directly related to the price of crude oil on the world market .

the eia projects the refiner's acquisition cost of crude oil to average $48.75 per barrel in 2017 , compared to $40.69 per barrel in 2016 .

two risk factors are key in assessing the heating oil component of the winter fuels outlook .

brent crude oil , the crude oil price most relevant to setting u.s. petroleum product prices , was projected to be $54 per barrel during the winter heating season .

however , the spot price of brent averaged over $62 per barrel during november 2017 .

crude oil prices are volatile , and changes in crude oil prices are likely to proportionally affect home heating oil prices .

the second risk factor is the level of inventories in the northeast .

at the beginning of october 2017 , distillate inventories in the northeast totaled 35.5 million barrels , 16.8 million barrels less than at the same time last year .

in addition , these inventories were 1.9 million barrels lower than the previous five - year average for the time period .

the lower inventory levels are due to high global demand and the disruptive effects of hurricane harvey .

prices for home heating oil in the northeast could rise rapidly if colder - than - expected weather occurs .

in that case , the northeast market might have to turn to more expensive imports .

simultaneous cold weather in europe could cause additional upward pressure on price and perhaps compound pressure on low inventories .

propane provides primary home heating for approximately 5.7 million households in the united states , about 5% of the total households .

propane consumers are projected to experience an increased expenditure of about $211 , or 10.6% in the northeast , while consumers in the midwest are projected to experience an increase of $276 , or 23.5% .

these cost increases make propane the second most expensive fuel among those covered in the stewfo .

the number of households heating with propane has remained roughly constant over the past three years .

the eia expects a decline of 1.3% in the number of households using propane in 2017-2018 .

for the northeast in 2016-2017 , propane prices were $3.06 per gallon , while they were $1.73 in the midwest , a differential of over 55% .

while the consumption levels in the two areas are expected to be , on average , within 90 gallons of each other , the difference in propane prices leads to heating season expenditures of $1,451 in the midwest compared to $2,203 in the northeast .

propane is unique compared to other fuels covered in this report in the sense that it is a by - product , and not directly produced itself .

the production of gasoline and natural gas both contribute to the supply of propane .

as a result , when the supply of those fuels is high , so is the supply of propane .

many of the same factors that affect natural gas and home heating oil prices also influence expected propane prices .

however , in the case of propane , the relationship is indirect because propane is a by - product .

propane prices , unlike the other fuels covered in this report , are affected by distance and dispersion of consumers .

because the distribution process usually requires delivery by truck , of relatively small quantities , it tends to be high cost .

electricity prices are related to natural gas and coal prices as well as the availability of nuclear , hydro , and alternative fuel generating capacity .

in addition to natural gas being an input in electricity generation , it is also a direct competitor to electricity as a home heating source .

approximately 40% of u.s. households use electricity as their primary heating source .

in the northeast , electricity use is lowest , at about 15% , while in the south it is highest , at about 63% .

overall growth in the number of households using electricity for space heating is expected to be 2% year - on - year , driven by expansion in the midwest of over 3% .

in comparison , the numbers of propane and heating oil customers are expected to decline , by 1.3% and 3.5% , respectively .

the number of households using natural gas for space heating is expected to remain the same for the 2017-2018 heating season .

the eia projects increasing heating expenditures for households heating with electricity .

in the northeast , expenditures of $1,145 , an increase of 3.4% , are projected , and in the midwest , expenditures of $1,072 , an increase of 7.7% , are projected .

in the south expenditures of $889 are projected , an increase of 8.6% , while in the west expenditures of $961 are projected , an increase of 3.8% .

table 6 shows that , while rising , electricity prices have shown less year - on - year volatility than other heating source prices .

wood and wood pellets are projected to provide primary home heating for approximately 2.3 million u.s. households in 2017-2018 .

the eia also estimates that wood provided a secondary heating source for about 9.3 million households in 2015 .

data in the stewfo show that the number of homes heating primarily with wood and wood products has declined since the winter of 2013-2014 , with a year - on - year decline of 1.7% expected during 2017-2018 .

the eia does not track wood prices , and therefore cannot calculate expected expenditure levels for the winter heating season .

wood prices are likely to be highly localized , with relatively large urban / rural differentials , as well as regional differences .

the primary risk factors with respect to stewfo projections are the weather and energy prices .

total household expenditures on home heating are equal to the price of the fuel times the quantity of fuel consumed .

the weather , measured by the number of heating degree - days , largely determines the quantity of fuel used .

conservation , in the form of reduced temperatures inside the home , also can reduce the quantity of fuel consumed , but for a given desired temperature inside the home , heating degree - days are the key factor .

the 2017-2018 winter heating season is expected to be colder in all regions of the united states , ranging from 2.9% colder in the west to 23.6% colder in the south .

as a result of this key dependence on the weather , the stewfo includes heating expenditure scenarios estimates based on weather which is 10% warmer , or 10% colder , than the noaa forecast , identified as the base case , as shown in table 7 .

it should be noted that in interpreting table 7 , when the weather is warmer , or colder , this affects the quantity demanded of heating fuel , which can translate into a change in the price of the fuel .

these "secondary effects" are included in table 7 .

the other independent risk factor in determining the expenditure on home heating is the price of the various fuels .

these prices are determined by a complex web of related prices , market conditions , exports , expectations , and other economic variables .

in a period of relatively strong economic growth , with low unemployment , the key relationship may be that between the level of economic activity , measured by the real growth rate of gross domestic product , and the prices of oil and natural gas .

a higher price of crude oil directly increases the price of home heating oil and propane .

electricity prices are directly affected by natural gas and coal prices .

even in the face of a growing reserve base and increased production , u.s. natural gas prices are expected to increase as shown in table 2 .

while crude oil prices are determined in the world market and are also thought to be non - forecastable , the stewfo includes an assumption of higher oil prices affecting heating oil and propane expenditures as shown in table 3 and table 4 .

the low income home energy assistance program ( liheap ) is the primary federal government program to supplement home heating expenditures .

liheap is composed of two parts: funding for block grants to states , and emergency contingency funds .

liheap funding for fy2018 has been set at $3.39 billion ( continuing appropriations resolution , 2018 , p.l .

115-56 ) .

prior to the approval of the continuing appropriations resolution , the president's budget request proposed to eliminate funding for the program .

emergency contingency funds have not been appropriated since 2011 .

liheap's ability to provide heating assistance depends upon the level of funding , but also on the cost of energy , which depends upon the prices of the various energy sources ; the total consumption of energy for heating , which depends on the severity of the weather and energy efficiency ; and the number of eligible households .

if the weather in the winter of 2017-2018 is severe , or if energy prices are volatile , the fixed amount of liheap funding will likely result in smaller assistance payments to families , or fewer families receiving payments .

the stewfo projects that u.s. households will generally face increased heating costs during the winter of 2017-2018 .

fuel costs are generally expected to be higher than last year and the weather is expected to be colder .

any change in the level of economic activity , or changes in the prices of fuels , coupled with the natural variability in the actual weather experienced during the winter heating season , could change the expenditure projections as shown in table 7 .

