the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ; p.l .

111-203 ) created the financial stability oversight council ( fsoc ) and the office of financial research ( ofr ) , among other changes , in response to the financial crisis that followed the mortgage boom and bust of the 2000s .

the fsoc is a collaborative body that brings together the expertise of federal financial regulators , a presidentially appointed independent insurance expert , and representatives of state financial regulators .

some observers , including financial regulators , contended that the structure of the federal financial regulatory system contributed to financial instability and systemic risk .

to address some of these structural concerns , the fsoc's primary mission includes identifying risks to financial stability emanating from large interconnected financial institutions and utilities , promoting market discipline by eliminating investor expectations of government support to financial institutions' creditors , and responding to emerging threats to financial instability .

the ofr is to support the fsoc in monitoring the financial system , conduct research , provide findings at fsoc meetings , and identify sources of systemic risk .

the ofr's permanent researchers and analysts are distinct from researchers and staff at member agencies .

to pursue its mission , the fsoc is to foster communication among financial regulators , monitor systemic risks in the financial system as evaluated by the ofr , designate systemically important financial institutions ( sif is ) and financial market utilities ( fmus ) for enhanced prudential regulation , provide annual reports on emerging risks and current responses , and alert congress and the president to any unaddressed potential systemic risks .

the fsoc and its ofr have a number of additional responsibilities , including making nonbinding recommendations to member agencies , encouraging research in financial stability , and promoting data standards for the financial industry .

this report provides an overview of the fsoc's structure and analyzes fsoc policy - related issues and legislation .

a number of bills have been introduced to alter the fsoc's structure and general mission , or to abolish the council altogether .

this section analyzes policy issues in lead legislation in the house and senate , as defined by bills receiving committee or floor action .

the financial choice act of 2017 ( h.r .

10 ) was passed by the house on june 8 , 2017 , and would make numerous changes to the fsoc and the ofr .

it would rescind the fsoc's authority to designate firms as systemically important , eliminate the ofr , subject the fsoc to the congressional appropriations process , alter council membership , remove the ability to stay cfpb rules , and alter voting procedures and open meeting requirements , as well as implement broader regulatory changes .

an alternative bill moving through the house , the financial stability oversight council improvement act of 2017 ( h.r .

4061 ) , would require fsoc to consider additional factors during its designation process and make a number of other procedural changes to the designation process , including more opportunities for firms to participate in the process .

a narrower proposal , the financial stability oversight council insurance member continuity act ( p.l .

115-61 ) , became law on september 27 , 2017 , and modified the fsoc's independent insurance member's term to allow the current member to continue to serve in the event of a delay in the naming of a successor by the end of the member's six - year term .

currently , if an agency is led by a board or commission , instead of by a single director , the chair of the agency is a member of the fsoc .

in other contexts , these agencies may require a board or commission vote for some agency actions .

h.r .

10 would make all board members or commissioners members of the fsoc , and the agency's vote would be a single vote determined by the board or commission collectively .

the agency's voting rule would be consistent with its voting method for its own activities .

expanding fsoc membership to all board members or commission members would arguably broaden the perspectives represented on the fsoc .

this may weaken an individual's influence , because one would conceivably present the board's or commission's perspective rather than one's own .

this may be particularly true for boards and commissions that have bipartisan requirements , such as the sec and the cftc .

the ofr provides the fsoc with a permanent staff to monitor the financial system as a whole , including available data sources from all regulators and directly from market participants .

h.r .

10 would eliminate the ofr .

many financial regulatory agencies perform their own research and analysis regarding the financial system , and as such , some observers consider that ofr research efforts may be duplicative .

additionally , some observers see research produced by the private sector as better able to identify risks to financial stability .

the ofr is charged with conducting broad - ranging research that surveys the entire financial system , whereas most agencies are tasked with relatively discrete areas of regulation .

the ofr's research , some say , may therefore be more adept at identifying broader systemic issues than that of individual regulatory agencies .

the fsoc and the ofr are funded by assessment fees on designated sifis and by bank holding companies with total consolidated assets greater than $50 billion , not by annual congressional appropriations .

as member salaries and offices are covered by their own agencies , the fsoc's direct funding needs are modest compared with those of other financial agencies .

however , the ofr has salary and administrative requirements for professional researchers similar to those of other economic data collection and monitoring bureaus .

h.r .

10 would eliminate the ofr and make the fsoc's funding subject to the annual appropriations process .

some executive agencies are funded outside of the congressional appropriations process to insulate them from political considerations and provide additional independence , as politically unpopular decisions would be less likely to affect their funding .

as such , the current funding structure for the fsoc and the ofr likely grants them additional independence from congress , like many other regulatory agencies .

alternatively , subjecting them to the annual appropriations process would give congress additional oversight and influence over the agencies .

currently , bhcs meeting certain requirements are automatically subject to enhanced prudential regulation .

this includes certain firms that received troubled asset relief program ( tarp ) funds and are not allowed to cease being sifis even if they change their structure ( so - called hotel california firms ) .

alternatively , the fsoc can designate a nonbank or a financial market utility as systemic with a two - thirds majority vote , directing regulatory agencies to apply prudential regulations .

h.r .

10 would eliminate the fsoc's authority to make systemic designations of sifis and fmus .

it would also retroactively rescind the designation of currently designated entities , including banks that had received funding under tarp and therefore were required to remain subjected to enhanced prudential regulation under dodd - frank .

the inability to designate financial firms as systemically important would eliminate the additional prudential regulations placed on those firms .

if the fsoc is capable of correctly identifying systemically important financial firms and these prudential regulations make financial firms less susceptible to failure , then eliminating the fsoc's systemic designations may increase the risk of financial instability .

alternatively , if the fsoc's systemic designations act as a signal that those designated firms are "too big to fail" and therefore would likely be bailed out by the government in the event of failure , the designations may result in riskier behavior by those firms .

this may make failures more likely if enhanced prudential regulation cannot mitigate the risky behavior .

alternative legislation ( h.r .

4061 ) was marked up and ordered to be reported by the house financial services committee on january 18 , 2018 .

h.r .

4061 would modify fsoc's consideration criteria for designating firms as systemic .

in addition to the current criteria fsoc considers when designating a nonbank financial company laid out in the " statutory factors " above , the bill would require fsoc to consider the "the appropriateness of the imposition of prudential standards as opposed to other forms of regulation to mitigate the identified risks. .

the bill would make changes to the evaluation process , providing for more contact between companies under consideration and fsoc .

the evaluation process would be modified to allow for more input from the company under consideration throughout the process , providing for numerous opportunities for the firm to provide materials to fsoc and opportunities for in - person hearings .

additionally , fsoc would be required to provide written notice to the company at each stage of the evaluation process , including when a company is initially identified for evaluation , following a proposed determination by fsoc , and after the final determination .

the bill would give companies under evaluation by fsoc an opportunity to present a plan to fsoc to alter their business , structure , or operations with a specified implementation period .

fsoc can approve the plan with a two - thirds vote including the chairperson , and after implementation fsoc votes again regarding final designation of the company .

the bill would alter the annual reevaluation process and implement a five - year periodic reevaluation process for companies designated as systemic .

during the annual reevaluation process , fsoc must provide written notice to companies being reevaluated , allow company representatives to meet with fsoc , and if the determination is not rescinded , fsoc must provide notice to the company explaining its reasoning .

the bill would also implement a process for reevaluation at the company's request five years after the initial designation .

during the reevaluation , the company would present a plan to alter its business , structure , or operations where upon implementation and approval by fsoc , through a two - thirds vote including the chairperson , the designation would be rescinded .

the additional criteria for evaluation imposed by h.r .

4061 is likely intended to prevent the imposition of redundant or more burdensome than necessary regulations on nonbank financial companies .

however , the inclusion of this additional criterion may send a signal to regulators that the imposition of prudential regulation should be eschewed in favor of alternative regulations , even if prudential regulations may be more appropriate .

additionally , fsoc may not have the authority to apply the alternative regulation , leaving it dependent on the appropriate member agencies to implement them .

the changes within the evaluation process would likely also increase the transparency and accessibility of fsoc by requiring additional written correspondence and in - person meetings between fsoc and nonbank financial companies .

however , the additional steps and requirements established by the bill may increase the risk of regulatory capture and may slow the evaluation process by fsoc , resulting in longer lag times between identifying sources of financial instability and implementing prudential regulation to reduce the risk of financial stability .

fsoc meetings are generally open to the public , and , when public , the meetings may be made available via webcast ; however , either the chairperson or a majority vote by voting members of the council can close a meeting or a portion of a meeting to the public .

meetings may be closed to the public for a number of reasons , as the fsoc often discusses confidential or market sensitive information .

agency commissioners and board members other than the head may be invited or admitted to fsoc meetings , but cannot attend as a matter of right .

in 2017 , as of this writing , fsoc has met at least seven times ; two of these meetings were made available to the public via webcast .

h.r .

10 would make a number of changes to increase congressional access to fsoc meetings and actions .

the bill would allow members of congress on committees of jurisdiction to attend the council's public meetings .

the bill would also require the fsoc to create and preserve transcripts for all nonpublic meetings .

additionally , the fsoc's chairperson would be required to provide confidential briefings to the house financial services committee and the senate banking , housing , and urban affairs committee at least once per year .

the changes introduced in h.r .

10 would generally allow for increased congressional oversight of the fsoc .

increased congressional oversight can ensure greater accountability of the fsoc .

at the same time , increased oversight by congress likely reduces the fsoc's independence from congress and from political considerations , which may affect regulatory decisions .

fsoc members can vote to put a stay on cfpb rules if they believe that the rules would put the safety and soundness of the banking system or financial stability at risk .

h.r .

10 would remove this fsoc power , in addition to making other significant changes to the cfpb .

fsoc recommendations to other agencies are nonbinding .

some have argued that unlike other financial regulators , who are charged with balancing consumer protection and financial stability , the cfpb is only charged with protecting consumers and therefore is not as concerned with potential tradeoffs between consumer protection and financial stability .

as such , it may be beneficial for the fsoc to have the power to stay rules if there is a threat to financial stability .

the cfpb is the one agency subject to this additional check from the fsoc , and repealing this fsoc authority would put the cfpb on par with other regulators .

currently , most property , casualty , and life insurances are regulated at the state level .

both the department of the treasury's federal insurance office ( fio ) and an independent insurance expert serve on the fsoc .

the independent insurance expert is a voting member ; treasury's fio is not .

the treasury office can serve as a single negotiator in harmonizing regulation of insurance internationally .

h.r .

10 would combine the treasury office and the office of the independent insurance expert into one office distinct from treasury .

