the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , as amended by the every student succeeds act ( essa ; p.l .

114-95 ) , specifies the requirements for the state assessments that states must incorporate into their state accountability systems to receive funding under title i - a .

title i - a of the esea authorizes aid to local educational agencies ( leas ) for the education of disadvantaged children .

title i - a grants provide supplementary educational and related services to low - achieving and other students attending elementary and secondary schools with relatively high concentrations of students from low - income families .

as a condition of receiving title i - a funds , states , leas , and public schools must comply with numerous requirements related to standards , assessments , and academic accountability systems .

all states currently accept title i - a funds .

for fy2017 , the program was funded at $15.5 billion .

the esea requires that states implement high - quality academic assessments in reading , mathematics , and science .

states must test all students in reading and mathematics annually in grades 3 through 8 and once in high school .

states must also test all students in science at least once within three grade spans ( grades 3-5 , 6-9 , and 10-12 ) .

the esea therefore requires states to implement annually , at a minimum , 17 assessments for students in elementary and secondary schools .

while many of the assessment requirements of the esea have not changed from the requirements put into place by the no child left behind act ( nclb ; p.l .

107-110 ) , the essa provides states some new flexibility in meeting them .

for example , states may choose to administer one summative assessment or multiple statewide interim assessments that result in a single summative score .

for the first time , the essa allows states to use "nationally recognized tests" to meet the high school assessment requirement , provided there is evidence the tests align with state standards .

it also includes provisions for states' use of alternate assessments for students with the "most significant cognitive disabilities," which was previously addressed only in regulations .

the essa explicitly authorizes the use of computer adaptive assessments .

computer adaptive assessments adjust to a student's individual responses , which means that all students will not see the exact same questions .

the essa also authorizes an exception to state assessment requirements for 8 th grade students taking advanced mathematics in middle school that permits them to take an end - of - course assessment rather than the 8 th grade mathematics assessment , provided certain conditions are met .

in addition , the essa authorizes a new demonstration authority for states to create an "innovative assessment system" that would permit them to use different assessment formats ( eg , competency - based assessments ) and assessments that validate when students are ready to demonstrate mastery or proficiency , and allow for differentiated student support based on individual learning needs .

the essa also includes a new provision that permits the secretary of education ( the secretary ) to reserve a portion of funds available under the state assessment grant program to award competitive grants to states for assessment audits .

the purpose of this report is to describe the general assessment requirements of the esea as amended and discuss the new flexibility states have in meeting these requirements .

the report also discusses some issues related to the changes enacted by essa regarding the use of assessments in accountability systems that are receiving attention as they are implemented .

more specifically , this report examines issues related to assessment of student growth , assessment of students with disabilities and english learners , the use of computer adaptive assessments , student assessment participation requirements , and testing burden .

while these changes have the potential to add flexibility and nuance to state accountability systems , states face the challenge of implementing them in such a way as to maintain the validity and reliability of the required assessments .

students participate in many assessments in elementary and secondary schools .

as mentioned above , the esea requires states to administer annually , at a minimum , 17 assessments collectively in reading , mathematics , and science .

to meet this requirement , states typically use summative assessments .

for reading and mathematics , the results of these assessments are then used in the state accountability system to differentiate schools based , in part , on student performance .

in addition to these assessments , states , leas , and schools administer a number of other assessments for different purposes and within different content areas .

the focus of this report is on the assessments required in title i - a of the esea .

several of the changes included in the esea as amended by the essa provide states with more flexibility with respect to using assessment for accountability purposes .

many of the changes have the potential of adding nuance to state accountability systems .

for state accountability systems to function effectively , however , the changes to the requirements of title i - a must be implemented in such a way as to retain the validity and reliability of state assessments and not to detract from the value or accuracy of state accountability systems .

it remains important to understand how the measurement of student achievement with assessments affects determinations made by the state accountability systems .

this section of the report includes a discussion of several assessment - related issues that have garnered attention in relation to essa - enacted changes .

these include issues related to assessment of student growth , assessments for students with special needs , computer adaptive assessments , student opt - out practices , and testing burden .

the discussion identifies ways in which essa - enacted adjustments are intended to enhance the use of assessments in accountability systems and / or facilitate the ease of operating such systems .

some topics related to valid and reliable uses of assessment for purposes of accountability which may be relevant to these adjustments are discussed as well .

these topics are ones that have surfaced in the reauthorization discourse or in the years in which nclb provisions were in effect .

they are presented not to forecast problems , but rather to explain some challenges that may have to be navigated and to identify some inherent tensions in using assessments in accountability systems .

these issues may bear monitoring as essa - enacted adjustments are deployed .

prior to the enactment of the essa , state accountability systems were only required to report student proficiency , a static measure of student achievement .

a singular focus on proficiency has been criticized for many reasons , most notably that proficiency may not be a valid measure of school quality or teacher effectiveness .

often , proficiency is a measure of factors outside of the school's control ( eg , demographic characteristics , prior achievement ) .

one of the unintended consequences of static measures , like proficiency level , was the way instruction may have been targeted toward students just below the proficient level , possibly at the expense of other students .

in an effort to raise the percentage of proficient students , schools and teachers may have targeted instructional time and resources toward those students who were near the proficiency bar .

because time and resources are limited , fewer instructional resources may have been available for students who were far below proficiency or those who were far above proficiency .

under the esea as amended by the essa , states , leas , and schools are still required to report data on student proficiency on the required assessments .

some education policy groups have argued for a different way to report static achievement than has been used in the past .

they have asserted that by continuing to focus only on proficiency , more emphasis will continue to be placed on students just below the level of proficiency .

some education policy groups have advocated instead for the use of a "performance index" for static measures .

using a performance index , states can get credit for reaching various levels of achievement ( eg , 0.75 points for partial proficiency , 1 point for reaching proficient , 1.25 points for reaching advanced levels ) .

by using a performance index , some say , schools would have an incentive to try to increase the achievement of all students .

another way to report static achievement in a way that represents all students would be to report average scale scores .

scale scores are much more sensitive to changes in achievement than proficiency levels .

they also have better statistical properties for research and analysis .

scale scores exist along a common scale so that they can be compared across students , subgroups , schools , and so forth .

by placing assessment results along a common scale , changes over time can be determined more accurately .

to address some of the concerns raised about relying only on proficiency as a measure of student academic achievement on required assessments , the esea as amended by the essa specifically provides the option for student achievement to be measured using student growth as well .

prior to the enactment of the essa , some states had already incorporated specific measures of student growth into their accountability systems after obtaining a waiver from ed to do so .

under the esea as amended by the essa , additional states may choose to incorporate measures of student growth into their accountability systems , while other states may choose to revise their student growth measures .

the type of growth model selected for a state accountability system depends on many different factors beyond the type of assessment measure used .

the selection of an assessment , however , can limit the choices states have in developing and implementing growth models .

the remainder of this section discusses different types of growth models currently used by states and the assessment requirements of such models .

measuring growth takes several forms .

a review of 29 state accountability systems that use student growth identified three types of growth models: state - set targets of student growth ( 14 states ) : state - set targets measure the degree to which a student meets a set amount of growth or reaches a performance benchmark .

student growth percentiles ( sgps ) ( 12 states ) : sgps examine a student's academic achievement relative to academic peers who began at the same place .

an sgp is a number from 1 to 99 that represents how much growth a student has made relative to his or her peers .

an sgp of 85 would indicate that a student demonstrated more growth than 85% of peers .

sas evaas ( 3 states ) : this model measures value - added growth .

"value - added growth" refers to the additional positive effect that a certain factor has on student achievement above what is considered "expected" growth .

this type of growth model follows students over time and provides projection reports on a student's future achievement .

the ccsso also released a paper that outlines many considerations in the development and implementation of growth models in esea accountability systems .

in this analysis , five common growth models were identified .

these models are briefly described below , including information on their assessment requirements: gain scores: gain scores are calculated by finding the difference between test scores .

using scale scores , the results of an earlier score ( eg , 3 rd grade mathematics ) is subtracted from the results of a later score ( eg , 4 th grade mathematics ) .

in terms of assessment , the use of gain scores requires a vertical scale that creates a common scale across grade levels .

growth rates: growth rates are calculated by using multiple results of student assessment and statistically fitting a "trend line" across the data points .

in order to aggregate the data across multiple grade levels , the growth rate may require vertically scaled scores .

student growth percentiles: as mentioned above , sgps examine academic achievement compared to a student's peers who start at the same achievement level .

these scores are based on the percentage of academic peers that a student outscores .

scores are reported as percentiles ( i.e. , 1-99 ) .

because sgps compare growth to peers who participated in the same assessment at the same time , a vertically scaled assessment is not necessarily a requirement .

transition tables: transition tables use growth in discrete "performance levels" ( i.e. , levels of proficiency , such as basic , proficient , and advanced ) .

these calculations are less precise but can be aggregated across grade levels without using vertically scaled scores .

residual models: residual models are also referred to as "value - added" models .

this type of model can describe the effect of outside factors on student growth over time ( eg , teacher or school influence on student learning ) .

residual models compare the performance of a class , school , or lea to the average expected change .

these models can be aggregated across grades without a vertical scale ; however , there are other significant data requirements , such as the ability to link student data to teachers , schools , and leas .

some education policy groups have cautioned against using a type of growth model that measures "growth to proficiency. .

the "growth to proficiency" model measures whether students are on - track to meet a proficient or higher performance standard ( eg , proficient or advanced ) .

using this type of model , there would be no difference between a student who moved from "not proficient" to "proficient" and a student who moved from "not proficient" to "advanced. .

this type of growth model would create the same incentive to focus instruction on students near the proficiency score .

students far below or above the level of proficiency may not receive appropriate attention .

if states choose a "growth to proficiency" model , however , there may be ways to weight certain types of growth .

similar to a performance index , growth from "not proficient" to "proficient" could be assigned a point value and other types of growth could be assigned lower or higher points , depending on the design of the system .

by measuring student growth , accountability systems are better suited to evaluate student learning over time .

measuring the amount of learning within a given school year may be a more valid measure of school accountability than proficiency , because a student's prior level of achievement can be taken into account .

under some growth models , schools would not be penalized for certain low achieving students , provided that the students are meeting growth targets set by the accountability system .

this type of growth model may be a more valid measure of factors within the school's control ( eg , classroom practices , teacher , leadership , school climate , etc. ) .

measuring growth targets , however , is dependent on reliable assessments that are sensitive to student learning over time .

the esea requires that all students participate in annual academic assessments .

there are , however , special provisions for how to include students with special needs , including students with disabilities and els .

for example , a subset of students with disabilities may participate in an alternate assessment , but the use of alternate assessment in state accountability systems is limited .

in addition , els may be included in state accountability systems in different ways depending on how long they have been in the united states and their level of english language proficiency .

this section explores how various assessments for students with special needs are included in state accountability systems .

as was required prior to the enactment of the essa , states must include all students with disabilities in the statewide assessment system .

furthermore , states must disaggregate assessment results for students with disabilities .

the majority of students with disabilities participate in regular academic assessments with their peers .

the esea , however , requires states to adhere to several assessment practices to ensure that students with disabilities fully participate in state assessment systems .

first , the esea as amended by the essa requires that state assessments "be developed , to the extent practicable , using the principles of universal design for learning" ( udl ) .

udl is an inclusive framework that can be used in the development of assessments and instructional materials .

in general , udl is based on three principles: ( 1 ) providing multiple means of representation , ( 2 ) providing multiple means of action and expression , and ( 3 ) providing multiple means of engagement .

udl can be used to reduce unnecessary cognitive burden in the assessment process .

for example , udl helps to limit the use of complex language ( eg , using "primary" vs. "most important," the use of figurative language ) and visual clutter ( eg , too much information on a page , unusual font style ) .

second , the esea continues to require that states allow "appropriate accommodations" for students with disabilities .

accommodations are intended to increase the validity of the assessment of these students .

for example , if a student has a learning disability in the area of reading , he or she may receive a "read aloud" accommodation on a test of mathematics ability .

because the assessment is measuring mathematics , the student's reading difficulty should not interfere with the measurement of his or her mathematics ability .

without an accommodation , the student's mathematics score may be lower than his or her true ability .

if , on the other hand , the student is taking a test of reading comprehension , the "read aloud" accommodation may not be appropriate because it may inaccurately increase the student's reading score .

third , the essa amended the esea to allow for the use of an alternate assessment aligned with alternate standards for students with the "most significant cognitive disabilities. .

while the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) includes provisions regarding the identification of students with disabilities , it does not mention students with the "most significant cognitive disabilities" as a specific disability category under the law .

as such , states must develop guidelines to identify students as those with the "most significant cognitive disabilities. .

a student's individualized education program team ( iep team ) applies the state guidelines to determine whether the student will participate in the alternate assessment .

determinations are made on a case - by - case basis .

if it is determined that a student may participate in an alternate assessment , his or her parents must be informed of the decision and how participation in an alternate assessment may affect the receipt of a regular high school diploma .

students who are found eligible to participate in the alternate assessment are often those identified with intellectual disabilities , autism , or multiple disabilities .

a state may provide an alternate assessment aligned with alternate achievement standards provided that the total number of students assessed in each content area does not exceed 1% of all tested students in the state .

the "1% cap" applies only at the state level ; there is no lea - level cap .

however , any lea that assesses more than 1% of the total number of students assessed in a content area using the alternate assessment must submit information to the sea justifying the need to do so .

the state is then required to provide "appropriate oversight , as determined by the state" of any such lea .

if a state exceeds the 1% cap , scores from the assessments over the cap are counted as nonproficient in the state accountability system .

an alternate assessment based on alternate achievement standards is considered a more valid assessment of students with the most significant cognitive disabilities because the alternate achievement standards are better aligned with the academic content standards for students in this group .

if students with the most significant disabilities participate in the general assessment , they may be assessed on the full range of grade - level standards , which may not reflect the content they are learning .

while the alternate assessment may be a more valid assessment of students with the most significant cognitive disabilities , there may be specific issues of reliability to consider .

for example , many alternate assessments are given in a different format , such as portfolio assessments , rating scales , or item - based tests .

these test formats are often scored against a rubric that reflects how well a student mastered the alternate achievement standard .

using this type of assessment scoring , issues of inter - scorer agreement may be particularly important to preserving the validity of the accountability system .

if different scorers do not rate student performance consistently and with reliability , the validity of the achievement score may be questionable and an incorrect number of students with the most significant cognitive disabilities may be counted as "proficient" in the accountability system .

states must include all els in the statewide assessment system and disaggregate results for these students .

els participate in statewide assessment and accountability systems in different ways , depending on their level of language proficiency and number of years of schooling in the united states .

there are two separate types of assessments for els: ( 1 ) assessments of english language proficiency ( elp ) and ( 2 ) statewide assessments of reading , mathematics , and science that are required for all students .

as was required prior to the enactment of the essa , states must ensure that all leas provide an annual assessment of english language proficiency of all els .

the assessment must be aligned to state english proficiency standards within the domains of speaking , listening , reading , and writing .

for elp assessment purposes , most states currently participate in the wida consortium , which serves linguistically diverse students .

the consortium provides for the development and administration of access 2.0 , which is currently the most commonly used test of english language proficiency .

in 2017 , the wida consortium changed the achievement standards for english language proficiency to reflect the language demands of college - and career - readiness standards .

as a result , some states are experiencing declines in reported english language proficiency levels and have fewer students exiting the school support programs for els .

this means that more el students may be included in accountability determinations for the el subgroup for longer periods of time .

as was also required prior to the enactment of the essa , states must generally provide for the inclusion of els in statewide assessments of reading , mathematics , and science .

similar to the provision for students with disabilities , the esea provides for "appropriate accommodations" for els and allows states to administer , "to the extent practicable," assessments in the language that is most likely to yield accurate results .

the esea continues to require a state to assess an el in english once the student has attended school in the united states for three or more consecutive years .

an lea , however , may decide on a case - by - case basis to assess an el in a different language for an additional two consecutive years if the student has not reached a level of english language proficiency that allows for participation in an english language assessment of reading .

the assessment of an el in a different language may yield more accurate results for some students .

as previously permitted prior to the enactment of the essa , a state may exclude an el from one administration of the reading assessment if he or she has been enrolled in school in the united states for less than 12 months .

the essa added a second option regarding the assessment of recently arrived el students: a state may assess and report the performance of such a recently arrived el on the statewide reading and mathematics assessments , but exclude that student's results for the purposes of the state's accountability system .

if a state selects the latter option , it is required to include a measure of student growth on these assessments in the student's second year of enrollment and a measure of proficiency starting with the third year of enrollment for the purposes of accountability .

the results of statewide academic assessments must be disaggregated for els .

a state may now include the scores of formerly identified els in the el subgroup for a period of four years after the student ceases to be identified an el .

that is , once an el becomes proficient in english , his or her score may still be included in the "el subgroup" for reading and mathematics for four years .

prior to the enactment of the essa , an el that had attained proficiency in english had his or her score included in the el subgroup for two years .

because the english language proficiency standards for many states' tests have changed , it may take longer for els to exit the subgroup .

this change in the way el proficiency is determined and the ability of a state to include the performance of former els in the el subgroup for four years means that many els may remain in the el subgroup for accountability purposes for a longer time .

it is possible , therefore , that the performance of the el subgroup improves because students presumably have higher levels of english language proficiency as time goes on .

the essa has changed the population of the students who are included in the el subgroup , which may increase the performance of the subgroup .

because the population of the subgroup has changed , there may be inconsistency in the performance of the el subgroup across time as states transition from nclb accountability systems to essa accountability systems .

the esea as amended by the essa explicitly authorizes the use of computer adaptive assessments to meet the requirements under title i - a .

prior to the enactment of the essa , it was unclear whether computer adaptive assessments were allowed due to the requirement that statewide assessments be "the same academic assessments used to measure the achievement of all public elementary school and secondary school students in the state. .

one property of computer adaptive assessments is that they adjust to a student's individual ability , which means that all students do not receive the same assessment items .

the essa , therefore , added clarifying language that specifies that the requirement that all assessments be "the same" "shall not be interpreted to require that all students taking the computer adaptive assessment be administered the same assessment items. .

a computer adaptive assessment works by adjusting to a student's individual responses .

if a student continues to answer test items correctly , the assessment administers more difficult items .

the items will continue to get more difficult until the student reaches a "ceiling. .

a ceiling in assessment is reached when a student either ( 1 ) completes all of the most difficult assessment items ( i.e. , the ceiling of the assessment itself ) or ( 2 ) answers a number of assessment items incorrectly ( i.e. , the ceiling of the student's ability ) .

because the assessment items are adaptive , a computer adaptive assessment can measure a student's ability above or below grade level .

the esea requires that computer adaptive assessments must measure , at a minimum , a student's academic proficiency based on state academic standards for the grade level of the student .

after measuring a student's grade level proficiency , the assessment may also measure proficiency above and below the student's actual grade level .

computer adaptive assessments are also required to measure student growth .

the esea authorizes their use for alternate assessments for students with the most significant cognitive disabilities and english language proficiency assessments for els .

due to the adaptive nature of these assessments , there have been several areas of concern about using them for statewide academic assessments .

first , because computer adaptive assessments generally require students to reach a ceiling , it is possible that the administration time may be longer than a traditional assessment for high - achieving students .

however , some states that use computer adaptive assessments find that they are more time efficient than traditional tests .

another concern is the accurate measurement of special populations , such as students with disabilities and els .

special populations are more likely to have inconsistent knowledge within a content area .

that is , they may not have mastered all the lower skills in a subject area , though they may have partial mastery of higher - level skills .

if a student reaches the ceiling on the lower skills , he or she would not have the opportunity to demonstrate partial mastery of the higher - level skills .

some have also expressed concern that computer adaptive assessments may test a student's computer literacy skills instead of the content areas of reading and mathematics .

if a student's computer literacy interferes with the measurement of reading and mathematics proficiency , the assessment result would not be a valid representation of what the student knows and can do .

other issues that have been raised related to computer adaptive assessments ( as well as nonadaptive computer assessments ) focus on technical , financial , and reporting issues .

for example , a school using computer adaptive assessments has to have computers available to students , may have to purchase software , needs to have technical staff available to set up the assessments and troubleshoot problems that may arise during the assessment process , and may need to provide training to teachers on the use of these assessments .

at the same time , depending on the nature of the test items , computer assessments can generally be scored more quickly than paper - and - pencil assessments , providing teachers with more immediate feedback on student performance .

a key provision of statewide assessment systems is the requirement to assess all students .

this requirement is enforced through the reporting of student assessment results in the accountability system .

states are required to annually measure the achievement of at least 95% of all students and 95% of all students in each subgroup .

when at least 95% of assessment results are reported within the accountability system , the conclusions based on these assessment results are more likely to be valid and reliable for differentiating schools based on academic achievement .

a school cannot solely decide whether students participate in academic assessments , as parents have rights concerning the participation of their children .

there are two separate provisions that were enacted through the essa regarding parental rights in the assessment process .

first , at the parent's request , the esea now requires the lea to provide information on student participation in assessments and to include any policy , procedure , or parental right to opt the child out of the assessment .

second , the esea now explicitly states that nothing in the assessment requirements "shall be construed as preempting a state or local law regarding the decision of a parent not to have the parent's child participate in the academic assessments. .

thus , if a state or local law regarding opt - outs exists , the assessment requirements of the esea as amended by the essa cannot preempt it .

although excessive numbers of opt - outs may have consequences for accountability , the primary focus of this discussion is the consequences for assessment itself .

excessive numbers of opt - outs may undermine the validity of the measurement of student achievement and , by extension , may undermine the validity of the state accountability system .

validity may be undermined because a large number of opt - outs could create a scenario in which states are measuring student achievement that is not representative of the whole student population .

to explore this issue , it is important to understand a few basic statistical terms .

in statewide assessment systems under the esea , states are required to assess the universe of students — that is , all students .

in education research , it is more common to assess a representative sample of students .

a representative sample of students is carefully selected from the universe of students , and the sample reflects the whole population in terms of certain demographic characteristics ( eg , gender , race / ethnicity , socioeconomic status , disability status , el status ) .

in a representative sample , students with desired demographic characteristics are randomly selected in specific proportions to represent the entire population .

in statewide assessment systems under the esea , states are not permitted to select a representative sample of students .

because the esea requires that states assess the universe of students , large numbers of students opting out of the assessment may create an unrepresentative sample .

parents of students who choose to opt out are likely not randomly distributed across all demographic characteristics ; therefore , it may create an unrepresentative sample .

if a state assesses an unrepresentative sample of students , the assessment results used in its accountability system would not accurately reflect the true achievement of the population as a whole ( i.e. , the universe ) .

both prior to and following the enactment of the essa , the esea has required states to administer 17 annual assessments across three subject areas ( reading , mathematics , and science ) .

these requirements have been implemented within a crowded landscape of state , local , and classroom uses of educational assessments .

the emphasis on educational assessment within federal education policies , which has coincided with expanded assessment use in many states and localities , has led to considerable debate about the amount of time being spent taking tests and preparing for tests in schools .

one common criticism of test - based accountability is that it leads to a narrowing of the curriculum .

there are several ways this could occur .

first , the time spent administering the actual assessments , sometimes called the "testing burden," could take away from instructional time .

second , test - based accountability may lead to increases in test preparation in the classroom , which also takes away from instructional time .

there is some evidence to suggest that teachers feel pressure to "teach to the test" and engage in test preparation activities at the expense of broader , higher - level instruction .

test - preparation activities take several forms , including emphasizing specific content believed to be on the assessments , changing classroom assignments to look like the format of the assessments , or presenting test taking strategies .

third , in test - based accountability systems , teachers report reallocating instructional time toward tested subjects and away from nontested subjects .

surveys of teachers have consistently reported that their instruction emphasizes reading and mathematics over other subjects like history , foreign language , and the arts .

test preparation can take many forms , and it is difficult to distinguish appropriate test preparation from inappropriate test preparation .

many schools provide test preparation to young students who have little experience with standardized testing , and this form of it can actually increase the validity of a test score because it is less likely that students will do poorly due to unfamiliarity with the testing process .

test preparation begins to affect validity in a negative way , however , when there are excessive amounts of alignment between test items and curricula , excessive coaching on a particular type of item that will appear on the test , or even outright cheating .

although these efforts are often undertaken with good intentions , overuse of test preparation strategies can lead to score inflation .

score inflation is a phenomenon in which scores on high - stakes assessments tend to increase at a faster rate than scores on low - stakes assessments .

the validity of the assessment results is reduced when score inflation is present .

studying its prevalence is difficult because leas may be reluctant to give researchers access to test scores for the purpose of investigating possible inflation .

several studies , however , have been able to document the problem of score inflation by comparing gains on state assessments ( historically , high - stakes ) to those made on naep ( low - stakes ) .

studies have consistently reported discrepancies in the overall level of student achievement , the size of student achievement gains , and the size of the achievement gap .

these discrepancies indicate that student scores on state assessments may be inflated and that these inflated scores may not represent true achievement gains as measured by another test of a similar construct .

in this case , the validity of the conclusions based on state assessments may be questioned .

the essa added new provisions that focus on testing burden and possibly reducing the number of assessments overall ( not just those required by title i - a ) .

each state may set a target limit on the aggregate amount of time used for the administration of assessments for each grade that is expressed as a percentage of annual instructional hours .

for each grade served by the lea , it must provide information on ( 1 ) the subject matter being assessed ; ( 2 ) the purpose for which the assessment is designed and used ; ( 3 ) the source of the requirement of the assessment ; and ( 4 ) the amount of time students will spend taking assessments , the schedule of assessments , and the format for reporting results of assessments ( if such information is available ) .

in addition , the secretary may reserve funds under the state assessment grant program to provide grants to states for conducting audit assessments that examine whether all of the tests being used in a state are needed , and to provide subgrants to leas to conduct a similar examination of assessments used at the lea level .

