growing demands on the transportation system and constraints on public resources have led to calls for more private - sector involvement in the provision of transportation infrastructure through what are known as "public - private partnerships" or "p3s. .

as defined by the u.s. department of transportation ( dot ) , "public - private partnerships ( p3s ) are contractual agreements between a public agency and a private - sector entity that allow for greater private - sector participation in the delivery and financing of transportation projects. .

typically , the "public" in public - private partnerships refers to a state government , local government , or transit agency .

the federal government exerts influence over the prevalence and structure of p3s through its transportation programs , funding , and regulatory oversight , but is usually not a party to a p3 agreement .

this report discusses the benefits and limitations of p3s that involve long - term private financing , the experience with these types of p3s in the united states , and current federal policy .

the report outlines a number of issues and policy options that congress might consider: project evaluation and transparency , asset recycling , incentive grants , infrastructure banks , tax credits for equity and debt , interstate highway tolling , and changes to an existing federal loan program .

with the traditional method of providing transportation infrastructure , known as "design - bid - build," the public sector is in charge of building , financing , operating , and maintaining a facility , although construction and other activities are typically contracted out to the private sector .

by contrast , a public - private partnership may involve private - sector participation in any or all phases of development and operation of a new facility or the operation and maintenance of an existing facility .

the many different forms p3s can take are characterized by the extent of the private sector's participation: design - build ; design - build - finance ; design - build - operate - maintain ; design - build - finance - operate - maintain ( dbfom ) ; and long - term lease agreements .

it is these last two types of p3s , dbfom and long - term lease agreements , which generate the most interest and discussion .

these p3s are also known as concession agreements , as they involve the ongoing participation of a private partner , termed the concessionaire , in managing the facility as a business .

dbfom p3s involve the private sector in most facets of constructing , operating , and maintaining a new facility , including long - term financing .

the private - sector partner is repaid by facility users , through fares or tolls , or by payments from state or local government over the life of the contract .

known as "availability payments," these payments from the government are contingent on the "availability" of the facility consistent with agreed performance standards , such as snow removal times , but do not depend on facility demand .

figure 1 depicts the relationships between the public and private partners in a toll road dbfom p3 , such as the $2 billion capital beltway ( i - 495 ) high occupancy toll ( hot ) lanes project that opened for traffic in northern virginia in 2012 .

the parties are capital beltway express , llc ( a joint venture of fluor , a construction and engineering company , and transurban , an australian firm specialized in managing toll roads ) and the virginia department of transportation .

long - t erm l ease a greement s involve the operation and maintenance of an existing facility by a private concessionaire for a specified amount of time .

the private partner pays the public sector a concession fee and agrees to operate and maintain the facility to prescribed standards .

in return , the private company typically collects tolls or other user fees to pay lenders and debt holders and to generate a return on equity investment .

many cargo terminals in u.s. ports are operated by for - profit firms under contracts with the public port agencies that own the underlying land .

a prominent example of this type of p3 is the 75-year lease concession of the indiana toll road that was awarded in 2006 to the indiana toll road concession company ( itrcc ) , a partnership between cintra , a spanish developer of transportation infrastructure , and macquarie infrastructure group , then a subsidiary of an australian investment bank , for a single lump - sum payment of $3.8 billion .

ownership of the lease was transferred to ifm investors after the bankruptcy of itrcc in 2014 .

implementing the procurement of infrastructure projects through p3s typically requires the public sector to establish a legal and policy framework through a state enabling statute .

these laws provide the authority for state and local government agencies to establish p3s and typically include provisions that limit the types of p3 arrangements allowed , how projects are to be selected and approved , how proposals are reviewed , the involvement of the public , and requirements for the release of information .

according to dot , 35 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico currently have general p3 enabling legislation .

the implementation of a p3 typically entails complex and costly legal , financial , and technical issues that require public oversight over the course of a long - term contract .

this may require extensive staff time and hiring of outside experts .

an important aspect is the evaluation of projects .

this may involve traffic and revenue studies , risk assessment , studies of project costs and financial feasibility , and value - for - money analysis that compares the proposed p3 with delivery of the project by the public sector .

to date , the number of transportation p3s in the united states is relatively small , as is the amount of long - term private financing provided .

according to one source , from 1993 through september 2017 there were 32 transporta tion p3s involving long - term financing , with total project costs totaling $45 billion .

this includes the 99-year lease of the chicago skyway ; the i - 595 managed lanes project in florida ; the purple line light rail transit project in maryland ; and the first large airport p3 , the $5 billion renovation of terminal b at laguardia airport in new york , agreed to in june 2016 .

other possible airport p3s include los angeles , san diego , and denver .

although the pace of p3 deals has accelerated over time , p3s remain a very small percentage of investment in transportation .

the congressional budget office estimated that the value of contracts involving privately financed roads over 20 years through 2012 was less than 1% of government highway spending .

others have noted that p3s currently account for about 2% of public infrastructure outlays .

p3s and private investment in surface transportation are relatively larger in many other countries , including portugal , spain , australia , and the united kingdom .

there are a number of possible reasons for the limited use of p3s in the united states .

among them are the following: municipal bonds , long - term debt instruments that receive preferential income tax treatment , allow state and local governments to borrow at lower cost than private investors .

p3s are more widely used in many other countries , where there is no similar tax preference for state or local government borrowing .

p3s are a source of financing , not a source of funding .

they require some type of revenue stream , such as a toll , fare , or tax , to service debt and provide a return on private equity , and such measures can be unpopular .

while the federal government can encourage the development of p3s , decisions are taken at the state and local level .

many states have very limited experience with p3s .

fifteen states do not have enabling statutes .

there are three main potential benefits of p3s .

first , p3s are a way to attract private capital to invest in transportation infrastructure .

this can be particularly important when public - sector budgets are heavily constrained .

p3s , therefore , can spur the building of transportation facilities earlier than would be the case if left to the public sector alone .

the opportunity to invest in equity or taxable debt may lure pension funds and foreign investors , which generally are not subject to u.s. federal income tax and thus do not benefit from the tax exclusion of interest on municipal bonds .

second , p3s may be able to build and operate transportation facilities more efficiently than the public sector through better management and innovation in construction , maintenance , and operation .

private companies may be more able to examine the full life - cycle cost of investments , whereas public agency decisions are often tied to short - term budget cycles .

third , through p3s the public sector can transfer to the private - sector partner many of the risks of building , maintaining , and operating transportation infrastructure ( table 1 ) .

one major risk is that a facility will cost more to operate and maintain than budgeted , particularly if initial construction is poor .

another is that a facility to be financed by tolls will have less demand than estimated , and will fail to generate the expected revenue .

transferring these and other risks to the private sector may not save money , as the private partner requires compensation for assuming them , but the risk transfer may provide greater certainty for the public sector .

concerns with p3s include the types of projects involved , the risks retained by the public sector , and transportation planning .

private - sector investors are drawn to projects that have the greatest potential financial returns , adjusted for risk .

p3s that are reliant on tolls or other user fees , therefore , are unlikely to address transportation issues in rural areas or on lightly traveled routes .

however , p3s in these areas may be viable if based on state and local government availability payments .

although some risks are typically transferred to the private sector in a p3 , the public sector may retain significant risk .

in some p3s , the public sector retains revenue risk , thus putting itself on the line to repay creditors if the project fails to generate anticipated revenue .

poorly written contracts , weak private - sector partners , and external events may force the public sector to renegotiate the p3 contract or to assume project ownership .

and many transportation p3s involve federal loans through the transportation infrastructure finance and innovation act ( tifia ) program , exposing federal taxpayers to losses if project revenue is insufficient to service the loans .

p3s may have longer - term effects on the transportation system insofar as they influence decisions about what to build and where .

unsolicited project proposals may not reflect the priorities of the state , region , or locality as incorporated into short - and long - range transportation plans .

noncompete clauses in p3 contracts may restrict public improvements near a privately operated facility or require the payment of compensation .

such restrictions may impede the ability of public agencies to increase capacity and to devise coordinated congestion management policies .

the exceedingly long terms of some concession agreements , 99 years in some cases , tie the hands of planners and policymakers years into the future , when conditions may be very different .

most transportation p3s to date have involved highways or marine cargo terminals .

only a few have involved public transportation , intercity passenger rail , or airports .

user fees ( fares ) collected by public transportation agencies make up less than one - third , on average , of the funding used to provide transit service , and rail projects are similarly challenged .

private - sector entities are unlikely to initiate projects in such situations , and the public sector has sought to finance only a few transit projects through availability payments .

airport p3s have been inhibited by a number of factors including restrictions on the use of lease proceeds for airport purposes , cheaper financing for public airport operators through tax - exempt bonds , and regulatory conditions such as the necessity for 65% of air carriers serving an airport to approve a lease or sale .

p3 agreements are typically negotiated between a private company and a state or local government , the owners of most transportation infrastructure ; the federal government is not directly involved .

however , the federal government can pursue policies to encourage p3s or not , and it can implement regulations on the way in which p3s are formed , particularly when federal funding , financing , and tax incentives are involved in the project .

limiting the formation of p3s would predominantly entail restricting federal benefits to such projects .

two broad policy options for expanding use of p3s would be to actively encourage p3s with program incentives , but with regulatory controls to protect the public interest , or to aggressively encourage the use of p3s through program incentives and deregulation .

p3s offer a number of potential benefits for states and localities , but they also present a number of trade - offs and potential problems .

skeptics emphasize that p3s sometimes involve little private money or are subsidized by the public sector , that risk transfer from the public to the private sector can be illusory , and that p3 contracts may constrain government decisions about the transportation system .

proponents of this view tend to be cautious about the benefits of p3s and favor regulations designed to protect the public interest .

two aspects of protecting the public interest are the evaluation of p3 projects and the transparency of the negotiations and agreement between the public and private sectors .

concerns about undervaluing public assets and windfall private profits are common with p3 deals .

an often cited example is the 75-year lease of parking meters in chicago that the city's inspector general argued was undervalued by 46% .

for this reason , the government accountability office and others have proposed requiring rigorous up - front analysis of the costs and benefits of a p3 .

one such approach is a value - for - money analysis that compares a traditional public - sector procurement with a p3 on the basis of projected risk - adjusted life - cycle costs .

this may inform decisions about "which procurement approach to use , which risks to allocate to the private sector , and which private sector bid to accept. .

such analyses are not without their own problems because they rest on a host of estimates and assumptions , including project costs , the valuation of risks , and future interest rates .

nevertheless , congress could require the use of value - for - money analysis or a similar analysis tool for proposed p3 projects using federal funding or financing .

this was one recommendation of the house transportation and infrastructure committee's special panel on public - private partnerships ( t&i special panel ) , which met in 2014 .

disclosure of information to the public , especially at an appropriate time in the decisionmaking process , is another issue in the development of p3 agreements and throughout the contract period .

the t&i special panel noted that "when federal funds are proposed to be included in a p3 agreement , the federal government should ensure that the project sponsor develops the agreement through a transparent process , the parties are held accountable , and there is an accurate accounting of the total federal investment. .

the information disclosed in highway p3s might include the proposed contract , current and future toll rates , the use of toll revenue for other investments , noncompete clauses , and administrative costs incurred by the public sector .

in terms of the federal investment , the t&i special panel recommended that federal agencies should provide detailed information including tax benefits deriving from tax - preferred financing and asset depreciation allowances .

a tradeoff to consider , however , is that the private sector may be less willing to enter into partnerships without confidentiality of certain aspects of a project , such as innovations and cost structures .

the federal government could offer financial incentives for state and local governments to enter into long - term lease concessions of public assets and to "recycle" the proceeds from these deals into other infrastructure investments .

assets with the potential for leasing are those with user - fee revenue streams , such as toll roads and airports .

new investments in infrastructure could involve facilities with or without such revenue streams , such as rural roads and transit systems .

in australia , the national government paid an incentive grant of 15% of the value of the asset to state and territorial governments to enter into such agreements .

for example , the state of victoria leased the port of melbourne for 50 years for nearly $10 billion , with those funds to be spent on removing highway - rail grade crossings and other regional infrastructure projects .

this asset recycling program was active from 2014 until 2016 .

criticisms of the australian program included that the public sector loses control of income - producing assets for a one - time infusion of funds ; that the incentive payment may lead to poor decisions by state and local government to privatize assets ; and that the incentive funding favors states and localities that have large assets to privatize .

federal grants also could be made available to encourage the development of p3 projects for new projects .

one option would be to set up a program of $2 billion per year to provide grants of up to 20% of costs for projects that would require life - cycle costing of capital , operations , and maintenance .

these grants would be available to both government and p3 projects , but the expectation would be that a significant number of projects would be implemented with a p3 .

canada has implemented a similar program with incentives provided by the p3 canada fund .

a national infrastructure bank could be designed to promote development of p3s .

the central idea of a national infrastructure bank , or "i - bank," would be to provide low - cost , long - term loans on flexible terms , much like the tifia program .

however , an i - bank might have more independence than tifia , which is controlled by dot , and as a separate organization might be able to build up a specialized staff , including expertise on the creation and oversight of p3s .

funding could come from an appropriation to pay for administrative costs and the subsidy cost of credit assistance , although in some formulations an i - bank would raise its own capital through bond issuance .

many different formulations of an i - bank have been proposed over the past few years .

three i - bank proposals introduced in the 115 th congress are the national infrastructure development bank act of 2017 ( h.r .

547 ) by representative delauro , the partnership to build america act of 2017 ( h.r .

1669 ) by representative delaney , and the building and renewing infrastructure for development and growth in employment ( bridge ) act ( s. 1168 ) by senator warner .

a related idea is the formation of a federal financing fund , most likely in the department of the treasury , which could administer all federal credit programs .

this would improve consistency and use of best practices across infrastructure sectors , and would avoid the conflict of interest within federal agencies of promoting projects and providing credit .

an alternative to creating a national infrastructure bank could be enhancing state infrastructure banks that already exist in many states .

although they tend to provide credit assistance to small projects that do not involve a p3 , an expansion of their role may make them more supportive of projects involving a private partner .

one of the biggest stumbling blocks to federally authorized sibs has been capitalization .

this is because federal grant funds that could be used to capitalize a sib have typically been committed elsewhere .

a fast act provision provides authority for a tifia loan to a sib , but to date none have been made .

other ideas that have been proposed but not enacted include dedicating federal funds to sibs ( h.r .

7 , 112 th congress ) and authorizing sibs to issue a type of tax credit bond ( h.r .

2534 ; s. 1250 , 113 th congress ) .

to encourage the development of p3s , the federal government could provide a tax credit for equity investment in infrastructure projects .

a recent tax credit proposal is the move america act of 2017 ( s. 1229 ; h.r .

3912 ) , introduced by senators hoeven and wyden and representative jackie walorski .

the act would provide a 5% tax credit on investment in a qualified fund or project for 10 years .

qualified funds would include state infrastructure banks and water pollution and drinking water revolving loan funds .

an investment in a fund or a project eligible for the tax credit could take the form of equity , a loan , or a loan guarantee .

a criticism of equity investment tax credits is that they could be a windfall for equity investors and would not produce any new infrastructure investment .

however , others argue that a well - designed tax credit for investors "should generate incremental tax - oriented equity augmenting ( not displacing ) the level of financial equity justified by project cash flows. .

private activity bonds ( pabs ) provide p3 projects access to municipal bond market rates available to government project sponsors .

under current law , the use of tax - exempt , qualified pabs for transportation projects is limited to a fixed $15 billion for the life of the program .

about $11 billion of the $15 billion has been allocated .

several proposals have sought to raise the cap .

for example , the obama administration's fy2017 budget proposal included a provision to increase this amount to $19 billion .

another proposal is to standardize the tax rules for different types of projects and to uncap the volume .

a more limited proposal , part of the move america act of 2017 , is for the establishment of a new type of pab known as move america bonds .

these bonds would have some features to encourage p3s .

another option for congress is to increase direct funding for or otherwise adjust the tifia program .

the fast act cut direct funding to the tifia program , while allowing states to trade formula grant funding for a larger loan .

at the moment states do not have to make that trade because the tifia program is not in danger of running out of budget authority .

in october 2017 , unobligated budget authority in the tifia program amounted to about $1.5 billion .

if the tifia program does exhaust its direct funding in the future , an unanswered question is whether states will voluntarily choose to use grant funding to pay the subsidy and administrative costs of a loan .

streamlining the application process to speed up approvals is another possible option for improving the use of tifia financing in p3 projects .

user fees such as vehicle tolls provide a revenue stream to retire bonds issued to finance a project and to provide a return on investment .

many parts of the interstate highway system , those in urban areas and some in rural areas , have traffic levels that would make it financially viable to have toll - supported p3s .

the need for reconstructing interstates is likely to accelerate in the years ahead , as many reach their approximately 50-year design life .

many of these projects are likely to be very expensive "mega - projects," running into the hundreds of millions of dollars .

although imposing tolls on "free" roads is likely to be unpopular , congress could allow states to impose tolls on an interstate after its reconstruction as a way to facilitate p3 involvement in financing such projects .

