t he u.s. constitution expressly grants each house of congress the power to discipline its own members for misconduct , including through expulsion , stating that: [e]ach house may determine the rules of its proceedings , punish its members for disorderly behaviour , and , with the concurrence of two thirds , expel a member .

this report discusses the nature of the power of congress to remove a member , including the historical background of the expulsion clause , the implications of the limited judicial interpretations of the clause's meaning , and other potential constitutional limitations in the exercise of the expulsion power .

the report then explores a number of issues of debate as to congress's power to expel , including whether past practice is legally binding on a given body ; which acts may be sufficient to warrant expulsion ; and whether acts that occurred prior to the member's election or reelection to congress are subject to the expulsion power .

expulsion is the process by which a house of congress may remove one of its members , after the member has been duly elected and seated .

expulsion , which is expressly provided for in the expulsion clause , is often confused with exclusion , which is an implied power of congress that stems from the qualifications clauses for the house and senate .

exclusion occurs when a body of congress refuses to seat a member - elect .

unlike the two - thirds majority requirement of the expulsion power , a body of congress may exclude a member - elect with a simple majority .

as the supreme court has explained , while exclusion and expulsion both bar an individual from holding a seat in congress , the two actions exist for different purposes and occur at different times .

specifically , in powell v. mccormack , the court explored the constitutionality of representative adam clayton powell's exclusion from the house of representatives .

the impetus for the case was an investigation of expenditures authorized by powell during the 89 th congress , which concluded that , as chairman of a house committee , the member had engaged in improper activities , including deceiving house authorities with regard to travel expenses and directing illegal payments to his wife .

the house took no formal action with regard to those findings during that congress , but refused to administer the oath of office to powell at the start of the 90 th congress the following year .

subsequently , a select committee , which was appointed at the outset of the 90 th congress to determine powell's eligibility to be seated as a member , recommended that powell be sworn into office as a member and subsequently disciplined .

however , the house rejected that recommendation and instead adopted a resolution that would exclude powell , which it approved by a vote of 307 to 116 .

powell sued to be reinstated and on appeal the supreme court held that powell's exclusion was unconstitutional , explaining that "exclusion and expulsion are not fungible proceedings. .

while the court recognized that the constitution grants broad authority to each of the houses of congress regarding expulsion and other discipline , it explained that congress's authority regarding exclusion was limited to the enumerated qualifications requirements .

because of the distinct nature of each action , the court emphasized that the vote to exclude powell , despite exceeding a two - thirds majority , could not substitute for his expulsion .

discerning the constitutional meaning of the expulsion clause requires an examination of the text of the clause , the historical background that undergirds the clause , the limited judicial decisions that have sought to interpret its text , and a brief evaluation of how the clause may be subject to limitation by other constitutional principles .

in addition , and in light of the discretionary nature of the power , an assessment of house and senate practice is necessary for a full understanding of the expulsion power .

in light of the scant evidence of the expulsion clause's historical basis and the limited judicial precedent in interpreting the clause , congress's own treatment of its expulsion power may play an important role in delineating the contours of the clause .

house and senate practice has interpretive import for two reasons .

first , the supreme court has suggested that "[i]n the performance of assigned constitutional duties each branch of the government must initially interpret the constitution , and the interpretation of its powers by any branch is due great respect from the others. .

thus , it would seem that as a general matter , congress's view of the scope of its own expulsion power is an important starting point for the proper interpretation of the expulsion clause .

second , the supreme court has often treated historical practice as an "important interpretive factor" in construing constitutional provisions .

the court turned to historical practice , for example , in a recent challenge to presidential recess appointments , reasoning that "in interpreting the [recess appointment] clause , we put significant weight upon historical practice. .

however , it should be noted that the extent that practice provides an interpretive gloss on constitutional text often varies depending on whether the practice is "long settled and established. .

as will be discussed in more detail below , little about the margins of the house and senate's expulsion power is settled , especially , for example , with regard to the question of whether each house may expel a member for conduct occurring prior to an intervening election .

while house and senate practice may not necessarily constitute legal precedent , it nevertheless may establish procedural and parliamentary norms , and — to the extent that a court has the opportunity to evaluate the clause — may have some influence on how a court construes the reach of the expulsion power .

moreover , even if not legally binding , historical practice may guide both the house and senate in making their own decisions about how to wield their own authority .

article i § 5 of the constitution provides the house and senate with broad , but not unlimited , authority to expel their own members with the concurrence two - thirds of the body .

in light of limited judicial interpretations of the clause and limited and inconsistent house and senate practice , it is difficult to define precisely the scope of the expulsion power , especially with regard to the nature and timing of conduct that may justify expulsion .

nonetheless , historical practice suggests that the chief and competing concerns that animate debates over the expulsion power are interests in preserving the integrity of a given house versus the interest in preserving the results of a democratic election .

