venezuela continues to be in the throes of a deep political crisis under the authoritarian rule of president nicolás maduro .

narrowly elected to a six - year term in 2013 following the death of longtime populist president hugo chávez ( 1999-2013 ) , maduro is unpopular .

despite serious economic challenges and recurring protests , maduro has various policies , including use of the courts and security forces , to repress and divide the political opposition .

the maduro regime has been accused of committing serious human rights abuses ; creating a deepening humanitarian crisis in venezuela ; establishing an illegitimate legislature , the national constituent assembly , which has usurped power from the democratically elected national assembly ; engaging in rampant corruption ; and persecuting the political opposition .

underpinning the political crisis is an acute and increasingly unstable economic crisis .

venezuela's economy is built on oil , which accounts for more than 90% of the country's exports .

the 2014 collapse in oil prices hit venezuela's economy hard .

venezuela's economy has contracted by 35% since 2013 , a larger contraction than the united states experienced during the great depression in the 1930s .

in addition , the crisis is marked by inflation , shortages of consumer goods , default on the government's debt obligations , and deteriorating living conditions with significant humanitarian consequences .

congress has long - standing interests in both u.s. - venezuela relations and foreign economic crises that affect u.s. economic interests .

this report analyzes the economic crisis in venezuela , arguably the most acute crisis in the global economy today , including the causes , policy responses by the government , and recent developments .

the report also examines how the crisis affects u.s. economic interests , including u.s. investors' holdings of venezuelan bonds , venezuelan assets in the united states , u.s. - venezuelan trade and direct investment , and possible future involvement of the international monetary fund ( imf ) in the crisis .

for decades , venezuela was one of south america's most prosperous countries , but now lags behind other key economies in the region ( figure 1 ) .

venezuela has the world's largest proven reserves of oil in the world , and its economy is built on oil .

oil accounts for more than 90% of venezuelan exports and oil sales fund the government budget .

oil exports also provide the country with the foreign exchange it needs to import consumer goods .

after years of economic mismanagement under president hugo chávez , venezuela was not well equipped to withstand the sharp fall in oil prices in 2014 .

economic conditions have deteriorated rapidly under president maduro .

in november 2017 , the government's increasingly dire fiscal situation came to a head , as the government announced it would seek to restructure its debt .

although the economic crisis in venezuela has been building for years , in many ways it is still in the early stages , with no clear or quick resolution on the horizon , particularly given the concurrent political crisis .

the country is facing a complex set of economic challenges embedded in a volatile political context: collapsed output , inflation , and unsustainable budget deficits and debt all plague the country .

the government's policy responses , including price and import controls , vague restructuring plans , and deficit spending financed by expanding the money supply ( printing money ) , have been widely criticized as inadequate and as exacerbating the economic situation facing the country .

over the past several decades , the international community has developed processes for helping countries respond to serious economic crises .

these processes usually entail an international financial assistance package , paired with debt restructuring and an imf reform program .

in the case of venezuela , the maduro government has no such plan in place , nor has it shown any signs of pursuing such a program .

given the political situation there , it is unlikely that the international community is inclined to do so either .

there are serious questions about how long the maduro regime can persist amid such a severe economic crisis , but in recent months maduro appears to have increasingly consolidated political power over the opposition .

in terms of u.s. policy , the trump administration likely increased the fiscal challenges facing venezuela's government through sanctions restricting venezuela's access to the u.s. financial system .

however , the sanctions are a double - edged sword .

the sanctions are opposed by a majority of venezuelan people , and may have boosted support for the maduro regime .

they also restrict the ability of u.s. investors to participate in any restructuring , and u.s. investors could face substantial losses if the maduro regime suspends payments .

some analysts have called for stronger sanctions on venezuela to force a change in government , but others have cautioned against potential harm to both the venezuelan people and u.s. economic interests .

