this report provides a broad overview of u.s. immigration policy .

the first section addresses policies governing how foreign nationals enter the united states either to reside permanently or to stay temporarily .

related topics within this section include visa issuance and security , forms of quasi - legal status , and naturalization .

the second section discusses enforcement policies both for excluding foreign nationals from admission into the united states , as well as for detaining and removing those who enter the country unlawfully or who enter lawfully but subsequently commit crimes that make them deportable .

the section also covers worksite enforcement and immigration fraud .

the third section addresses policies for unauthorized aliens residing in the united states .

while intended to be comprehensive , this primer may omit some immigration - related topics .

it does not discuss policy issues or congressional concerns about specific immigration - related policies and programs .

u.s. immigration policy is governed largely by the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , which was first codified in 1952 and has been amended significantly several times since .

implementation of ina policies is carried out by multiple executive branch agencies .

the department of homeland security ( dhs ) has primary responsibility for immigration functions through several agencies: u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) , customs and border protection ( cbp ) , and immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) .

the department of state ( dos ) issues visas to foreign nationals overseas , and the department of justice ( doj ) operates immigration courts through its executive office of immigration review ( eoir ) .

foreign - born populations with different legal statuses are referred to throughout this report .

the term a liens refers to people who are not u.s. citizens , including those legally and not legally present .

the two basic types of legal aliens are ( 1 ) immigrants ( not including refugees and asylees ) and ( 2 ) nonimmigrants .

im mi grant s refers to foreign nationals lawfully admitted to the united states for permanent residence .

n onimmigrant s refers to foreign nationals temporarily and lawfully admitted to the united states for a specific purpose and period of time , including tourists , diplomats , students , temporary workers , and exchange visitors , among others .

refugees and asylees refer to persons fleeing their countries because of persecution , or a well - founded fear of persecution , on account of race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion ( see " refugees and asylees " ) .

refugees and asylees are not classified as immigrants under the ina , but once admitted , they may adjust their status to lawful permanent resident ( lpr ) .

na turalized citizens refers to lprs who become u.s. citizens through a process known as naturalization ( described below ) , generally after residing in the united states continuously for at least five years .

noncitizen s are persons who have not naturalized and may include immigrants as well as nonimmigrants .

u nauthorized alie ns refers to foreign nationals who reside unlawfully in the united states and who either entered the united states illegally ( "without inspection" ) or entered lawfully and temporarily ( "with inspection" ) but subsequently violated the terms of their admission , typically by "overstaying" their visa duration .

immigration enforcement encompasses enforcement of the ina's civil provisions ( eg , violations of admission conditions ) as well as its criminal provisions ( eg , marriage fraud , alien smuggling ) .

it involves border security where foreign nationals enter the united states ( at ports of entry ) and along u.s. borders ( between ports of entry ) , as well as enforcing immigration laws in the u.s. interior , including worksite enforcement .

immigration enforcement also involves the identification , investigation , apprehension , prosecution , and deportation of foreign nationals who violate u.s. laws and become removable .

determining how to address the unauthorized alien population residing in the united states has arguably been among the most divisive immigration issues facing congress .

unauthorized aliens consist of those who ( 1 ) entered the country surreptitiously without inspection , ( 2 ) were admitted on the basis of fraudulent documents , or ( 3 ) overstayed their nonimmigrant visas .

in all three instances , the aliens violated the ina and may be removed .

aliens who attempt to enter the united states illegally and those who assist them also are subject to ina - mandated penalties .

because the exact number of unauthorized aliens residing in the united states remains unknown , demographers have developed methods to estimate their population size and characteristics .

according to the most recent and widely cited estimates available , the size of the unauthorized alien population increased from 8.6 million in 2000 to a peak of 12.2 million in 2007 .

it has fluctuated between 11.0 and 11.5 million since that time .

scholars attribute the general decline and changing country - of - origin composition in illegal migration flows in recent years to increased border security , relatively large numbers of alien removals , high u.s. unemployment , crime in central america , and other factors .

options proposed for addressing the unauthorized alien population often emphasize reducing its size .

some approaches would require or encourage unauthorized aliens to depart the united states .

other strategies would grant qualifying unauthorized residents various immigration benefits , including an opportunity to obtain legal immigration status .

federal law places various restrictions on unauthorized aliens .

in general , they have no legal right to live or work in the united states and are subject to removal from the country .

at the same time , the ina provides limited forms of immigration relief for some unauthorized aliens to be legally admitted to the country , including crime victims or those seeking asylum .

unauthorized aliens who were present illegally in the united states for between 6 and 12 months are barred from readmission to the united states for 3 years , and those present for more than 1 year are barred for 10 years ( the "3- and 10-year bars" ) .

for unauthorized aliens who cannot obtain lpr status , existing mechanisms enable some to remain in the united states .

one such mechanism , deferred action , is defined by dhs as "a discretionary determination to defer removal action of an individual as an act of prosecutorial discretion. .

deferred action is not an immigration status and does not have a statutory authority ; it is a form of administrative discretion .

examples of deferred action may include dhs terminating removal proceedings , declining to initiate removal proceedings , or declining to execute a final order of removal .

approval of deferred action means that no action will be taken against a removable alien for a specified time or in some cases indefinitely .

under the deferred action for childhood arrivals ( daca ) initiative begun by dhs in june 2012 , certain individuals without a lawful immigration status who were brought to the united states as children and who meet other criteria may be granted deferred action for two years , subject to renewal .

daca recipients can apply for employment authorization but are not afforded a pathway to a legal immigration status .

daca was initiated not by congressional legislation but by the obama administration .

the trump administration announced the planned rescission of the daca initiative on september 5 , 2017 , but due to federal court orders enjoining the rescission , daca remains in effect pending the outcome of further litigation .

