the transportation , housing and urban development , and related agencies ( thud ) appropriations subcommittees in the house and senate are charged with drafting bills to provide annual appropriations for the department of transportation ( dot ) , the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , and six small related agencies .

title i of the annual thud appropriations bill generally funds dot .

the department is primarily a grant - making and regulatory organization .

its programs are organized roughly by mode of transportation , providing grants to state and local government agencies to support the construction of highways , transit , airport , and intercity passenger rail infrastructure , while overseeing safety in all modes of transportation .

the federal aviation administration ( faa ) is exceptional among dot's large sub - agencies in that the largest portion of its budget is not for grants but for operating the u.s. air traffic control system .

in support of that task , it employs over 80% of dot's total workforce , roughly 46,000 of dot's approximately 56,000 employees .

title ii of the annual thud appropriations bill generally funds hud .

the department's programs are primarily designed to address housing problems faced by households with very low incomes or other special housing needs .

these include several programs of rental assistance for persons who are poor , elderly , and / or have disabilities .

three rental assistance programs — public housing , section 8 housing choice vouchers , and section 8 project - based rental assistance — account for the majority of the department's funding .

two block grant programs — the home investment partnerships program and community development block grants ( cdbg ) — help communities finance a variety of housing and community development activities designed to serve low - income families .

other , more specialized grant programs help communities meet the needs of homeless persons , including those with aids .

hud's federal housing administration ( fha ) insures mortgages made by lenders to homebuyers with low down payments , often first - time homebuyers , and to buyers and developers of multifamily rental buildings containing relatively affordable units .

title iii of the thud appropriations bill generally funds a collection of agencies involved in transportation or housing and community development .

they include the access board , the federal maritime commission , the national transportation safety board , the amtrak office of inspector general ( ig ) , the neighborhood reinvestment corporation ( often referred to as neighborworks ) , the u.s. interagency council on homelessness , and the costs associated with the government conservatorship and regulation of the housing - related government - sponsored enterprises , fannie mae and freddie mac .

the surface transportation board , formerly an agency of dot , was made independent of dot in 2015 legislation , and now appears in title iii of the thud bill .

title iv of the thud appropriations bill typically sets out general provisions applicable to the bill .

they can range from , for example , restrictions placed on funding in the bill to supplemental funding for disasters .

 table 1 and figure 1 show recent funding trends for the primary thud agencies , dot and hud , in both nominal and constant dollars ( excluding emergency supplemental funding ) .

in real terms , dot and hud funding declined for several years after fy2010 , and even in fy2017 their funding was still below their fy2010 levels .

 table 2 provides a timeline of legislative action on the fy2018 thud appropriations bill .

 table 7 presents account - level funding information for hud , comparing fy2017 with fy2018 congressional action .

the president's fy2018 budget request for hud included the following: $40.7 billion in gross discretionary appropriations for hud , not accounting for savings from offsets and other sources .

that amount is about $7.3 billion ( 15% ) less than was provided in the final fy2017 appropriations law .

$31.2 billion in net discretionary appropriations for hud , accounting for the effect of offsets , rescissions , and other savings .

a proposal to eliminate funding for several hud grant programs .

most notable among these are hud's two largest block grant programs for states and localities , the cdbg and home programs , as well as grants funded in the self - help homeownership opportunity ( shop ) account ( i.e. , funding for sweat - equity programs , like habitat for humanity , and certain capacity building programs ) .

large funding reductions for public housing , including a 68% cut relative to fy2017 for the capital fund and elimination of funding for the choice neighborhoods program .

funding reductions for most other accounts relative to fy2017 , with the exception of the housing for the elderly account ( 2% increase ) .

several policy proposals , including an increase in the share of rent paid by certain recipients of hud - assisted housing from 30% of family income to 35% and an elimination of utility reimbursements paid to families in assisted housing .

as reported by the house appropriations committee , h.r .

3353 would have provided the following for hud: $48.0 billion in gross discretionary appropriations for hud , which is about $7.3 billion ( 15% ) more than was requested by the president and only slightly ( < 1% ) less than was enacted for fy2017 .

 ( $38.3 billion in net discretionary funding. ) .

small increases in funding for the tenant - based rental assistance account ( +1% ) and project - based rental assistance account ( +2% ) relative to fy2017 .

the public housing operating fund would receive level funding , and the capital fund would be cut by 5% .

funding reductions for major hud grant programs , but not an elimination of funding , as proposed in the president's budget .

relative to fy2017 , the bill would have cut the shop account by 17% , home by 11% , and cdbg by 3% .

during floor consideration of h.r .

3354 , which includes as division h the text of h.r .

3353 , hud - related floor amendments were approved: increasing funding for: cdbg , shop , public housing capital fund , housing for persons with aids , and housing for the elderly ( section 202 ) .

offsetting those increases with decreases for: public housing operating fund , information technology , fha administrative expenses , and research and technology .

making policy changes to block hud's implementation of some manufactured housing regulations and guidance ( sec .

424 ) and to allow for the study of certain foundation materials ( amendment to the community development fund account ) .

as reported by the senate appropriations committee , s. 1655 would provide the following for hud: $49.9 billion in gross discretionary appropriations for hud's programs and activities , which is 4% more than was enacted for fy2017 and 23% more than was proposed by the president ( $40.2 billion in net discretionary appropriations ) .

increases in funding for the section 202 housing for the elderly program ( +14% over fy2017 enacted ) , the project - based rental assistance account ( +6% ) , and the tenant - based rental assistance account ( +5% ) .

level funding , relative to fy2017 , for the grant programs slated for elimination in the president's budget request ( cdbg , home , and the programs included in the shop account ) .

several new policy changes , including an expansion of the rental assistance demonstration ( eliminating the cap on the number of units that may convert , modifying the terms of conversion for some properties and expanding the program to section 202 housing for the elderly properties ( section 236 of the general provisions ) ) and new penalties for hud if the agency does not issue reports to the committee about properties that fail inspection ( section 202 of the general provisions ) .

 table 8 shows appropriations levels for the various related agencies funded within the transportation , hud , and related agencies appropriations bill .

the surface transportation board was transferred from the dot title to the related agencies title starting with fy2017 .

the president's fy2018 budget request included that congress begin the process of winding down the interagency council on homelessness ( usich ) , which was created in 1987 to coordinate across government agencies to reduce and end homelessness .

the requested funding level — $57 a more than 80% reduction from fy2017 — is intended to cover salaries , benefits , and operational costs for permanently closing the agency by november 2017 .

the usich has a statutory sunset date — currently , october 1 , 2018 — that has generally been extended in annual appropriations acts .

the house committee bill would adopt the president's request , allowing for the termination of the usich ; the senate committee bill would not , funding the usich at fy2017 levels and permanently eliminating the statutory sunset .

the president's fy2018 budget also included a request that congress begin the process of winding down federal funding for the neighborhood reinvestment corporation ( commonly known as neighborworks america ) , which was created via federal charter in 1978 to support affordable housing and neighborhood revitalization nationwide .

the requested funding level of $27 million is intended to cover personnel , administrative , and other costs associated with winding down existing commitments .

both the house and senate committee bills would continue to fund neighborworks at the fy2017 level .

