ukraine is one of the largest successors , by territory , population , and economy , to the union of soviet socialist republics ( ussr , or soviet union ) ( for map , see figure 1 ) .

historically , ukrainians trace their lineage to the medieval kievan rus , an early orthodox christian state that russians also consider to be a core part of their heritage .

most of ukraine's territory was incorporated over time into the ussr's predecessor , the russian empire , although several western regions of ukraine were first annexed by the soviet union only during world war ii .

in december 1991 , ukraine's leaders joined those of neighboring russia and belarus to dissolve the ussr .

in over a quarter - century of independence , ukraine has had periodic swings toward greater and lesser democracy .

throughout this time , many observers have considered ukraine's government to be a "hybrid" regime with both democratic and nondemocratic elements .

the u.s. government - funded nongovernmental organization ( ngo ) freedom house gives ukraine a "freedom rating" of "partly free. .

according to freedom house , ukraine's democratic credentials have improved since the ouster of former president viktor yanukovych in 2014 , following the so - called euromaidan protests .

in ukraine , these events came to be known as the revolution of dignity .

the government that replaced yanukovych in 2014 pledged to embrace pro - western reforms , and an energized civil society supported its efforts .

within weeks , however , the new government had to confront russian armed interventions in southern and eastern ukraine .

these culminated in russia's occupation of ukraine's "autonomous" ( quasi - federal ) republic of crimea in march 2014 and a protracted conflict in eastern ukraine , where observers consider that the russian government has fostered and supported pro - russian separatists ( see " russia - ukraine conflict " below ) .

as a result , the ukrainian government's readiness to implement reforms had to be balanced with the need to move to a war footing with an underdeveloped military and to grapple with the economic consequences of conflict .

ukraine's post - euromaidan government took shape after presidential and parliamentary elections in may and october 2014 , respectively .

ukraine has a mixed system of governance in which the president shares power with a prime minister nominated by parliament .

the winner of the presidential election was petro poroshenko ( aged 51 ) , a former official , businessman , and supporter of the euromaidan protests , who received 55% of the vote .

as a candidate , poroshenko pledged to move ukraine closer to the west , fight corruption , and address the conflict that had emerged in the eastern part of the country .

in october 2014 , ukraine held elections to its 450-seat parliament ( verkhovna rada ) , elected equally through party lists and single - mandate races .

the main victors were the petro poroshenko bloc ( 21.8% of the vote and 31% of single - mandate seats ) and the people's front ( 22.1% of the vote and 8% of single - mandate seats ) , led by arseniy yatsenyuk , a former government official turned protest leader , who became prime minister .

the petro poroshenko bloc and the people's front together headed a pro - western reform coalition that included the samopomich ( self - reliance ) party , the populist radical party , and the fatherland party of former prime minister yulia tymoshenko .

this coalition gave the incoming government a clear majority in parliament .

due to various disagreements , however , the latter three parties left the coalition by early 2016 , leaving the poroshenko bloc , the people's front , and a handful of independent deputies with a slim majority .

in april 2016 , an increasingly unpopular yatsenyuk was replaced as prime minister by parliamentary chairman volodymyr groysman ( aged 39 ) , a former mayor and poroshenko's ally .

other parties represent different parts of the political spectrum .

the opposition bloc , a successor to yanukovych's former ruling party of regions , won 9% of the popular vote in 2014 and currently has around 10% of seats in parliament .

far - right nationalist groups , which russian officials and media often sought to characterize as key drivers of the euromaidan , won a handful of seats .

many observers believe the poroshenko / groysman government has made impressive strides in its reform agenda .

others consider that ukraine's reforms remain fragile and that the government has progressed too slowly in certain areas .

in april 2017 , the international monetary fund ( imf ) , which supports ukraine with a $17.5 billion loan package , called on the government to accelerate the pace of its reforms , noting that "progress in advancing structural reforms has been mixed," with "important achievements in the energy and financial sectors" but "limited progress in reforming and privatizing state - owned enterprises , land and pension reforms , and effectively tackling corruption. .

international donors and domestic civil society organizations continue to encourage the government to implement necessary reforms .

in october 2017 , the government moved forward on some key measures: supporting the establishment of an anticorruption court and passing legislation on pension and health care reform .

some observers expressed concern that new reforms did not go far enough or could be coupled with other measures that may limit their effectiveness .

some observers also have noted that a particular challenge to reform efforts stems from the influence of so - called "oligarchs," many of whom became wealthy in ukraine's free - wheeling economic environment prior to 2014 , particularly in areas like energy , metals , and mining .

according to the economist intelligence unit , "the continuing influence of their networks remains the most serious domestic impediment to the judicial and economic reforms needed to strengthen ukraine's political and economic outlook. .

in june 2016 , then - u.s .

ambassador to ukraine geoffrey pyatt suggested that "the single area that still requires the greatest sustained focus and the greatest sustained pressure and engagement from civil society [is the] rule of law — building a judiciary , a prosecutorial service , a court system in which the ukrainian people have confidence. .

in opinion polls , ukrainian respondents express relatively low levels of support for the country's political leaders .

in a june - july 2017 poll , 15% - 17% of respondents expressed approval of the government .

among likely voters , eight parties from across the political spectrum had between 4% and 12% support .

the next round of elections in ukraine is scheduled for 2019 .

many observers consider that of all the post - soviet states , ukraine has been the most difficult for russians to accept as fully independent .

many russians traditionally have considered much of ukraine to be a historical province of russia and ukrainians to be their close ethnic brethren .

most ukrainians can speak russian , whether as a secondary or primary language .

ethnic russians are estimated to make up 15% - 20% of the population , mostly concentrated in the south ( crimea ) and east ( donbas ) , where ties to russia are stronger .

in soviet times , eastern ukraine became home to a heavy industrial sector ( including defense - related manufacturing ) that retained close economic ties to russia after independence .

even before 2014 , however , the russia - ukraine relationship suffered turbulence , with disputes over ukraine's ties to nato and the eu , the status of russia's crimea - based black sea fleet , and the transit of russian natural gas via ukraine to europe .

under ex - president yanukovych , such disputes were largely papered over .

by the end of 2013 , yanukovych appeared to make a decisive move toward russia , postponing the conclusion of an association agreement that would establish closer political and economic ties with the eu and agreeing instead to substantial financial assistance from moscow .

this decision provoked the euromaidan protests and , ultimately , yanukovych's removal from power .

as part of the soviet union , ukraine was responsible for a large share of the country's agricultural and industrial production .

since independence , ukraine has experienced uneven economic growth .

after the soviet union collapsed in 1991 , the 1990s were a decade of decline ; ukraine's gdp reportedly dropped by over 60% from 1989 to 1999 .

ukraine's economy recovered for much of the 2000s , but ukraine was hit hard by the 2008-2009 global recession , with gdp declining by almost 15% in 2009 .

after some growth , the economy stagnated in 2012-2013 and then declined with the outbreak of conflict in 2014 .

ukraine's gdp declined by 6.6% in 2014 and 9.8% in 2015 .

in recent years , observers have reported some signs of financial and economic stabilization , due in part to international assistance , including a $17.5 billion imf loan package ( around half of which has been disbursed ) .

in april 2017 , the imf positively cited key reforms , including reduction of the fiscal deficit , an increase in gas prices , reform of the banking system , and reduction in inflation ( which had risen to over 60% in april 2015 ) .

ukraine's gdp grew by 2.3% in 2016 , and the imf and world bank project growth of 2% in 2017 and over 3% in 2018 .

in september 2017 , ukraine raised $3 billion in sovereign bonds .

observers caution , however , that ukraine's continued economic growth depends on continuation of critical reforms .

both the imf and the european bank for reconstruction and development ( ebrd ) , which says it is ukraine's largest international investor , have called on ukraine to combat "rampant" and "widespread" corruption .

both also have noted the importance of privatizing state - owned enterprises and allowing land sales , on which a moratorium has been imposed since 2001 .

the world bank estimates that the percentage of ukrainians living in moderate poverty rose from 15% in 2014 to 22% in 2015 .

the official unemployment rate for the first three quarters of 2016 was around 10% .

ukraine's overall merchandise trade has declined since 2013 .

that year , russia , ukraine's largest trading partner , began to impose restrictions on trade in response to ukraine's plans to conclude a free trade agreement with the eu .

further restrictions followed in 2014-2015 , and russia suspended its own free trade agreement with ukraine in january 2016 .

ukraine also introduced trade restrictions against russia .

excluding exports from occupied crimea and separatist territories in eastern ukraine , the total value of ukraine's merchandise exports declined 15% in 2014 , 29% in 2015 , and 5% in 2016 .

the value of merchandise exports to russia declined by 35% in 2014 , 51% in 2015 , and 26% in 2016 .

in 2016 , russia remained ukraine's top merchandise trading partner ( $8.75 billion ) , followed by china ( $6.49 billion ) and germany ( $5.74 billion ) .

overall , over 40% of ukraine's trade was with members of the eu .

the top three destinations for ukraine's merchandise exports were russia ( 10% ) , egypt ( 6% ) , and poland ( 6% ) , while its top three sources of imports were russia ( 13% ) , china ( 12% ) , and germany ( 11% ) .

its main exports included iron and steel , cereals , fats and oils , electrical machinery , and ores .

after declines in 2013-2014 , ukraine's foreign direct investment ( fdi ) began to recover in 2015-2016 .

according to official statistics , total fdi in 2016 amounted to $4.4 billion .

growth in fdi in 2015-2016 was mainly in the banking sector .

in 2016 , russia was reportedly the main source of fdi ( 38% ) , followed by cyprus ( 10% ) and the united kingdom ( 9% ) .

the united states has long supported ukraine's pro - western orientation and reform efforts .

an anchor of the bilateral relationship is the 2008 u.s. - ukraine charter on strategic partnership , which established a variety of areas for enhanced cooperation .

especially since 2014 , the united states has committed significant financial and technical assistance to ukraine ( for details , see below ) .

the united states firmly supports ukraine's territorial integrity , including with respect to crimea , as well as implementation of the minsk agreements to resolve the conflict in eastern ukraine .

president trump and president poroshenko have met twice , in june and september 2017 .

according to the white house , the meetings focused on resolving the conflict in eastern ukraine , implementing reforms , and promoting economic growth .

in moscow in april 2017 , u.s. secretary of state rex tillerson called on russia to "make progress in implementation [of the minsk agreements] by de - escalating violence and taking steps to withdraw separatist armed forces and heavy weapons so that osce observers can fulfill their role. .

two days before visiting kyiv in july 2017 , secretary tillerson announced the appointment of former u.s .

ambassador to nato kurt volker to the newly established position of u.s. special representative for ukraine negotiations .

on several occasions , secretary tillerson has stated that ukraine - related sanctions on russia will remain in place "until moscow reverses the actions that triggered" them .

the united states is ukraine's 10 th - largest trading partner , with $1.7 billion in total merchandise trade in 2016 .

exports to ukraine in 2016 totaled $1.1 billion ( down from around $2 billion annually in the three years before the conflict ) ; imports from ukraine totaled $578 million in 2016 ( and have been in decline since 2011 ) .

in july 2017 , president trump and president poroshenko agreed on the sale of u.s. coal to ukraine to help replace now - halted supplies of coal from separatist territories in eastern ukraine ; shipments of coal began the following month .

the united states has been a leading contributor of foreign assistance to ukraine .

nonmilitary , nonhumanitarian assistance in fy2014 amounted to around $80 million and rose to around $315 million in fy2015 .

in fy2016 , nonmilitary , nonhumanitarian assistance totaled $575 million , around half of which ( $290 million ) was the subsidy cost of a $1 billion sovereign loan guarantee , the third the u.s. government had extended to ukraine since 2014 .

for fy2017 , the senate appropriations committee recommended $323 million in such assistance ( s.rept .

114-290 to s. 3117 ) , although fy2017 foreign aid allocations by country are not yet available .

the trump administration's fy2018 request for ukraine was $201 million in nonmilitary , nonhumanitarian assistance .

the house appropriations committee has recommended allocating $313 million in such assistance ( h.rept .

115-253 to h.r .

3362 ) , and the senate appropriations committee has recommended $323 million ( s.rept .

115-152 to s. 1780 ) .

in addition , the united states provides humanitarian assistance to ukraine in cooperation with the u.n. high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) and other countries to assist internally displaced persons ( idps ) and other victims of conflict .

in july 2016 , the state department noted that humanitarian assistance provided to ukraine since 2014 totaled more than $135 million .

the united states has also provided military assistance to ukraine .

in july 2016 , the white house stated that the united states had committed over $600 million in total security ( mostly military ) assistance since the ukraine conflict began in 2014 ( this included funds for fy2014 and fy2015 ) .

in addition to foreign military financing and other programs , military assistance has included a new ukraine security assistance initiative ( p.l .

114-113 , §9014 ) to provide "appropriate security assistance and intelligence support" to help ukraine defend against further aggression and support ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity .

congress first appropriated $250 million for this initiative in fy2016 and appropriated an additional $150 million in fy2017 .

for fy2018 , the trump administration requested another $150 million .

in september 2016 , then - secretary of defense ash carter and ukrainian minister of defense stepan poltorak signed a framework document "for the united states and ukraine to enhance the defense capacity of ukraine's forces , advance critical ukrainian defense reforms , improve resource management processes , and boost defense technology cooperation. .

the united states also joins ukraine in hosting two annual military exercises — rapid trident ( ground forces peacekeeping ) and sea breeze ( naval ) .

the united states has not provided lethal aid to ukraine , although congress has supported the provision of defensive lethal weapons ( most recently in 2017 appropriations , p.l .

115-31 , §9014 ) .

in december 2016 , a bipartisan group of 27 senators asked the incoming trump administration to provide defensive lethal assistance "to help ukrainians better defend themselves" and "deter future aggression. .

by contrast , arguments against the provision of lethal assistance have centered on russia's ability and willingness to steadily escalate conflict in response .

in kyiv in august 2017 , u.s. secretary of defense james mattis said that the united states was "actively reviewing" the question of lethal assistance .

the united states has also supported ukraine in the area of cybersecurity .

u.s. interagency teams visited ukraine in 2016 regarding december 2015 cyberattacks against ukrainian power companies .

in july 2016 , the department of state reported its intention to obligate $2.7 million to be used by the department of energy for energy resiliency planning and cybersecurity programs in ukraine .

the united states and ukraine held an inaugural bilateral cybersecurity dialogue in kyiv in september 2017 .

the eu's main framework for political and economic engagement with ukraine is the association agreement ( aa ) .

the aa includes a free trade agreement with the eu , formally known as a deep and comprehensive free trade area ( dcfta ) .

the aa requires ukraine to adopt eu legislation and standards in various areas and gradually exposes ukrainian firms to competition from eu imports while providing access to eu markets .

in june 2014 , the eu and ukraine signed the aa .

the european parliament and the ukrainian parliament ratified the aa in september 2014 but postponed implementation of the dcfta until 2016 .

in april 2016 , voters in the netherlands rejected the aa , forcing the dutch government to delay ratification , which all eu members had to complete for the aa to fully come into effect .

after negotiations with the eu to clarify certain terms , the dutch parliament approved the agreement , and in july 2017 the eu formally approved the aa .

the eu also granted ukrainian citizens visa - free travel starting in june 2017 .

in addition , the eu has provided substantial economic assistance to ukraine since 2014 .

this includes €3.4 billion ( around $4 billion ) in macro - financial assistance ( mfa ) loans , over 80% of which has been disbursed .

the eu has also committed to almost €880 million ( $1 billion ) in assistance grants .

assistance also includes €5.7 billion ( $6.7 billion ) in financing from the european investment bank ( eib ) and the ebrd .

nato and ukraine also have a strong history of partnership .

ukraine was the first post - soviet state ( after the three baltic states ) to join nato's partnership for peace in 1994 , and nato allies and ukraine signed a charter on a distinctive partnership and established the nato - ukraine commission in 1997 .

at the april 2008 nato summit in bucharest , nato members agreed that ukraine and georgia would eventually become nato members , although the statement did not specify a timeline or road map for membership .

in 2010 , under ex - president yanukovych , ukraine adopted a "non - bloc" ( i.e. , nonaligned ) status , rejecting aspirations of nato membership , but still invited nato to launch a defense education enhancement programme ( deep ) in 2012 .

after the onset of conflict in 2014 , ukraine's parliament rejected its "non - bloc" status ; in june 2017 , it voted to make cooperation with nato a foreign policy priority .

although most observers do not expect ukraine to come closer to nato membership in the near future , nato and ukraine remain partners .

at the july 2016 nato summit in warsaw , nato pledged additional training and technical support for the ukrainian military and endorsed a comprehensive assistance package ( cap ) .

the cap includes "tailored capability and capacity building measures ... to enhance ukraine's resilience against a wide array of threats , including hybrid threats. .

according to a 2016 white house fact sheet , the cap's areas of focus include advisory support , defense reform , defense education , countering improvised explosive devices and demining , and explosive ordnance disposal .

in addition , nato established six trust funds of two to three years' duration to support ukraine .

many advocates have called for greater nato support to ukraine .

among other things , nato remains limited by differences among allies on whether to provide more substantive military support , such as intelligence capabilities or weapons systems .

almost four years after ukraine's euromaidan protests and onset of conflict with russia , ukraine continues to face a number of internal and external challenges .

questions that members of congress may consider in seeking to influence or shape u.s. relations with ukraine could include the following: how can ukraine's government be encouraged to continue political and economic reforms that are supported by the international community and ukrainian civil society ? .

what are the prospects for vibrant democratic competition in ukraine's next election cycle in 2019 ? .

how might greater u.s. engagement in negotiations on the ukraine conflict contribute to implementation of the minsk agreements and settlement of the conflicts in eastern ukraine and crimea ? .

how might the provision of defensive lethal weapons to ukraine alter the conflict dynamic ? .

what other kinds of u.s. assistance will be especially important to ukraine in the coming years ? .

how long can ukraine expect to receive high levels of economic assistance from the united states and other international donors ? .

how can ukraine's economic recovery be sustained ? .

how can ukraine best benefit from its free trade and association agreement with the eu ? .

