congress has had a long - standing interest in department of defense ( dod ) efforts to develop directed energy ( de ) weapons .

past dod programs , such as the u.s. air force's airborne laser ( abl ) program and the reagan - era strategic defense initiative ( sdi ) , and current programs , such as the u.s. navy's laser weapon system ( laws ) , have been subject to rigorous congressional oversight .

interest in u.s. military de efforts in congress resulted in the establishment of the congressional directed energy caucus in november 2011 to oversee dod de activities .

with a number of u.s. army weapons - related de programs showing promise during concept demonstrations and their potential relevance in addressing a number of current and emerging threats to u.s. ground forces , congressional oversight could focus on programmatic developments and timelines as well as related authorization and appropriations issues .

according to dod de is an umbrella term covering technologies that produce concentrated electromagnetic ( em ) energy and atomic or subatomic particles .

a de weapon is a system using de primarily as a means to incapacitate , damage , disable , or destroy enemy equipment , facilities , and / or personnel .

directed - energy warfare ( dew ) is military action involving the use of de weapons , devices , and countermeasures to incapacitate , cause direct damage or destruction of adversary equipment , facilities , and / or personnel , or to determine , exploit , reduce , or prevent hostile use of the electromagnetic spectrum ( ems ) ( see figure 1 ) through damage , destruction , and disruption .

it also includes actions taken to protect friendly equipment , facilities , and personnel and retain friendly use of the ems .

with the maturation of de technology , weaponized de systems are becoming more prolific , powerful , and a significant subset of the electronic warfare ( ew ) mission area .

de examples include active denial technology , lasers , radio frequency ( rf ) weapons , and de anti - satellite and high - powered microwave ( hpm ) weapon systems .

this report examines the two most prevalent types of de weapons: high energy lasers ( hels ) and high powered microwaves ( hpms ) .

de weapons have the potential to change the very nature of warfare and could have implications for u.s. national security .

some of these potential implications are as follows: de could be used as both a sensor and a weapon , thereby shortening the sensor - to - shooter timeline to seconds .

this means that u.s. weapon systems could conduct multiple engagements against a target before an adversary could respond .

airborne hels could change the nature of air combat .

aircraft with hels could engage ballistic missiles , surface - to - air missiles ( sams ) , and other airborne platforms .

hels could also be employed on stealthy unmanned combat aerial vehicles ( ucavs ) , enabling precision strikes against a wide variety of highly defended enemy targets .

hpms could also be used to defend u.s. aircraft against sams .

de could also significantly improve u.s. suppression of enemy air defense ( sead ) operations , permitting , under certain circumstances , the united states to achieve air dominance over an adversary in a few days or a couple of weeks .

de weapons could rapidly locate and attack mobile sam systems .

hpm weapons could significantly improve antiradiation attack capabilities and defeat efforts by enemy air defense systems to evade detection and attack by turning off their systems .

de weapons could prove an important advancement in missile defense .

de weapons could be highly effective as part of a boost - phase defense and could , if successfully developed , serve as a cost - effective counter to enemy ballistic missiles as well as associated countermeasures such as decoys and maneuverable warheads .

de weapons could have the potential to preempt enemy use of weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) .

hpm weapons , in particular , could be used to attack wmd facilities that are buried , hardened , or co - located with civilian populations or infrastructure .

de weapons , particularly hpm weapons , could enhance the ability of the united states to conduct precise , effects - based operations .

de weapons could address one of the most problematic asymmetric strategies employed by adversaries: use of civilians as shields .

although hels offer a precision strike capability to help reduce civilian casualties , hpms could attack virtually any electronic system without doing direct harm to nearby civilians .

de weapons could facilitate new strategic operations such as disrupting power generation and distribution .

de weapons could be used in selected strategic strikes against industrial systems and military infrastructure dependent on electric power and electronic systems .

effects could range from short - term disruption of service to subsystem destruction .

de weapons could also provide a means by which the u.s. military could achieve limited space control .

defensively , de weapons could provide protection of u.s. and allied space - based assets .

employed offensively , de weapons could temporarily deny the use of space assets by adversaries and damage or destroy enemy satellites .

although it is difficult to predict how de weapons could affect international relations — primarily because many of these technologies are in development — there are some general observations that may be useful for policymakers .

these observations , however , are predicated on the assumption that de programs presently being developed will eventually overcome any technological challenges that are preventing them from being fielded as viable weapon systems .

early de weapon applications will likely be both tactical and defensive in nature , whether for missile defense or for counter rocket , artillery , and mortars ( c - ram ) applications , for example .

these weapons will likely have little effect on the international environment for that very reason .

some argue these weapons could exert a stabilizing influence on international affairs "by offering non - offensive means of responding to threats posed by theater ballistic missiles , short - range rockets and even long - ranged artillery fire. .

however , if de weapons become more common and effective and possibly take on a more offensive role , their effect on military operations and international relations could grow .

as previously noted , de weapons represent a transformative capability in a number of military domains , perhaps fundamentally altering the nature of combat and putting other nations at a severe military disadvantage .

in the case of air combat , incorporating de weapons on u.s. aircraft , from an adversary's perspective , "could negate billions of dollars of investment in both tactical fighters and sams," suggesting that "nations that wish to deploy credible , effective air power will have to consider how they can acquire de capabilities. .

in a sense , if de weapons become more commonplace , a de "arms race" could ensue .

one particular realm where de weapons could have a profound international relations affect as well as shape u.s. foreign policy is in the area of space control .

in a space role , de could potentially be used defensively to attack enemy antisatellite systems targeted against u.s. space systems and offensively could potentially be used to interfere with or destroy enemy satellites .

such an unchallenged ability to exert space control "could dramatically impact military balances and the course of future conflicts. .

the possibility , however , of such "conflict in space" is not without significant controversy , as many here and abroad oppose the "weaponization of space" — a domain many view as a shared common environment where all nations should have unfettered access .

as the most extensive user of space for national security purposes , the united states is particularly vulnerable to attacks against its space - based assets , making this domain of critical concern to both defense officials and policymakers .

a discussion paper drafted for the convention on certain conventional weapons ( ccw ) noted the following: directed energy weapons ( dew ) are not authoritatively defined under international law , nor are they currently on the agenda of any existing multilateral mechanism .

nevertheless , there are a number of legal regimes which would apply to dew .

these range from national civilian use regulations and guidelines to international humanitarian law ( ihl ) and human rights law that would constrain or preclude their use under certain circumstances .

selected international regimes that apply to de weapons include the following .

although many extol the potential virtues of de weapons , suggesting they could "change the very nature of warfare" or provide those nations possessing de weapons an "unchallenged dominance," others point out that laser - based projects "have over - promised and under - delivered for decades. .

along these lines , others have also noted "lasers will save us all - if they ever work," and lasers "have perennially been on the cusp of a major breakthrough. .

in 2016 , frank kendall , under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics ( at&l ) from may 2012 until january 2017 , reportedly cautioned that de weapons were not the "panacea" that many believe .

under secretary of defense kendall noted the following: there are serious limitations that could make it unlikely that a directed - energy weapon is ever truly effective enough to be used in combat .

those limitations go beyond the long - standing question of how much power such a system would require to be effective , and the hurdles of employing it outside controlled laboratory conditions .

there are limitations with lasers because of weather .

there are limitations of lasers because of behavior , beams of light in the atmosphere , and the possibility that [an enemy] could harden against them .

advances made in recent years in solid - state laser technology may challenge this belief .

solid - state lasers are more compact than chemical lasers , which require a significant logistics footprint and employ hazardous chemicals .

solid - state lasers only require electricity to operate but generate a significant amount of heat in weapons - grade lasers .

successfully developing practical cooling technologies for solid - state lasers could potentially further advance their military utility .

the deputy assistant secretary of the army for research and technology ( dasa [r&t] ) under the assistant secretary of the army ( acquisitions , logistics , and technology ( asa[alt] ) is responsible for oversight of all army science and technology ( s&t ) investments .

army de management is broken out as follows: army s&t investments in de are part of the lethality portfolio for asa ( alt ) / dasa ( r&t ) .

de is only one aspect of the lethality portfolio , whose major focus areas include fire support , air defense , close combat , and weapons enablers .

the two major s&t executing commands within the lethality portfolio are the research , development , and engineering command ( rdecom ) at aberdeen proving ground , md , and the army space and missile defense command ( asmdc ) in huntsville , al .

falling under rdecom are the u.s. army armament research , development and engineering center ( ardec ) at picatinny arsenal , nj ; the u.s. army aviation and missile research , development , and engineering center ( amrdec ) in huntsville , al ; and the u.s. army research laboratory ( arl ) in adelphi , md .

the lethality portfolio director , asa ( alt ) oversees the portfolio's s&t efforts , coordinates with dod and the services on de and other lethality matters , and also interacts with various dod advanced technology organizations , such as the defense advanced research projects agency ( darpa ) in arlington , va , and the joint improvised threat defeat organization ( jido ) at ft. belvoir , va .

the following sections provide background information on selected past army de programs , some of which are still ongoing .

this information is intended to provide historical context for other current programs .

the army has a variety of weapons - related de initiatives underway .

the following section provides a brief description of selected unclassified efforts .

other nations are developing de weapons for a variety of applications .

the following sections provide a brief overview of reported de weapons - related efforts in russia , china , and israel and are intended to provide policymakers with a point of comparative reference when examining u.s. programs .

weapons - related de efforts are not limited to these three countries .

a comprehensive funding profile of all unclassified army de - related programs was not available to crs , but the u.s. army space and missile defense command / army forces strategic command ( usasmdc / arstrat ) provided crs with some programmatic funding information that provides useful context when evaluating these programs ( see table 1 ) .

the lethality portfolio director , asa ( alt ) noted the army divested itself of hpm in s&t beginning in fy2018 and focuses more on peer and near - peer threats and army modernization priority areas of long - range precision fires and air and missile defense .

congress has played a role in the furtherance of dod and army de efforts .

the fy2017 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

114-328 ) called for the following: sec .

219 .

designation of department of defense senior official with principal responsibility for directed energy weapons .

 ( a ) designation of senior official ( 1 ) in general .

not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this act , the secretary of defense shall designate a senior official already serving within the department of defense as the official with principal responsibility for the development and demonstration of directed energy weapons for the department .

 ( 2 ) development of strategic plan .

 ( a ) in general .

the senior official designated under paragraph ( 1 ) shall develop a detailed strategic plan to develop , mature , and transition directed energy technologies to acquisition programs of record .

 ( b ) roadmap .

such strategic plan shall include a strategic roadmap for the development and fielding of directed energy weapons and key enabling capabilities for the department , identifying and coordinating efforts across military departments to achieve overall joint mission effectiveness .

 ( 3 ) acceleration of development and fielding of directed energy weapons capabilities ( a ) in general .

to the degree practicable , the senior official designated under paragraph ( 1 ) shall use the flexibility of the policies of the department in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of this act , or any successor policies , to accelerate the development and fielding of directed energy capabilities .

 ( b ) engagement .

the secretary shall use the flexibility of the policies of the department in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of this act , or any successor policies , to ensure engagement with defense and private industries , research universities , and unaffiliated , nonprofit research institutions .

 ( 4 ) advice for exercises and demonstrations .

the senior official designated under paragraph ( 1 ) shall , to the degree practicable , provide technical advice and support to entities in the department of defense and the military departments conducting exercises or demonstrations with the purpose of improving the capabilities of or operational viability of technical capabilities supporting directed energy weapons , including supporting military utility assessments of the relevant cost and benefits of directed energy weapon systems .

 ( 5 ) support for development of requirements .

the senior official designated under paragraph ( 1 ) shall coordinate with the military departments , defense agencies , and the joint directed energy transition office to define requirements for directed energy capabilities that address the highest priority warfighting capability gaps of the department .

 ( 6 ) availability of information .

the secretary of defense shall ensure that the senior official designated under paragraph ( 1 ) has access to such information on programs and activities of the military departments and other defense agencies as the secretary considers appropriate to coordinate departmental directed energy efforts .

 ( b ) joint directed energy transition office .

 ( 1 ) redesignation .

the high energy laser joint technology office of the department of defense is hereby redesignated as the ''joint directed energy transition office'' ( in this subsection referred to as the ''office'' ) , and shall report to the official designated under subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) .

 ( 2 ) additional functions .

in addition to the functions and duties of the office in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of this act , the office shall assist the senior official designated under paragraph ( 1 ) of subsection ( a ) in carrying out paragraphs ( 2 ) through ( 5 ) of such subsection .

 ( 3 ) funding .

the secretary may make available such funds to the office for basic research , applied research , advanced technology development , prototyping , studies and analyses , and organizational support as the secretary considers appropriate to support the efficient and effective development of directed energy systems and technologies and transition of those systems and technologies into acquisition programs or operational use .

on january 23 , 2017 , the congressional directed energy caucus wrote to secretary of defense mattis asking , among other things to quickly implement section 219 of the fiscal year 2017 national defense authorization act , public law no: 114-328 , by designating a senior official to have principal responsibility for the development and demonstration of directed energy weapon systems throughout the department .

currently , the technical requirements for various service and agency directed energy programs vary broadly , which results in the pursuit of different technical approaches , a valid risk reduction strategy for directed energy across the department .

the aforementioned designated senior official will be critical to the development of the required strategic plan and roadmap for accelerating the development of this technology toward acquisition programs of record .

the fy2018 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

115-91 ) calls for the following: sec .

215 .

department of defense directed energy weapon system prototyping and demonstration program .

 ( a ) designation of under secretary of defense for research and engineering as the official with principal responsibility for development and demonstration of directed energy weapons .

subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) of section 219 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 ( public law 114 – 328 ; 10 u.s.c .

2431 note ) is amended by striking ''not later'' and all that follows through ''department of defense'' and inserting ''the under secretary of defense for research and engineering shall serve'' .

 ( b ) prototyping and demonstration program .

such section is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ( c ) prototyping and demonstration program .

 ( 1 ) establishment .

the secretary of defense , acting through the under secretary , shall establish a program on the prototyping and demonstration of directed energy weapon systems to build and maintain the military superiority of the united states by: ( a ) accelerating , when feasible , the fielding of directed energy weapon prototypes that would help counter technological advantages of potential adversaries of the united states ; and ( b ) supporting the military departments , the combatant commanders , and other relevant defense agencies and entities in developing prototypes and demonstrating operational utility of high energy lasers and high powered microwave weapon systems .

 ( 2 ) guidelines .

 ( a ) not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2018 , the under secretary shall issue guidelines for the operation of the program established under paragraph ( 1 ) , including the following: ( i ) criteria required for an application for funding by a military department , defense agency or entity , or a combatant command .

 ( ii ) the priorities , based on validated requirements or capability gaps , for fielding prototype directed energy weapon system technologies developed by research funding of the department or industry .

 ( iii ) criteria for evaluation of an application for funding or changes to policies or acquisition and business practices by such a department , agency , or command for purposes of improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the program .

 ( b ) funding for a military department , defense agency , or combatant command under the program established under paragraph ( 1 ) may only be available for advanced technology development , prototyping , and demonstrations in which the department of defense maintains management of the technical baseline and a primary emphasis on technology transition and evaluating military utility to enhance the likelihood that the particular directed energy weapon system will meet the department end user's need .

 ( 3 ) applications for funding. — ( a ) not less frequently than once each year , the under secretary shall solicit from the heads of the military departments , the defense agencies , and the combatant commands applications for funding under the program established under paragraph ( 1 ) to be used to enter into contracts , cooperative agreements , or other transaction agreements entered into pursuant to section 2371b of title 10 , united states code , with appropriate entities for the prototyping or commercialization of technologies .

 ( b ) nothing in this section shall be construed to require any official of the department of defense to provide funding under the program to any congressional earmark as defined pursuant to clause 9 of rule xxi of the rules of the house of representatives or any congressionally directed spending item as defined pursuant to paragraph 5 of rule xliv of the standing rules of the senate .

 ( 4 ) funding .

 ( a ) except as provided in subparagraph ( b ) and subject to the availability of appropriations for such purpose , of the funds authorized to be appropriated by the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2018 or otherwise made available for fiscal year 2018 for research , development , test , and evaluation , defense - wide , up to $100,000,000 may be available to the under secretary to allocate to the military departments , the defense agencies , and the combatant commands to carry out the program established under paragraph ( 1 ) .

 ( b ) not more than half of the amounts made available under subparagraph ( a ) may be allocated as described in such paragraph until the under secretary: ( i ) develops the strategic plan required by subsection ( a ) ( 2 ) ( a ) ; and ( ii ) submits such strategic plan to the congressional defense committees .

 ( 5 ) under secretary defined. — in this subsection , the term 'under secretary' means the under secretary of defense for research and engineering in the under secretary's capacity as the official with principal responsibility for the development and demonstration of directed energy weapons pursuant to subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) .

while these fy2017 and fy2018 legislative provisions address dod specifically , they carry implications for army de programs .

these provisions addressing the designation of a senior dod official to be responsible for all de efforts ; the formulation of a dod de strategy and roadmap ; the acceleration of developmental and fielding activities ; and establishment of a de prototyping and demonstration program suggest potential congressional concern with overall dod management of its de activities .

as such , the army , as well as the other services , will likely be affected by the implementation of these provisions and may have to either develop or modify their respective management approaches to de weapons .

appendix a .

types of de weapons high energy lasers ( hels ) from the center for strategic and budgetary assessments ( csba ) 2012 , "changing the game: the promise of directed - energy weapons," in contrast to light bulbs that emit "white light" ( photons with a multitude of different wavelengths and phases in all directions ) , lasers produce narrow beams of monochromatic ( single - wavelength ) light in coherent beams ( all photons traveling in the same direction with the same phase ) .

these narrow beams can focus energy precisely on a designated point .

there are three primary types of hels: chemical lasers ; solid - state lasers ; and free electron lasers .

beyond differences in the lasing media , each type has fundamental attributes that affect their ability to mature into operational weapon systems .

in addition to the actual lasers , target tracking , laser pointing , thermal management , and beam control systems are required to place as much laser energy as possible on a target over operationally relevant distances .

chemical lasers from csba: chemical lasers are the only current de systems able to achieve the power needed to interdict targets such as ballistic missiles over hundreds of kilometers .

as a result , chemical lasers have until recently been the basis for dod's most mature hel concepts .

chemical lasers use exothermic ( energy - liberating ) reactions of various chemicals in the gas phase to create atoms or ions in excited states within a lasing medium .

since these reactions must occur at very low pressures — typically only a couple percent of atmospheric pressure — chemical lasers are large devices requiring vacuum pumps , complex chemical management systems , and low - pressure reaction chambers contained inside a laser resonator .

solid - state lasers ( ssls ) from csba: the first laser invented in 1960 was an ssl .

today , low - power ssls with outputs of milliwatts are used in a wide variety of consumer products , such as dvd players and laser jet printers .

watt - class ssls are used in numerous military applications , including target range finders ( laser radars , also known as ladars ) , imagers , target designators , and dod's large aircraft infrared countermeasure ( laircm ) defensive system .

ssls use ceramic or glass - like solids , rather than a gas , as their lasing media .

free electron lasers ( fels ) from csba: free electron laser ( fel ) systems accelerate beams of electrons to nearly the speed of light in racetrack - like accelerator rings and use powerful magnets to "wiggle" the electron beams to generate high - energy beams of laser photons .

fels are of interest to the navy due to their potential to achieve the high power outputs needed to interdict hardened targets such as incoming ballistic missile reentry vehicles , and their unique ability to "tune" their beams to different wavelengths to different wavelengths so they can better transmit through the dense , humid atmospheres of maritime environments .

current developmental fels are extremely large and inefficient .

high powered microwaves ( hpms ) from csba: a high - power microwave weapon uses electricity to power a microwave generator that emits very short pulses — typically nanoseconds to microseconds in duration — of microwave radiation at megawatt to gigawatt output levels .

future hpm weapons could emit beams of radiation that are a few degrees wide to attack targets in specific locations or emit radiation multi - directionally to degrade electronic components over wider areas .

the effects created by hpm applications could range from temporarily disrupting electronic systems such as computers to physically burning out systems that are not shielded against the high electromagnetic fields generated by an hpm pulse .

since hpm beams cannot be as tightly focused as lasers , the energy per unit area in hpm beams decreases significantly over distance .

this could impose significant operational limitations compared to longer - range laser weapons .

since hpm weapons would affect all unshielded electronic systems within their beam spots , care must be taken when employing them to avoid collateral damage to nearby friendly systems .

it can be argued that hpm weapons are not "true" de weapons but they are treated as such by dod .

radio - frequency weapons propagate intense bursts of energy at microwave or lower frequencies that disable or destroy electronics .

such bursts can be generated by both nuclear and conventional explosives , but since these mechanisms result in omnidirectional , wideband releases of energy , they cannot properly be called "directed" energy .

radio - frequency devices producing directed energy would typically resemble radar transmitters , with steerable antennas for aiming their beams .

it could be argued that radio - frequency weapons transmitting omnidirectionally but on tightly restricted frequencies are a form of directed energy .

some , however , question the viability of hpm weapons .

moisture in the air absorbs microwaves , and uncertainty on how electromagnetic energy flows through structures makes it difficult to predict what kind of damage an hpm weapon could do .

in addition , countermeasures to hpm weapons could be as simple as surrounding sensitive electronics with a faraday cage .

further compounding this is the classified nature of most of dod's hpm programs , which makes public and academic examination of these programs problematic .

appendix b .

background how they work hels from the lexington institute: although there are several different methods by which high - energy lasing can be accomplished , the generic components of a laser weapon are always the same .

there must be a power source with adequate fuel ; there must be a chamber in which coherent light is generated ; there must be optical mechanisms for forming and focusing a beam ; there must be sensors for tracking intended targets and characterizing the space between the laser and the targets ; there must be beam - control techniques for shaping the beam and directing it so it traverses the intervening space with maximum efficiency ; and there must be some method of assessing whether the energy deposited on the target has had the desired effect .

assuming a specific degree of pointing accuracy , the lethality of the laser against any class of targets will be determined by power level , wavelength and optical dimensions .

these factors are typically traded off in designing an integrated system .

shorter wavelength enables designers to use less power or smaller optical dimensions and still achieve desired lethality , although the effects of atmospheric turbulence are more pronounced at shorter wavelengths .

higher power or larger optics enables the same effect to be achieved at longer wavelengths with less degradation from turbulence .

however , there are limits on each of these parameters dictated by physical laws .

for example , a laser operating at any given wavelength in the atmosphere will have a "critical power level" that defines its maximum lethality ; at higher power levels , beam degradation resulting from interaction with the atmosphere will actually diminish energy deposited on the target .

high power output can also exceed the tolerances of optical systems , leading to system failure .

hpms from the lexington institute: the one significant offensive application of directed energy likely to be available in the near - term is the high - power microwave "bomb" ( hpm ) .

such a weapon , in which detonation of an explosive charge creates a pulsed - power source to drive the hpm generator , could play a role in the disruption and even destruction of a wide range of electronic systems .

hpm weapons have very interesting operational characteristics .

first , an hpm weapon is an area weapon , whose area of effect is determined by the frequency generated , the area of view of the antenna and the power of the pulse generator .

second , all targets within the area of effect will be attacked simultaneously ( because hpms can generate an electrical pulse over a wide area they can be used effectively against imprecisely located targets ) .

third , they can achieve a "system kill" by damage inflicted upon electronic circuits , components , and subsystems .

fourth , hpm's are effective against electronics even when those systems are turned off .

fifth , the only effective defense is to completely isolate the target from means of conducting energy — a step that would in all likelihood produce a mission kill .

sixth , because they use an electromagnetic pulse that can affect electronic systems from a distance , hpm weapons offer the prospect of reduced collateral damage .

finally , hpm weapons are inherently tunable , allowing the user to graduate the effects imposed on the target .

types of army weapons — related applications common military uses for de include detection , targeting , range - finding , medical treatment , and communications .

there are a variety of weapons - related applications for hels and hpms , and if these technologies improve and become more practical for military use , new applications may likely be identified .

the following are some of the weapons - related applications that have been or are currently being pursued: hels ground - based defense against rockets , artillery , and mortars ( referred to as counter rockets , artillery , and mortars or c - ram ) ; ground - based defense against unmanned aerial vehicles ( uav ) , rotary wing , fixed - range aircraft , cruise missiles ; airborne defense against man - portable air defense systems ( manpads ) ; and force protection .

hpms area denial ; vehicle - mounted defeat of improvised explosive devices ( ieds ) ; ground - based vehicle stopping system ; airborne defeat of manpads ; and airborne defeat of electronic systems .

features and constraints of de weapons hel features some basic hel features include the following: beams generated by hel weapons reach targets at the speed of light ; a destructive beam can travel great distances almost instantaneously , making it difficult for a target to evade the weapon system .

for purposes of terrestrial - based weapons and targets , hel beams are not affected by gravity or atmospheric drag .

this lack of mass frees them from kinematic and aerodynamic constraints and also means that complex calculations required to determine ballistic trajectories and other flight characteristics of conventional munitions are not required .

hel weapons effects are extremely precise .

this precision potentially makes it possible to undertake surgical strikes with little to no collateral damage or friendly fire casualties .

hel weapons can be customized to achieve a range of results — lethal or nonlethal , destructive or disruptive .

this is achieved by regulating the amount of energy and time focused on targets .

hel weapons cost relatively little to intercept targets compared with conventional munitions .

for example , u.s. aircraft and missile defense missiles — the $3.3 million patriot advanced capability - 3 ( pac - 3 ) missile ; the $9 million terminal high altitude area defense ( thaad ) missile ; and the $10-15 million standard missile - 3s ( sm - 3 ) — are employed against threat systems costing a fraction of these missiles' price tags .

by contrast , hel weapons reportedly can cost as little as $30 a shot while achieving an equivalent or superior probability of kill .

hel weapons are less constrained by ammunition availability than conventional systems and have a much deeper "magazine" than conventional weapons .

hel weapons can conduct repetitive engagements over a protracted period of time constrained only by the availability of power and requirements to vent beam generation by - products such as heat and chemicals .

hel weapons can also serve as sensors — not only attacking targets but detecting , imaging , tracking , and illuminating them as well .

hel constraints some basic hel constraints include the following: hel power dissipates with water vapor , dust , obscurants , and atmospheric turbulence , making them susceptible to terrain and adverse weather conditions .

hel beams travel in straight lines , meaning they are incapable of indirect fire over terrain and obstacles and cannot shoot beyond their visual horizon .

depending on the hel type , power requirements and beam generation by - products such as heat can significantly constrain the type of platform needed to accommodate the hel weapon .

for the army , a challenge is mounting hels on already size - and power - constrained ground combat and tactical wheeled vehicles .

developing a hand - held laser weapon to replace the current assault rifle , for example , could also prove particularly daunting when power generation and cooling requirements are factored into development .

hpm features some basic hpm features include the following: hpm weapons can generate waves at different frequencies and power levels to temporarily or permanently disrupt certain types of electronic devices while leaving others unaffected .

hpm weapons can also destroy a wide array of electronic targets both military and commercial .

hpm weapons can also cause discomfort to humans and can serve as nonlethal weapons .

hpm weapons can also potentially limit collateral damage to property and friendly fire casualties , making them attractive weapons in situations "short of war. .

hpm constraints some basic hpm constraints include the following: hpm beams cannot be as tightly focused as lasers and energy per unit area for hpm beams decreases significantly over distance , potentially imposing significant operational limitations .

because hpm weapons could affect all unshielded electronic systems within range , measures must be taken to insure that friendly systems are properly shielded to avoid collateral damage .

hpm beams can also be absorbed by any conductive material between the weapon and target , thereby lessening effectiveness .

