as its name might suggest , t he s upplemental poverty measure ( spm ) was developed to supplement , but not replace , the official poverty measure by addre ssin g some of its met hodological limitations .

t he official measure provides a consistent historical view of poverty in the united states , but t he spm may be better suited to help ing c ongress ional policymakers and other experts understand how taxes and government programs affect the poor .

also , it may better illustrate how medical expenses and work - related expenses such as child care can affect a family's economic well - being .

this report describes the spm , how it was developed , how it differ s from the official poverty measure , and the insights it can offer .

this report will not dis cuss potential consequences of changes to anti - poverty programs , nor will it provide an analys is of poverty trends .

the spm was developed after decades of research focused on overcoming the limitations of the official poverty measure .

these limitations are not easy to surmount , as evidenced by dozens of alternative poverty measures developed over the years by the census bureau and by academia , and the working papers and reports written about those measures .

as mentioned above , the spm differs from the official poverty measure in three broad ways .

first , the measure of need is defined differently in the spm's poverty thresholds .

second , the economic resources measured in the spm differ from those counted in the official poverty measure .

third , the definition for "family" units used in the spm is not the same .

in determining an individual's poverty status , the poverty thresholds are compared with his or her family's economic resources .

information on relationships within the household determines which threshold is appropriate to use and whose resources are to be compared with that threshold .

this information on family relationship and resources is measured using household surveys , and the way it is measured is affected and limited by what is asked in the surveys .

through 2016 , the census bureau has produced estimates of individuals living in poverty as measured by the spm using the annual social and economic supplement ( asec ) to the current population survey ( cps ) as the source of the family relationship and income information used to compute poverty status .

the cps asec is also the survey used to produce the official poverty estimates at the national level .

thus , the spm poverty estimates are based on the detail available in , and the limitations of , the cps asec .

if other surveys were to be used to estimate spm poverty , their limitations and advantages would affect what information could be produced .

as mentioned earlier , the itwg never intended for the spm to replace the official poverty measure or to fulfill administrative purposes .

it supplements the official measure by allowing for analyses of the low - income population that would not otherwise be possible .

particularly visible and of possible relevance to congress are the effects that taxes and tax credits , noncash transfer programs , and work - related and medical expenses have on poverty .

the spm also highlights differences in the demographic profile of those identified as poor .

even with improved visibility into those areas , however , the spm has important limitations to be considered .

the official poverty measure captures only those government benefits that are paid in cash .

this includes the largest government transfer program , social security , though it excludes medicare .

however , in terms of programs targeted to lower income people and families , the official measure excludes noncash medical , food , and housing benefits as well as benefits paid through the tax code .

over time , means - tested benefits paid in noncash forms or through the tax code have grown to account for most of what the federal government spends on low - income assistance .

for example , in fy2015 the federal government spent $5.5 billion on veterans' pensions , $6.4 billion on tanf cash assistance , and $62.1 billion on supplemental security income ( ssi ) .

these cash benefits are included in both the official poverty measure and the spm .

however , the federal government also spent a total of $80.6 billion on refundable tax credits , $103.1 billion on food assistance , and $44.6 billion on housing , much of which are benefits that are captured only in the spm .

figure 1 illustrates the impact of various resource components on the number of people identified as poor using the spm .

bars pointing left ( negative ) indicate the number of people kept out of the population identified as poor by the spm's treatment of that resource component .

the bars pointing right ( positive ) indicate the number of people added to the estimated poor population by the spm's treatment of the component .

these data show how the population estimated to be poor would change if the spm omitted a particular component ( either by subtracting resources , or failing to subtract taxes and expenses ) but do not take into account any behavioral changes people would make in the absence of any one program , tax , credit , or expense .

furthermore , the data illustrate changes to the poverty population estimate with each component considered in isolation .

people are often affected by multiple resource components ; therefore , the numbers represented by separate bars should not be added together .

social security , along with ssi , tanf , and other cash welfare assistance ; unemployment insurance ; child support received ; and workers' compensation , are money income sources that are included in both the official poverty measure and the spm .

of these income sources , social security has the biggest impact on the number of persons kept out of poverty according to the spm ( 26.1 million persons in 2016 ) .

while it was designed to be a universal program and not targeted specifically to the poor , it has a large antipoverty effect nevertheless .

while most of those kept above poverty by social security were ages 65 and older ( 17.1 million ) , a substantial minority were younger: 7.5 million were age 18 to 64 , and 1.5 million were children under age 18 .

some of those in the younger age groups are social security recipients themselves because of a disability , but others were kept out of poverty because an older family member received it .

the remaining resource components shown in figure 1 are not included in the official poverty measure but are included in the spm .

of these , none individually have as large an impact on the estimated poor population as social security .

after it , the components with the most impact are moop ( with 10.5 million persons added to the poverty population once those expenses are taken into account ) ; refundable tax credits ( with 8.1 million kept out of the estimated poor population because they or a family member received the credits ) , work expenses , including child care ( 6.0 million added to the poverty population , on the margin ) ; fica ( 4.7 million added to the poverty population , on the margin ) ; and snap ( 3.6 million kept out of the poor population , on the margin ) .

as seen above , people can be affected by multiple resource components considered in the spm .

as a result , the profile of the poor population as identified by the spm is different from that identified by the official poverty measure .

fewer children are identified as poor in the spm because many government assistance programs , such as wic , tanf , and the additional child tax credit ( actc ) , are targeted toward families with children .

conversely , more working - age adults are in poverty in the spm because they are more likely to have work expenses ( including child care expenses ) .

these expenses are partially offset by eitc , but only working families receive it .

working families with children could get actc , but they have to have qualifying children .

slightly more of the aged are below poverty under the spm than under the official measure because they are more likely to incur moop , which are subtracted from income .

while moop can be high for the aged , their effect on poverty rates is mitigated by the fact that homeowners without a mortgage ( such as aged persons who have paid off their mortgages and still live in that house ) have lower housing expenses — and in turn lower poverty thresholds — than do mortgage - paying homeowners and renters .

further details are given in the census bureau's report , t he supplemental poverty measure: 201 6 .

as shown in table a - 1 in the appendix , poverty thresholds in the spm vary geographically and are typically different from their corresponding official poverty threshold .

the spm thresholds for new york illustrate within - state variation .

spm thresholds for the binghamton metro area are lower than their corresponding official poverty threshold , while for new york city they are considerably higher ( between $2,000 and $8,000 higher in 2016 than their corresponding official threshold ) .

nevertheless , regional patterns emerge .

poverty rates in the northeast and west tend to be higher under the spm than under the official measure , in part because of the relatively higher thresholds in those regions , compared with the midwest and the south .

the spm thresholds in 2016 for california ( a western state ) and alabama ( a southern state ) illustrate the most extreme examples: the highest poverty threshold ( for homeowners with mortgages in the san jose - sunnyvale - santa clara metro area , california ) and the lowest poverty threshold ( for homeowners without mortgages in nonmetropolitan alabama ) were found to apply in these states .

as a caveat , while the spm thresholds tend to increase poverty rates in the northeast and midwest and decrease poverty rates in the south and west compared with the official measure , the thresholds are not the only driver of spm poverty rates .

regional differences in income , noncash benefits , and items subtracted from spm resources ( such as moop or work expenses ) also drive differences in regional poverty rates .

because it is based mainly on survey data , the spm warrants the same caveats as do any estimates based on surveys ( including the official poverty measure ) : the data are estimates based on a sample of the population and , as a result , have margins of error .

additionally , means - tested transfers and certain types of non - transfer income are underreported in the cps asec .

portions of spm resources — notably the values of taxes and some noncash benefits — are not asked of respondents in the cps asec and need to be estimated using models .

the models take care to use administrative data where appropriate to ensure that the estimated amounts reflect external totals and distributions ; nevertheless , the estimated amounts are not perfect .

for example , the estimated total benefits from both the eitc and the child tax credit are substantially lower than those found when examining federal income tax returns .

thus , the estimates understate the impact these two tax provisions have on poverty as measured by the spm .

the spm includes the values of in - kind food and housing benefits in measuring resources .

while resources such as these are used to meet the needs ( fcsu ) specified in the thresholds , and thus it is consistent to include them as resources in the spm , in - kind benefits , unlike money income , are not fungible .

that is , barring illegal trading , they cannot be used to meet any expense that arises , but only the needs for which they are specified .

while the fcsu amounts in the thresholds are based empirically on spending patterns , it should not be assumed that every family's needs are the same .

because a family could use money income to meet its specific levels of need , but does not have the same flexibility with in - kind benefits , the in - kind benefits are worth somewhat less than their face value to families whose needs are met in one area but not another .

in measuring resources , the spm method caps housing benefits because a large housing subsidy can only fill housing needs .

housing benefits are capped at the housing portion of the spm poverty threshold minus the amount of rent paid by a tenant .

on the other hand , snap benefits are counted at their full face value , even though their "value" to the recipient might be less than that amount .

the spm accounts for expenses for health care and insurance by subtracting moop from family resources .

that is , it does not count the "value" of health insurance as a resource , and subtracts from resources health insurance premium payments , deductibles , copayments , and other out - of - pocket health expenses made by the family .

medical needs are not included in the spm poverty thresholds .

this treatment of medical expenses does not take account of all the economic effects of subsidized medical care generally .

two families with different health insurance arrangements , and different health care needs , but the same amounts of moop would be treated identically by the spm: their ( identical ) moop would be subtracted from their income .

however , those same families may not be equally as well off if one of the families kept its out - of - pocket costs down by purchasing a less comprehensive insurance plan than the other family and decided to forego certain types of health care .

the spm thresholds were defined to include the recurring needs of food , clothing , shelter , utilities , and a little more for miscellaneous expenses ; moop are subtracted from family income because they cannot be used to meet the needs identified in the threshold .

this treatment of medical expenses also means that some of the largest noncash benefits programs — medicare , medicaid , and premium assistance under the patient protection and affordable care act — are not explicitly taken into account in determining spm poverty status .

there has been some research into methods and measures that would incorporate medical risk , and how it is affected by health insurance , into measures of economic well - being to complement the current spm .

tax credits , when they are provided to filers , are given as a lump sum based on income in the previous year .

the spm imputes taxes in the year they are earned , but in reality the credit will not appear in the family's income until the following year .

furthermore , tax credits are given as a lump sum , but poverty is a spell phenomenon .

both the spm and the official poverty measure examine resources in a full calendar year compared with a threshold based on the calendar year .

the economic status of families , however , can change throughout the year .

a family may experience poverty because one or more workers in the family lost a job and months passed before the worker was able to find another one , putting the family in a poverty spell for that duration .

the tax credit , therefore , may or may not provide relief during the poverty spell , depending on the spell's timing in the year and the severity of expenses faced by the family throughout the year .

longitudinal datasets like the survey of income and program participation can unmask the length of time people and families spend in poverty .

however , they typically have smaller sample sizes than the cps asec , which limits their ability to provide detailed geographic analyses .

there has been some debate about whether the spm is closer to a relative or an absolute poverty measure .

a relative poverty measure is one in which poverty is defined with respect to some percentile of the income distribution ( eg , half of median income ) , while an absolute measure uses a fixed dollar cutoff updated for inflation over time .

relative poverty measures keep pace with changes in the income distribution over time and identify the economically worst - off portion of the population , but they may not necessarily be tied to a particular level of well - being .

because relative poverty measures are based on the income distribution , it is possible for poverty to increase even when incomes throughout the distribution rise if the distribution of income becomes wider .

this potential disconnection between the poverty rate and levels of well - being is considered to be a weakness of relative measures .

absolute poverty measures are set to a fixed income amount representing a level of economic well - being at a point in time , adjusted periodically for inflation .

they are consistent over time in representing the number of people below a resource level , and are more sensitive over time than relative measures to detecting the shares of the population unable to obtain this level , and presumably , economic well - being .

the spm includes aspects of both relative and absolute measures in its computation , and gauging whether the spm is closer to one or the other is an unresolved question .

the spm thresholds are based on roughly the 33 rd percentile of expenditures on fcsu , using the five most recent years of ce data .

in this sense , the spm can be thought of as relative because the thresholds are computed based on a percentile within the distribution of expenditures .

on the other hand , the thresholds are not computed using overall income , but rather expenditures , and only for a limited set of basic goods ( fcsu , plus 20% extra for miscellaneous expenses ) .

it is theoretically possible for incomes to rise at a different rate than expenditures on basic goods , which if true would imply that the spm is not a relative measure .

moreover , expenditures on fcsu are driven not only by income but also by prices , which can be affected by factors other than the income distribution .

the question of whether the spm is relative or absolute has meaning for those trying to evaluate whether the spm accurately describes the poor population both in a single year and over time .

it also highlights the value judgments involved in determining what is meant by "poverty" and in expressing that determination using a concrete metric .

in the case of the official poverty measure , the level of well - being is characterized by the likely nutritional impact of the economy food plan , with fewer than 1 in 10 families on that plan meeting their recommended nutritional requirements , and about half of families on that plan failing to get two - thirds of them ( see footnote 27 ) .

the description of the spm in this report , and the tables provided in the appendix , are intended to help readers better gauge for themselves the levels of well - being on which the spm is based .

unlike the official poverty measure , which uses 48 poverty thresholds that are updated annually for inflation and applied nationwide , the spm thresholds are computed using additional variables , resulting in thousands of thresholds once they are geographically adjusted .

the spm thresholds are based on consumer expenditure survey ( ce ) data for food , clothing , shelter , and utilities ( fcsu ) , and adjustments are made thereafter by housing tenure ( that is , for homeowners with mortgages , homeowners without mortgages , and renters ) , by geographic variations in housing costs for each housing tenure group , and by family composition .

three tables are shown below , to illustrate the dollar amounts used to determine poverty status in both the spm and the official measure .

table a - 1 focuses only on spm poverty thresholds for a two - adult two - child family , by housing tenure , and illustrates the range of geographic cost variation .

in contrast , table a - 2 illustrates how the spm thresholds vary by family composition , but without geographic adjustment .

table a - 3 presents the official poverty thresholds , for comparison .

