t he north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) entered into force on january 1 , 1994 , establishing a free trade area as part of a comprehensive economic and trade agreement among the united states , canada , and mexico .

currently , the united states is renegotiating the agreement .

however , repeated threats from president trump to abandon nafta and other actions by the administration as part of ongoing efforts to "modernize" nafta have raised concerns that the united states could withdraw from the agreement altogether .

although some u.s. agricultural industries support nafta renegotiation and efforts to address certain outstanding trade disputes — especially regarding milk , potatoes , some fruits and vegetables , cheese , and wine — many continue to express strong support for nafta and oppose outright withdrawal .

possible disruptions in u.s. export markets and general uncertainty in u.s. trade policy also continue to be a concern for u.s. food and agricultural producers .

similar concerns have been raised by some in congress who have oversight authority on industry and trade activities and who continue to monitor the ongoing nafta renegotiations .

this report examines some of the potential consequences to u.s. agricultural markets of a u.s. withdrawal from nafta , focusing on the possibility that higher tariffs could be imposed on u.s. imports and exports .

in particular , under a nafta withdrawal , it is likely that most - favored - nation ( mfn ) tariffs would be imposed on agricultural products traded among the nafta countries instead of the current zero tariff ( i.e. , duty - free trade ) for most agricultural products .

in general , mfn tariffs on u.s. agricultural imports would likely raise prices both to u.s. consumers and other end users , such as manufacturers of value - added food products .

applying general principles of supply and demand , it is possible to anticipate the effect that sustained higher prices due to higher mfn tariffs could have on the volume ( quantity ) of goods traded .

specifically , as prices increase , the quantity demanded for a product tends to decrease .

assuming mfn tariffs could apply in the event of a u.s. nafta withdrawal , imported products could become more expensive , which could lower the demand for some u.s. agricultural imports .

similarly , if higher mfn tariffs were applied to u.s. goods exported to canada and mexico , this could make some u.s. agricultural products more costly to buyers in those markets , which could lower u.s. exports — such as meat products , grains and feed , and processed foods .

as part of a formal free trade agreement ( fta ) negotiation , the office of the united states trade representative ( ustr ) will often request a "probable economic effects" study of a trade agreement , which is usually conducted by the united states international trade commission ( usitc ) .

the administration has asked usitc to conduct only an investigation into the probable economic effect of eliminating tariffs on certain dutiable nafta imports currently under a tariff rate quota ( trq ) .

this analysis was expected to have been completed in august 2017 but is confidential and not publicly available .

ustr has confirmed that , to date , a comprehensive review of a possible u.s. withdrawal from nafta has not yet been conducted .

comprehensive analysis of a possible u.s. nafta withdrawal focused exclusively on agricultural markets is also not available .

researchers at the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) have not yet conducted such an analysis .

university researchers often also contribute to studies of the effects of a range of market and trade policy actions .

crs communications with researchers that typically conduct such studies indicate that an assessment of a possible u.s. nafta withdrawal on agricultural markets has not been initiated at this time .

an extensive amount of data would be needed to conduct such an analysis , including quantity produced and traded for a wide range of products , domestic and international prices , production costs and inputs , measures of price response by product and market , and other modeling data .

the text box below provides a qualitative summary of some of the potential ways that u.s. agricultural markets could be affected if the united states were to withdraw from nafta .

a recent economy - wide study by a private research firm , impactecon , concluded that a "nafta reversal" would likely raise u.s. tariffs on canada and mexico imported products to current mfn rates , which could cause all nafta parties to experience declines in real gross domestic product ( gdp ) , trade , investment , and employment .

the study examined trade and economic changes assuming both reciprocation and no reciprocation in terms of canada's and mexico's applied tariffs .

according to the study , if canada and mexico were to also impose higher mfn tariffs , this could result in additional overall trade declines among the nafta countries , resulting in the loss of 256,000 low - wage workers in the short term ( three to five years ) as well as additional relocation of workers throughout the united states .

the impactecon study concluded that a nafta reversal could especially impact the meat , food , textiles , auto , and services sectors .

impacts are likely to be greatest for those industries where production is highly integrated .

the impactecon study and its conclusions regarding the potential impacts to the food and agricultural sectors have been highly commended and cited by some agricultural economists .

for example , dermot hayes of iowa state university notes that imposing mfn duties will have a price effect on traded goods that will lead to eventual market adjustment , forcing the united states to seek alternative export markets or be forced to downsize the domestic industry .

for example , he estimates that mfn duties of 20% on u.s. pork exports to mexico could cause a 5% contraction of the u.s. pork sector and stimulate additional production in mexico and / or require mexican buyers to find additional suppliers outside the united states .

contraction in the u.s. pork industry would result in a loss of u.s. jobs and have a disproportionate effect on specific counties that are dependent on farming , input markets , and value - added production in the sector .

trade under nafta underpins an important market for u.s. food and agricultural producers .

canada and mexico are the united states' two largest trading partners , accounting for 28% of the total value of u.s. agricultural exports and 39% of its imports in 2016 .

over the past 25 years under nafta , the value of u.s. agricultural trade with canada and mexico has increased sharply .

exports rose from $8.7 billion in 1992 to $38.1 billion in 2016 ( figure 1 ) , while imports rose from $6.5 billion to $44.5 billion over the same period ( figure 2 ) .

adjusted for inflation , the value of agricultural exports and imports between the united states and its nafta partners has increased roughly threefold since 1990 , growing at an average rate of about 5% - 6% annually .

this growth resulted in a $6.4 billion trade deficit for u.s. agricultural products in 2016 , reversing the trend in previous years when there was a trade surplus .

in 2016 , u.s. agricultural exports to canada were valued at $20.2 billion .

the leading exports were grains and feed , animal products , fruits and vegetables and related products , nuts and other horticultural products , sweeteners , oilseeds , beverages ( excluding fruit juice ) , and essential oils .

u.s. agricultural exports to mexico were valued at $17.8 billion in 2016 .

the leading exports were animal products , grains and feed , oilseeds , sweeteners , fruits and vegetables and related products , nuts and other horticultural products , cotton , seeds , and nursery crops .

mexico is also the largest or second - largest market for u.s. beef , pork , poultry , dairy , wheat , and corn exports .

for more information about u.s. agricultural trade under nafta , see crs report r44875 , the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) and u.s. agriculture , and crs in focus if10682 , nafta renegotiation: issues for u.s. agriculture .

under nafta , tariffs and quantitative restrictions were eliminated on most agricultural products , with the exception of some that may be subject to trqs and high out - of - quota tariff rates .

under nafta , canada excludes dairy , poultry , and eggs for tariff elimination .

the united states excludes dairy , sugar , cotton , tobacco , peanuts , and peanut butter .

because canada was able to exclude certain products from tariff elimination in nafta , canada is able to limit imports through restrictive trqs .

for example , according to ustr , imports of u.s. products above quota levels may be subject to out - of - quota tariffs as high as 245% for cheese and 298% for butter under nafta .

aside from these exempted products , most agricultural products are traded duty - free ( i.e. , zero tariff ) and receive other types of trade preferences intended to facilitate trade .

under an fta , preferential tariffs are charged to member countries and are lower than a country's mfn tariff rates .

mfn rates generally reflect the highest ( most restrictive ) rates that world trade organization ( wto ) members can charge each other on imported goods and services .

the text box below describes the different types of tariffs .

when president trump announced in april 2017 that he was considering withdrawing the united states from nafta , many u.s. agricultural groups expressed strong opposition to withdrawal .

many in congress also voiced opposition to outright withdrawal from nafta .

the national pork producers council stated that nafta withdrawal could be "cataclysmic" and "financially devastating" to u.s. pork producers .

the national corn growers association said that "withdrawing from nafta would be disastrous for american agriculture" and would disrupt trade with the sector's top trading partners .

the american soybean association said withdrawing from nafta is a "terrible idea" and would hamper ongoing recovery in the sector .

the u.s. grains council highlighted that withdrawal would have an "immediate effect on sales to mexico. .

the national association of wheat growers ( nawg ) noted that mexico is the largest u.s. wheat buyer and claimed that nafta withdrawal would be a "terrible blow to the u.s. wheat industry and its mexican customers. .

cargill , inc. , a major privately held u.s. grain distributor and global agricultural supplier , claims that sales to canada and mexico account for an estimated 10% of the company's annual revenues .

most fruit and vegetable growers did not support nafta withdrawal , citing the benefit of exports to mexico .

the administration did not withdraw from nafta at that time , deciding instead to formally renegotiate and "modernize" nafta .

although many in congress and in the u.s. agricultural sectors support nafta renegotiation and efforts to address certain outstanding trade disputes — such as disputes involving milk , potatoes , some fruits and vegetables , cheese , and wine — most u.s. agricultural groups are unified in their opposition to outright nafta withdrawal .

an october 2017 letter from nearly 90 farm and agriculture groups states that "nafta withdrawal would cause immediate , substantial harm to american food and agriculture industries and to the u.s. economy as a whole. .

agriculture groups also remain concerned about growing uncertainty in u.s. trade policy and its potential to disrupt u.s. export markets .

some also worry that the administration is actively seeking to exit nafta .

among the concerns of u.s. agricultural groups related to a withdrawal is fear that the nation's nafta trading partners could seek alternative markets for u.s. corn , soybean , dairy , pork , beef , and rice .

for example , media reports indicate that mexico is looking to find alternative suppliers for some imported products , such as rice ( which could be supplied by vietnam and thailand ) , corn and soybeans ( argentina and brazil ) , wheat ( argentina and the baltic states ) , and dairy products ( new zealand and europe ) .

the u.s. pork industry continues to claim that a nafta withdrawal would be catastrophic to the sector .

meanwhile , reports also indicate that mexico is not worried about finding alternative consumer markets for some of its exported products , such as avocados , which are now mostly sold to the united states .

other reports suggest that mexico's efforts to diversify its agricultural suppliers and markets may be in retaliation for certain u.s. proposals tabled during the nafta renegotiation .

others suggest that the general tone of the ongoing renegotiation has had a negative impact on the relations among the nafta partners .

an economy - wide survey of investors by the industry - supported trade leadership coalition reports that 72% of agricultural investors surveyed believe that the near - term ( one to two years ) business impacts of ending nafta would be negative ( 56% of businesses surveyed ) or very negative ( 16% ) .

also , 78% of agricultural investors surveyed believe that the risks of nafta withdrawal have not been fully priced into stock valuations .

members of the international chamber of commerce have also warned that u.s. withdrawal from nafta or other critical changes to the agreement would "greatly restrict , rather than enhance , cross - border commerce. .

the trump administration has generally downplayed these types of concerns .

however , usda is reportedly developing a contingency plan to protect against potential agricultural losses if the united states withdraws from nafta .

again , in august 2017 , president trump and other administration officials suggested the united states would likely withdraw from the agreement .

most states continue to express their support for nafta .

the national association of state departments of agriculture and the american farm bureau federation , among other industry coalition groups , also continue to emphasize the importance of nafta to the u.s. agricultural sectors and the need to maintain a preferential trade relationship with canada and mexico .

many in congress representing states with agricultural interests continue to express opposition to nafta withdrawal .

in november 2017 , the leadership of the house agriculture committee , chairman k. michael conaway and ranking member collin c. peterson , joined several u.s. agriculture groups in opposing withdrawal and supporting a quick end to the ongoing nafta renegotiations .

in october , 2017 chairman pat roberts of the senate agriculture committee expressed support for nafta and emphasized the need for industry leaders to present their support to the administration .

senator debbie stabenow , ranking member of the senate agriculture committee , has also expressed support for nafta .

reportedly , some agricultural groups believe that congress has the ability to intervene , if president trump withdraws the united states from nafta .

congress maintains oversight authority on industry and trade activities and has continued to monitor and conduct hearings on the ongoing nafta renegotiations .

for additional information on the role of congress in the ongoing negotiation , see crs report r44981 , nafta renegotiation and modernization .

for additional information on the legal aspects of congressional action in this area , see crs legal sidebar wslg1724 , renegotiation of the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) : what actions do not require congressional approval ? .

appendix a. most - favored - nation ( mfn ) tariff , hs - 2 , agricultural and fisheries products ( united states , canada , mexico ) appendix b. most - favored - nation ( mfn ) tariff , hs - 4 , agricultural and fisheries products ( united states , canada , mexico ) .

