as part of their normal operations , vessels may discharge a wide range of wastes and contaminants into u.s. and international waters , including nutrients , pathogens , oil and grease , metals such as copper , toxic chemical compounds , conventional pollutants such as suspended solids , and nonnative aq uatic nuisance species ( ans ) — also referred to as invasive species .

the discharges can include shower and laundry facility water , deck washdown and runoff , bilgewater , motor fuel , machinery wastewater , and ballast water , among others .

contaminants in these discharges can have a broad array of effects on aquatic species and human health , many of which can be harmful .

the universe of vessels that may release these discharges is diverse .

it includes commercial fishing vessels , cruise ships , ferries , barges , mobile offshore drilling units , tankers , cargo ships , container ships , research vessels , and emergency response vessels , such as firefighting and police vessels .

including recreational vessels , the universe of vessels numbers in the millions .

ballast water discharges from vessels are a concern to stakeholders particularly because they may introduce ans — nonnative species that can threaten the diversity or abundance of native species , the ecological stability of infested waters , or commercial , agricultural , aquacultural , or recreational activities dependent on such waters .

in certain cases , successful establishments of ans can result in significant economic losses .

in the late 1980s , the introduction of nonnative zebra mussels into the great lakes drew national attention to ans .

zebra mussels compete with native species and cause significant ecological damage .

they also attach to hard surfaces such as water intake pipes used for cooling water and municipal water supply , sometimes causing a significant reduction in pumping capacity .

currently , many u.s. areas have ans , although some areas — the great lakes , hawaii , the west coast , and florida — have larger numbers of ans .

ballast water discharged from ships is one significant pathway for the introduction of ans .

ships use large amounts of ballast water to stabilize the vessel during transport .

ballast water is often taken on in the coastal waters in one region after ships discharge wastewater or unload cargo .

it is then discharged at the next port of call , where ships load more cargo .

the practice of taking on and discharging ballast water is essential to the proper functioning of ships because the water that is taken in or discharged compensates for changes in the vessel's weight as cargo is loaded or unloaded , and as fuel and supplies are consumed .

however , ballast water discharge may contain a variety of biological materials , including ans .

if these species are released into lakes or rivers as part of ballast water discharge , they can alter aquatic ecosystems if they become established .

recognizing the potential economic and environmental consequences of ans invasions , congress first passed legislation in 1990 to prevent and control infestations of ans introduced through ballast water and other means .

today , multiple entities — including the coast guard , u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) , and some states — regulate discharges incidental to the normal operation of vessels , including ballast water .

some types of vessel discharges — including garbage ; oil or hazardous substances ; sewage ; graywater from commercial vessels operating in the great lakes ; and air pollutant emissions — are regulated separately and will not be discussed in this report .

for the purposes of this report , "vessel discharges" refers to discharges incidental to the normal operation of vessels , including ballast water .

the combination of multiple federal and state requirements presents several complex policy issues .

congress has considered these issues in proposed legislation for more than a decade , including house and senate versions of the vessel incidental discharge act in the 115 th congress ( discussed below ) .

in the 115 th congress , some members have introduced bills intended to address issues with the existing regulatory system for ballast water and other discharges incidental to the normal operation of vessels .

h.r .

1154 and s. 168 , both titled the "vessel incidental discharge act," are the same with one potentially significant exception discussed below .

the house has not acted on h.r .

1154 since it was introduced in february 2017 .

the companion bill in the senate , s. 168 , was reported out of the committee on commerce , science , and transportation in march .

in addition , in june 2017 , the committee reported s. 1129 , the coast guard authorization act of 2017 .

as reported , s. 1129 includes the text of s. 168 as title viii .

these bills are similar to those introduced in previous sessions of congress , but do differ in some respects .

several bills address only the moratorium on cwa permitting for certain incidental discharges ( excluding ballast water ) from commercial fishing vessels of all sizes and nonrecreational vessels less than 79 feet in length .

s. 2273 ( p.l .

115-100 ) , signed by president trump on january 3 , 2018 , extended the moratorium that expired on december 18 , 2017 , through january 19 , 2018 .

s. 2194 and h.r .

4656 would extend the moratorium through december 18 , 2020 .

s. 2331 , introduced on january 23 , 2018 , would extend the moratorium through march 23 , 2018 .

for more than a decade , some members of congress have introduced legislation intended to modify and clarify regulation and management of ballast water discharges that can be a source of ans in u.s. waters .

in recent years , these bills have focused on establishing uniform , national standards for ballast water and other incidental discharges and providing the authority to regulate these discharges primarily with the coast guard ( in consultation with epa ) .

many in the maritime industry strongly support the legislation discussed in this report , arguing that without it , the confusion and inefficiencies they associate with the current regulatory scheme will continue to grow .

others , including some states and environmental advocacy groups , continue to oppose aspects of the proposals — especially the preemption of state authority and the cwa in regulating the discharges .

considering the complex policy issues associated with the regulation of ballast water and other incidental discharges will likely continue to be of interest to congress .

