the united states has long distinguished temporary migration from settlement migration .

the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) establishes the circumstances under which foreign nationals may be admitted temporarily or come to live permanently .

those admitted on a permanent basis are known as immigrants , or lawful permanent residents ( lprs ) , while those admitted on a temporary basis are known as nonimmigrants .

the ina provides for the admission of nonimmigrants for designated periods of time and a variety of specific purposes .

nonimmigrants include tourists , foreign students , diplomats , temporary agricultural workers , cultural exchange visitors , internationally known entertainers , foreign media representatives , intracompany business personnel , and crew members on foreign vessels , among others .

policy discussions about nonimmigrant admissions are as varied as the visa classes under which temporary migrants enter .

tourists , business visitors , and foreign students , for example , are usually seen as a boon to the u.s. economy , while the economic costs and benefits of temporary workers are hotly debated .

in addition , cultural exchange programs are a foreign policy tool , intended to foster democratic principles and spread american values across the globe , but some of these programs that include work authorization have come under scrutiny for an alleged lack of protections for both u.s. workers and program participants .

further , the entry of nonimmigrants has prompted national security concerns — particularly over those who enter under the visa waiver program .

debates also continue over the implementation of a system to document the exits of foreign nationals from the united states , as nonimmigrants who remain in the country after their visas expire are accounting for a growing share of the unauthorized alien population .

achieving an optimal balance among policy priorities — ensuring national security , facilitating trade and commerce , supporting fair labor practices , protecting public health and safety , and fostering international cooperation — remains a challenge .

as policymakers consider modifying nonimmigrant visa categories , they may be interested in learning more about each of the categories and their relationship to the policy priorities .

this report explains the statutory and regulatory provisions that govern nonimmigrant admissions to the united states before turning to a description of the major nonimmigrant categories .

it describes trends in temporary migration , including changes over time in the number of nonimmigrant visas issued and nonimmigrant admissions .

estimates of nonimmigrants who establish residence in the united states are briefly discussed , as are estimates of those who stay beyond their authorized period of admission .

the report concludes with a detailed table showing key admissions requirements across all nonimmigrant visa types .

the department of state ( dos ) , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , and the department of labor ( dol ) each play key roles in administering the law and setting policies on the admission of nonimmigrants .

foreign nationals living outside the united states who wish to enter the country apply for a visa at a u.s. embassy or consulate abroad .

two agencies within dhs handle the admission procedures that occur on u.s. soil: customs and border protection ( cbp ) determines whether to admit nonimmigrants at u.s. ports of entry ( poes ) , and u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) handles applications for extending or changing an individual's nonimmigrant status and the adjudication of visa petitions by employers for nonimmigrant workers .

for certain classes of workers , an employer must first submit an application to dol's office of foreign labor certification .

if approved , the employer petitions uscis for the visa on behalf of the worker .

finally , dos interviews the worker and issues a visa if conditions are met .

a dos consular officer ( at the time of application for a visa ) and a cbp immigration inspector ( at the time of application for admission ) must be satisfied that an alien is entitled to a nonimmigrant status .

the burden of proof is on the applicant to establish eligibility for nonimmigrant status and the type of nonimmigrant visa for which the application is made .

currently , there are 24 major nonimmigrant visa categories and more than 80 specific types of nonimmigrant visas .

most of the nonimmigrant visa categories are defined in §101 ( a ) ( 15 ) of the ina .

for most nonimmigrant visa categories , there are specific visas for derivatives , typically dependent spouses and minor children , of the principal visa holder .

in this section , nonimmigrant visas are grouped under broad labels .

for a listing of all the current visa types in alphabetical order , see table a - 1 in the appendix .

for each visa type , it provides information from current law and regulations regarding length of stay , foreign residence requirements , employment authorization , labor market test requirements , annual numerical limit , and the number of visas issued in fy2016 .

dos and cbp collect data on nonimmigrant visa issuances and nonimmigrant admissions to the united states , respectively .

both sets of data have strengths and shortcomings for analyzing trends related to nonimmigrants .

data from dos on the number of visas issued shows the potential number of foreign nationals who may gain admission to the united states because not all visa recipients end up traveling to the country , and some who do are denied admission .

most cbp admissions data come from i - 94 forms , which are used to document entries of foreign nationals into the united states .

these data enumerate arrivals , thus counting frequent travelers multiple times .

notably , mexican nationals with border crossing cards and canadian nationals traveling for business or tourist purposes are not required to fill out i - 94 forms and are thus not reflected in cbp data tables .

because canadian and mexican visitors make up the vast majority of nonimmigrant admissions , less than half of nonimmigrant admissions to the united states each year are included in the i - 94 totals .

data on nonimmigrant departures are much less complete because the united states does not have a comprehensive exit system in place .

nonimmigrants may overstay their visas , depart the country without submitting a departure form , gain the right to live in the united states permanently , or receive an extension of their nonimmigrant stay , making a direct count of nonimmigrants in the country impossible .

nevertheless , recent improvements in data sharing have allowed dhs to produce estimates of nonimmigrants residing in the united states and overstay rates for nonimmigrants who entered at air or sea ports .

the following sections present both visa issuance and admissions data for nonimmigrants by category and geographic region .

estimates of the number of nonimmigrants who have overstayed their visas are also presented , as are estimates of those who have ( legally or otherwise ) established a residence in the united states .

in fy2016 , dos consular officers issued 10.4 million nonimmigrant visas , down from a peak of 10.9 million in fy2015 .

combined , visitor visas issued in fy2016 for tourism and business comprised by far the largest category of nonimmigrant visas: about 8 million , or 78% of the total ( see figure 1 ) .

temporary workers ( including h visa holders , treaty traders and investors , intracompany transferees , and representatives of foreign media ) received 8.5% of all nonimmigrant visas issued in fy2016 , followed by students and exchange visitors with 4.9% and 3.7% , respectively ( see figure 1 ) .

from fy2007 to fy2016 , the number of nonimmigrant visas issued grew by 61% , from 6.4 million in fy2007 to 10.4 million in fy2016 ( see figure 2 ) .

during this time , nonimmigrant visa issuances were at their lowest level in fy2009 , due , in part , to the impact of the economic downturn beginning in 2007 ( great recession ) on international travel .

after fy2009 , there was a steady increase in the number of visas issued until fy2015 ; from fy2015 to fy2016 , issuances declined by half a million , or 5% .

the number of tourist and business visitor visas ( b visas ) issued increased by 78% over the entire decade , but like nonimmigrant visas overall , they saw a drop of 5% from fy2015 to fy2016 .

because tourist and business visitor visas ( b visas ) dominate the nonimmigrant flow , it is useful to examine trends in other nonimmigrant categories separately .

figure 3 reveals that the number of visas issued for temporary workers saw a sharp drop from fy2008 to fy2009 .

this timing coincides with the start of the great recession .

while most other visa categories also experienced some fluctuation , visas issued to diplomats and other representatives held steady across the decade .

since fy2009 , visas issued to temporary workers and students have seen large and steady increases resulting in growth rates of 38% and 55% , respectively , over the decade .

from fy2015 to fy2016 , however , the number of student visas experienced a 25% drop .

this sharp decline was largely driven by a 46% decrease in the number of f - 1 visas issued to applicants from mainland china , the most frequent recipient of f - 1 visas .

saudi arabia , mexico , brazil , and india also experienced steep drops in the number of f - 1 visas issued from fy2015 to fy2016 .

during fy2015 , cbp inspectors granted 181.3 million nonimmigrant admissions to the united states , according to dhs workload estimates .

mexican nationals with border crossing cards , canadian nationals traveling for business or pleasure , and others not required to complete a form i - 94 accounted for over half ( 58% ) of these admissions , with approximately 104.7 million entries ( see " statistical trends " ) .

the remaining categories and countries of the world contributed the remaining 76.6 million i - 94 admissions in fy2015 .

the following analysis of admissions data is limited to i - 94 admissions .

total i - 94 admissions more than doubled between fy2006 and fy2015 , from 33.7 million to 76.6 million .

the trend in admissions of temporary visitors ( for business and pleasure ) mirrored that for visa issuances: a decline from fy2008 to fy2009 followed by a steady increase .

because dhs has not yet released fy2016 data , it is unknown whether the fy2015 to fy2016 drop in nonimmigrant visas issued will also appear in the admissions data .

as with the visa issuance data , tourists and business visitors dominate the admissions data ( see figure 4 ) .

over three - quarters of all i - 94 admissions in fy2015 were tourists , and another 10.4% were business visitors .

similar to visa issuances , other nonimmigrant categories with measurable percentages of admissions were temporary workers ( including intracompany transferees , treaty traders / investors , and representatives of foreign media ) , at almost 5% , students ( 2.6% ) , cultural exchange visitors ( 0.8% ) , and diplomats ( 0.6% ) .

included in the admissions data are tourists and business visitors who entered without a visa under the visa waiver program ( vwp ) .

while the number of vwp admissions has climbed steadily since fy2009 , the share of visitor ( b visa ) admissions accounted for by vwp admissions dropped from more than half ( 53.2% ) in fy2006 to less than one - third ( 32.5% ) in fy2015 ( see figure 5 ) .

this corresponds with an increase in the share of admissions coming from asia ( see figure 8 ) , as european countries dominate the vwp .

figure 6 shows fy2006-fy2015 admission trends for all visa types except for b visa holders .

as was also shown in figure 4 , temporary workers are the largest category of "other than b - visa" nonimmigrant admissions .

overall , the temporary workers category saw a 118% increase in the number of admissions from fy2006 to fy2015 , second only to student admissions , which grew by 169% .

admissions of diplomats and exchange visitors grew 50% and 35% , respectively .

visas issued to foreign nationals from asia made up 45.3% , or 4.7 million , of the 10.4 million nonimmigrant visas issued in fy2016 ( see figure 7 ) .

north american nonimmigrants ( i.e. , those from canada , mexico , central america , and the caribbean ) accounted for the next largest group of fy2016 nonimmigrant visa issuances , with 2.1 million individuals .

south america accounted for 1.8 million of the nonimmigrant visa issuances .

europe's 1.2 million visas comprised 11.4% of all nonimmigrant visas issued , down from 16.1% in fy2007 .

half a million nonimmigrant visas were issued to africans , and less than 70,000 went to those from oceania .

over the past decade , nonimmigrant visas issued to nationals from asia increased 78% from 2.6 million visas issued in fy2007 to 4.7 million in fy2016 ( see figure 8 ) .

although asian nationals experienced the largest numerical increase during that time , the number of nonimmigrant visas issued to south american nationals also increased by 78% , and visas issued to african nationals doubled over the same time period , surpassing 500,000 in fy2016 for the first time .

reflecting the decrease in total visa issuances from fy2015 to fy2016 , visa issuances to nationals from asia and south america also decreased during this time .

the drop in visas issued to nationals from asia is due almost equally to decreases in business and tourist visitors ( b ) and student ( f - 1 ) visas .

chinese nationals , for example , received about 237,103 fewer b visas and 126,444 fewer f - 1 visas in fy2016 than in fy2015 .

foreign nationals from brazil — south america's largest economy and a country suffering from a deep recession — accounted for most of the decrease in business and tourist visitor visas for south america .

citizens of north american countries accounted for almost half ( 47.4% ) of i - 94 nonimmigrant admissions in fy2015 ( see figure 9 ) .

in addition to sharing a border with the united states , canadian and mexican nationals have expedited entry in many cases .

admissions of european nationals made up almost one quarter ( 22.6% ) of fy2015 nonimmigrant admissions , followed by asian nationals ( 18.3% ) .

citizens of south america , oceania , and africa each accounted for less than 10% of nonimmigrant admissions .

it is worth noting that 30 of the 38 visa waiver program countries are european , which , coupled with the continent's proximity to the united states , helps explain how european nationals can make up almost a quarter of admissions but 9.8% of visas issued in fy2015 .

although foreign nationals from asia held 45.9% of visas issued in fy2015 , they comprised 18.3% , or 14 million , of i - 94 admissions .

this could be due in part to the fact that only five asian countries are designated in the vwp , along with the lower likelihood of repeat entries from asia given its distance from the united states .

citizens from africa , oceania , and south america also accounted for a higher share of visas issued than admissions .

figure 10 depicts the region of citizenship for i - 94 admissions into the united states from fy2006 to fy2015 .

the dramatic increase in admissions from north america is due largely to significant changes in the way cbp records i - 94 admissions .

before the changes in procedure , north american admissions trends mirrored those from asia .

aside from the large increase in north american admissions that was due to improvements in data collection , admissions from south america and africa had the fastest growth rates from fy2006 to fy2015: 157.3% and 100.9% , respectively .

admissions of european nationals grew the slowest , increasing 35.6% over the decade .

asian admissions increased 67.5% , and those from oceania grew by 78.8% .

foreign nationals coming to the united states as nonimmigrants go to destinations around the country .

eleven states and guam were identified as the destination for 1 million or more nonimmigrant admissions each in fy2015 .

california and florida were the top two destination states , with over 10 million admissions each ( see figure 11 ) ; over 90% of these admissions were tourists and business travelers ( b visa holders ) .

new york and texas were also top destinations for all types of nonimmigrants .

certain states and one territory stood out as primarily tourist destinations in fy2015: in hawaii , nevada , and guam , more than 98% of admissions were on b visas .

other states stood out as those that attract a disproportionate share of students: in massachusetts , students and exchange visitors accounted for 12% of admissions ; california and new york had higher numbers of student / exchange visitor admissions than massachusetts ( though they made up about 4% of nonimmigrant admissions in each of these states ) .

michigan ( 19% ) and new jersey ( 10% ) received a disproportionate share of temporary workers compared to the overall share of 5% nationwide .

in addition , the district of columbia had the highest share of nonimmigrant admissions classified as diplomats ( 14% ) .

not all nonimmigrant visas are issued for brief visits , and some lengths of stay are sufficiently long for a person to establish residence in the united states .

as noted , a - 1 ambassadors are allowed to remain in the united states for the duration of their service , f - 1 students are allowed to complete their studies , and h - 1b professionals are allowed to remain for three years or more .

the term "resident nonimmigrant" refers to foreign nationals admitted on nonimmigrant visas whose classes of admission are associated with stays long enough to establish a residence .

the most recent dhs estimates of the resident nonimmigrant population in the united states are for fy2014 .

that year , dhs estimated the average population of resident nonimmigrants to be 1.7 million on any given day .

of these , 45.6% ( 790,000 ) were temporary workers and their families , 38.7% ( 670,000 ) were students and their families , 11.6% ( 200,000 ) were cultural exchange visitors and their families , and 4.0% ( 70,000 ) were diplomats , other representatives , and their families .

dhs estimated that 30% were ages 18 to 24 , and 50% were ages 25 to 44 .

more than half ( 57% ) of resident nonimmigrants in fy2014 were male .

foreign nationals from asia made up more than half ( 56% ) of resident nonimmigrants in the united states in fy2014 , with india and china making up 24% and 14% of the total , respectively .

europe and north america comprised another 14% and 13% of the total , respectively .

the top 10 sending countries accounted for 71% of the total , as depicted in figure 12 .

although the u.s. immigration system is generally bifurcated into temporary and permanent admissions of foreign nationals , there are significant connections between the two .

overall , about half of those receiving lawful permanent residence each year are adjusting to lpr status from another status within the united states , and the other half are new arrivals .

the adjusters may have entered the country in various capacities , including as refugees , asylees , parolees , nonimmigrants , or illegal entrants .

as discussed earlier , most foreign nationals seeking to qualify for a nonimmigrant visa must demonstrate that they are not coming to the united states to reside permanently .

by statute , three nonimmigrant visas permit the visa holder to simultaneously seek lpr status , also known as "dual intent": h - 1 professional workers , l intracompany transfers , and v accompanying family members .

the connections between the temporary and permanent immigration systems affect both employment - and family - based immigration , the two main mechanisms for permanent immigration .

while about half ( 51.6% ) of all individuals receiving lpr status in fy2015 adjusted from another status ( versus new arrivals ) , a larger share ( 84.7% ) of those receiving employment - based lpr status were adjusting from another status .

presumably , many of these individuals were previously h - 1b and l visa holders , both of which allow for immigrant intent .

the h - 1b visa provides a link for foreign students to become employment - based lprs .

u.s. firms that want to hire foreign students can obtain h - 1b visas for recent graduates — a process which is usually faster than sponsoring them for permanent residence — and if the employees meet expectations , the employers may also petition for them to become lprs through one of the employment - based immigration categories .

some policymakers consider this a natural and positive chain of events , arguing that it would be foolish to educate nonimmigrants only to make them leave the country to work for foreign competitors .

to that end , there have been legislative proposals to allow aliens who have earned a ph.d. in a stem field from a u.s. university to be exempt from numerical limits on h - 1bs and employment - based green cards .

others consider this "f - 1 to h - 1b to lpr" pathway an abuse of the temporary element of nonimmigrant status and a way to circumvent the laws and procedures that protect u.s. workers from being displaced by immigrants .

to that end , other proposals would prevent foreign students from gaining u.s. employment through the optional practical training ( opt ) program .

opt has become a common mechanism for temporary employment ( ranging from 12 to 36 months ) that is directly related to an f - 1 student's major area of study .

in fy2014 , uscis reported that there were 136,617 f - 1 foreign students approved for opt , up from 90,896 in fy2009 .

in addition to the 12 to 36 months of opt work authorization , f - 1 students with pending h - 1b petitions can extend their f - 1 status and employment authorization unti l their h - 1b employment begins .

it is estimated that each year , hundreds of thousands of foreign nationals overstay their nonimmigrant visas and , as a consequence , become unauthorized aliens .

the absence of a comprehensive system to track the exit of foreign nationals from the united states has made direct , complete measurement of overstays impossible .

however , dhs has reportedly made progress in identifying and quantifying overstays and issued a report in each of 2016 and 2017 on this topic .

according to the 2017 report , which accounted for 50.4 million nonimmigrants who entered the united states through an air or sea port and were expected to depart in fy2016 , an estimated 1.47% ( or 739,478 individuals ) were overstays .

this number includes individuals who left the country after their visa expired and those who were suspected to still be in the united states .

given the historical lack of nonimmigrant departure data , immigration scholars have used estimation techniques to study the number and characteristics of the overstay population ( and the population of unauthorized aliens writ large ) .

recent reports from the center for migration studies found that , in each year from 2007 to 2014 , the number of aliens becoming unauthorized by overstaying a nonimmigrant visa was higher than the number who did so by entering the country without inspection ( ewi ) .

this is mainly a result of the sharp decline in the number of ewis since the early 2000s .

of the 11 million unauthorized aliens estimated to be living in the united states in 2014 , 42% ( 4.5 million ) were estimated to have arrived in the country legally and overstayed a visa .

