federal education legislation continues to emphasize the role of assessment in elementary and secondary schools .

perhaps most prominently , the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , as amended by the every student succeeds act ( essa ; p.l .

114-95 ) , requires the use of test - based educational accountability systems in states and specifies the requirements for the assessments that states must incorporate into state - designed educational accountability system .

these requirements are applicable to states that receive funding under title i - a of the esea , which authorizes aid to local educational agencies ( leas ) for the education of disadvantaged children .

title i - a grants provide supplementary educational and related services to low - achieving and other students attending elementary and secondary schools with relatively high concentrations of students from low - income families .

all states currently accept title i - a funds .

for fy2017 , the program was funded at $15.5 billion .

more specifically , to receive title i - a funds , states must agree to assess all students annually in grades 3 through 8 and once in high school in the areas of reading and mathematics .

students are also required to be assessed in science at least once within each of three specified grade spans ( grades 3-5 , 6-9 , and 10-12 ) .

the results of these assessments are used as part of a state - designed educational accountability system that determines which schools will be identified for support and improvement based on their performance .

the results are also used to make information about the academic performance of students in schools and school systems available to parents and other community stakeholders .

these requirements have been implemented within a crowded landscape of state , local , and classroom uses of educational assessments , ranging from small - scale classroom assessments to high school exit exams .

the emphasis on educational assessment within federal education policies , which has coincided with expanded assessment use in many states and localities , has led to considerable debate about the amount of time being spent taking tests and preparing for tests in schools , the fit between various types of assessments and intended uses , and optimal ways to increase the usefulness of assessments .

as student assessments continue to be used for accountability purposes under the esea as well as in many other capacities related to federal programs ( eg , for identifying students eligible to receive extra services supported through federal programs ) , this report provides congress with a general overview of assessments and related issues .

it discusses different types of educational assessments and uses of assessment in support of the aims of federal policies .

as congressional audiences sometimes seek clarification on how the assessments required under federal programs fit into the broader landscape of educational assessments , the report situates the types of assessment undertaken in conjunction with federal programs within the broader context of assessments used for varied purposes within schools .

the report explains basic concepts related to assessment in accessible language , and it identifies commonly discussed considerations related to the use of assessments .

the report provides background information that can be helpful to readers as they consider the uses of educational assessment in conjunction with policies and programs .

this report accompanies crs report r45049 , educational assessment and the elementary and secondary education act , by [author name scrubbed] , which provides a more detailed examination of the assessment requirements under the esea .

this report begins by briefly discussing the current types of assessments used in elementary and secondary education .

it then provides a framework for understanding various types of assessments that are administered in elementary and secondary schools .

it broadly discusses several purposes of educational assessment and describes the concept of balanced assessment systems .

the report also provides a description of technical considerations in assessments , including validity , reliability , and fairness , and discusses how to use these technical considerations to draw appropriate conclusions based on assessment results .

this report does not comprehensively or exclusively discuss specific assessments required by federal legislation .

the information herein can be applied broadly to all assessments used in elementary and secondary schools , including those required by federal legislation .

examples from federal legislation , such as the esea and the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ; p.l .

108-446 ) , are used to highlight assessment concepts .

the examples provided are not exhaustive but rather serve to demonstrate the application of assessment concepts to actual assessments administered in schools .

students in elementary and secondary education participate in a wide range of assessments , from small - scale classroom assessments to large - scale international assessments .

some assessments are required , and some are voluntary .

some assessment results are reported on an individual level , and some are reported at a group level .

some assessments have high - stakes consequences , and some do not .

the most common type of assessment used in educational settings is achievement testing .

although educational assessment involves more than testing , this report uses "assessment" and "test" interchangeably .

among the assessments discussed , state assessments required by the esea receive considerable attention in this report .

these assessments are administered annually in reading and mathematics to all students in grades 3 through 8 and once in high school .

in addition , science assessments are administered once in each of three grade spans ( grades 3-5 , 6-9 , and 10-12 ) .

the results of reading and mathematics assessments are used as indicators in the state accountability systems required by title i - a .

results are aggregated and reported for various groups of students .

though they are not required to do so by federal law , states may require students to pass exit exams to graduate from high school .

a state "exit exam" typically refers to one or more tests in different subject areas , such as english , mathematics , science , and social studies .

exit exams can take several forms , including minimum competency exams , comprehensive exams , end - of course exams , or some combination of the three .

students may also participate in national assessments .

the national assessment of educational progress ( naep ) is a series of assessments that have been used since 1969 .

the naep tests are administered to students in grades 4 , 8 , and 12 .

they cover a variety of content areas , including reading , mathematics , science , writing , geography , history , civics , social studies , and the arts .

the naep is a voluntary assessment for students ; however , states that receive funding under title i - a of the esea are required to participate in the reading and mathematics assessment for grades 4 and 8 .

a sample of students in each state is selected to participate in the naep .

some students are selected to participate in international assessments .

there are currently three international assessments that are periodically administered: ( 1 ) the programme for international student achievement ( pisa ) , ( 2 ) the progress in international reading literacy study ( pirls ) , and ( 3 ) the trends in international mathematics and science study ( timss ) .

participation in international assessments is voluntary , and the countries that choose to participate can vary from one administration to the next .

as with the naep , a sample of students from a participating country is selected to take the assessment .

certain students also take assessments to qualify for special services .

states are required by the federal government to provide special services to students with disabilities and english learners ( els ) .

to receive special services , a student must be found eligible for services based on a variety of assessments .

states are required to designate the specific assessments that determine eligibility .

in addition , states are required to assess els in english language proficiency , which includes the domains of listening , speaking , reading , and writing .

on the surface , it may be difficult to understand why students participate in so many assessments .

each assessment has a specific purpose and reports a specific kind of score .

teaching and learning can benefit from educational assessment , but there is a balance between the time spent on educational assessment and the time spent on teaching and learning .

determining the number and type of assessments to administer in elementary and secondary education is important , and the information in this report is intended to help policymakers as they contribute to these decisions .

educational assessment is a complex task involving gathering and analyzing data to support decision - making about students and the evaluation of academic programs and policies .

there are many ways to classify assessments in frameworks .

the framework offered below is meant to provide a context for the remainder of the report and present an easily accessible vocabulary for discussing assessments .

this framework addresses the various purposes of assessment , the concept of balanced assessment systems , and the scoring of assessments .

after outlining a general assessment framework , this report discusses technical considerations in assessment and how to draw appropriate conclusions based on assessment results .

a glossary containing definitions of commonly used assessment and measurement terms is provided at the end of this report .

the glossary provides additional technical information that may not be addressed within the text of the report .

this section will discuss technical considerations such as validity , reliability , and fairness .

it is generally the responsibility of the test developer to investigate the technical characteristics of an assessment and report any relevant statistical information to test users .

usually , this information is reported in testing manuals that accompany the assessment .

it is the responsibility of the test user to administer the test as intended and use the reported information concerning validity , reliability , and fairness to interpret test results appropriately .

learning how to evaluate the validity , reliability , and fairness of an assessment allows test users to make appropriate inferences ( i.e. , conclusions drawn from the result of a test ) .

inferences may be either appropriate or inappropriate based on a number of technical and contextual factors .

following a discussion of the concepts of validity , reliability , and fairness , this report will conclude with a discussion of how to avoid making inappropriate inferences from educational assessments .

it will also highlight some of the issues to consider when making inferences from high - stakes assessments versus low - stakes assessments .

test users have a responsibility to examine the validity , reliability , and fairness of an assessment to make appropriate inferences about student achievement .

there is no checklist that will help determine if an inference is appropriate .

instead , test users are to conduct a thoughtful analysis of the assessment in terms of the construct ; purpose ; type of scores it reports ; and evidence concerning its validity , reliability , and fairness ; as well as the context in which the assessment results will be used .

if these issues are not carefully considered , inappropriate inferences can lead to a variety of unintended consequences .

the sections that follow provide some guidance in the form of sample questions that can be used to consider the appropriateness of inferences about test scores .

these guidelines are not intended to be an exhaustive list of considerations but rather a starting point for examining the appropriateness of conclusions drawn from assessments .

students in elementary and secondary education participate in a wide range of educational assessments .

assessments are an important tool at many levels — from making instructional decisions in the classroom to making policy decisions for a nation .

when used correctly , educational assessments contribute to the iterative process of teaching and learning and guide education policy decisions .

currently , a primary focus of educational assessment is tracking student academic achievement and growth in schools .

assessment is a critical component of accountability systems such as those required under title i - a of the esea .

at times , the results of these assessments are used to make high - stakes decisions that affect students , teachers , leas , and states .

it is therefore important to understand the purpose of educational assessments and to give consideration to the appropriateness of inferences based on assessment results .

