congress is currently considering reauthorization of the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) .

the house passed a reauthorization bill ( h.r .

2874 ) in november 2017 , and three bills have been introduced in the senate , but so far the nfip has received a series of short - term reauthorizations .

the debate over a longer reauthorization of the nfip is taking place during the 2018 hurricane season , and in the aftermath of the 2017 hurricane season , which produced widespread flooding and renewed concern about the structure of the nfip and its solvency in the face of catastrophic flood losses .

the nfip is authorized by the national flood insurance act of 1968 and was reauthorized until september 30 , 2017 , by the biggert - waters flood insurance reform act of 2012 ( bw - 12 ) .

congress amended elements of bw - 12 , but did not extend the nfip's authorization further in the homeowner flood insurance affordability act of 2014 ( hfiaa ) .

the nfip received a short - term reauthorization through december 8 , 2017 , a second short - term reauthorization through december 22 , 2017 , and a third short - term reauthorization through january 19 , 2018 .

the nfip lapsed between january 20 and january 22 , 2018 , and received a fourth short - term reauthorization until february 8 , 2018 .

the nfip lapsed for approximately eight hours during a brief government shutdown in the early morning of february 9 , 2018 , and was then reauthorized until march 23 , 2018 .

the nfip received a sixth reauthorization until july 31 , 2018 , and a seventh reauthorization until november 30 , 2018 .

the nfip is managed by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , through its subcomponent federal insurance and mitigation administration ( fima ) .

the general purpose of the nfip is both to offer primary flood insurance to properties with significant flood risk , and to reduce flood risk through the adoption of floodplain management standards .

a longer - term objective of the nfip is to reduce federal expenditure on disaster assistance after floods .

the nfip is discussed in more detail in crs report r44593 , introduction to the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

a brief overview of private flood insurance in the nfip is given in crs insight in10450 , private flood insurance and the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

the nfip is the primary source of flood insurance coverage for residential properties in the united states .

as of may 2018 , the nfip had over 5 million flood insurance policies providing over $1.28 trillion in coverage .

the program collects nearly $3.6 billion in annual premium revenue .

nationally , as of july 2018 , 22,322 communities in 56 states and jurisdictions participated in the nfip .

according to fema , the program saves the nation an estimated $1.87 billion annually in flood losses avoided because of the nfip's building and floodplain management regulations .

fema expects this amount to increase over time as additional new construction is built to increasingly better standards .

floods are the most common natural disaster in the united states , and in recent years all 50 states have experienced flood events .

u.s. flood losses in 2016 were about $17 billion , with losses from five individual flood - related events in 2016 exceeding $1 billion .

2017 was the most costly year for u.s. hurricane losses on record .

losses from the midwest flooding in april and may 2017 are estimated at $1.7 billion and losses from the california flooding in february 2017 at $1.5 billion .

the total for the 2017 hurricanes significantly exceeds the previous record of $214.8 billion ( cpi - adjusted ) , from the 2005 hurricane season .

total losses ( insured and uninsured ) for the 2017 hurricane season are estimated at a record $270.3 billion , with losses for hurricane harvey estimated at $127.5 billion , hurricane maria at $91.8 billion , and hurricane irma at $51.0 billion .

this report summarizes key insurance reform provisions in recent legislation and identifies key issues for congressional consideration as part of the possible reauthorization of the nfip .

it describes selected provisions in the bill to reauthorize the nfip passed by the house ( h.r .

2874 , the 21 st century flood reform act ) and the bills introduced in the senate that relate to the issues discussed in the report .

the provisions discussed in the report are listed in table 1 at the end of this report .

the statute for the nfip does not contain a comprehensive expiration , termination , or sunset provision for the whole of the program .

rather , the nfip has multiple different legal provisions that generally tie to the expiration of key components of the program .

unless reauthorized or amended by congress , the following will occur on november 30 , 2018: the authority to provide new flood insurance contracts will expire .

flood insurance contracts entered into before the expiration would continue until the end of their policy term of one year .

the authority for nfip to borrow funds from the treasury will be reduced from $30.425 billion to $1 billion .

other activities of the program would technically remain authorized following november 30 , 2018 , such as the issuance of flood mitigation assistance ( fma ) grants .

the house financial services committee completed markup on june 21 , 2017 , of seven bills to reform and reauthorize the nfip .

the 21 st century flood reform act ( h.r .

2874 ) came to the house floor under h.res .

616 , and included provisions from the six other bills .

h.r .

2874 passed the house on a vote of 237-189 on november 14 , 2017 .

h.r .

2874 would authorize the nfip until september 30 , 2022 .

three bills have been introduced in the senate that reauthorize the expiring provisions of the nfip: s. 1313 ( flood insurance affordability and sustainability act of 2017 ) , s. 1368 ( sustainable , affordable , fair , and efficient [safe] national flood insurance program reauthorization act of 2017 ) , and s. 1571 ( national flood insurance program reauthorization act of 2017 ) .

none of these bills have yet been considered by the committee of jurisdiction .

s. 1313 would authorize the nfip until september 30 , 2027 ; s. 1368 would authorize the nfip until september 30 , 2023 ; and s. 1571 would authorize the nfip until september 30 , 2023 .

the remainder of this report will summarize relevant background information and proposed changes to selected areas of the nfip in h.r .

2874 , s. 1313 , s. 1368 , and s. 1571 .

the report does not examine every provision in detail , but focuses on selected provisions that would introduce significant changes to the nfip , particularly those related to the issues identified by the government accountability office ( gao ) described below .

in a recent report , gao examined actions which congress and fema could take to reduce federal fiscal exposure and improve national resilience to floods , and recommended that congress should consider comprehensive reform covering six areas: ( 1 ) outstanding debt ; ( 2 ) premium rates ; ( 3 ) affordability ; ( 4 ) consumer participation ; ( 5 ) barriers to private sector involvement ; and ( 6 ) nfip flood resilience efforts .

this report will discuss the areas identified by gao as well as additional issues which congress may wish to consider .

as a public insurance program , the goals of the nfip were originally designed differently from the goals of private - sector companies .

as currently authorized , the nfip also encompasses social goals to provide flood insurance in flood - prone areas to property owners who otherwise would not be able to obtain it , and reduce government's cost after floods .

the nfip also engages in many "non - insurance" activities in the public interest: it disseminates flood risk information through flood maps , requires communities to adopt land use and building code standards in order to participate in the program , potentially reduces the need for other post - flood disaster aid , contributes to community resilience by providing a mechanism to fund rebuilding after a flood , and may protect lending institutions against mortgage defaults due to uninsured losses .

the benefits of such tasks are not directly measured in the nfip's financial results from underwriting flood insurance .

from the inception of the nfip , the program has been expected to achieve multiple objectives , some of which may conflict with one another to ensure reasonable insurance premiums for all ; to have risk - based premiums that would make people aware of and bear the cost of their floodplain location choices ; to secure widespread community participation in the nfip and substantial numbers of insurance policy purchases by property owners ; and to earn premium and fee income that , over time , covers claims paid and program expenses .

gao concluded that the sequence of actions taken by congress is important ; for example , requiring full - risk rates for all policyholders and expanding the mandatory purchase requirement would create affordability concerns which would warrant having an affordability assistance program already in place .

according to gao , when addressing barriers to private sector involvement , it would be important to protect nfip's flood resilience activities at the same time ; and addressing the outstanding debt would be best accompanied by premium rate reform to help reduce the likelihood of a recurrence of another unpayable debt buildup .

as congress considers a long - term reauthorization of the nfip , a central question may be who should bear the costs of floodplain occupancy in the future .

the nrc study on affordability concluded that the costs of floods can be borne in three possible ways , or in some combination of them .

the first is that individual policyholders ( whether nfip or private ) bear location cost in the form of insurance premiums paid and damages falling within policy deductible amounts .

the second is that the federal taxpayers bear floodplain location costs in several possible ways: if the federal government develops a premium assistance program , or makes up for nfip premium revenue shortfalls , or pays for pre - flood mitigation , or makes post - flood disaster assistance payments to individual households .

third , property owners and other floodplain or coastal zone inhabitants bear the costs for losses that are uninsured or otherwise uncompensated .

while there are many ways to finance flood risk , the majority of the cost will likely ultimately be allocated across these three stakeholder groups: policyholders ( the insured ) , government , and uninsured flood victims , requiring potentially difficult policy choices by congress .

