iraq's government declared military victory against the islamic state organization ( is , aka isis / isil ) in december 2017 , but insurgent attacks by remaining is fighters threaten iraqis as they shift their attention toward recovery and the country's political future .

security conditions have improved since the islamic state's control of territory was disrupted ( figure 1 and figure 2 ) , but is fighters are active in some areas of the country and security conditions are fluid .

meanwhile , daunting resettlement , reconstruction , and reform needs occupy citizens and leaders .

ethnic , religious , regi onal , and tribal identities remain politically relevant in iraq , as do partisanship , personal rivalries , economic disparities , and natural resource imbalances .

national legislative elections were held in may 2018 , but results were not certified until august , delaying the formal start of required steps to form the next government .

turnout was low relative to past national elections , and campaigning reflected issues stemming from the 2014-2017 conflict with the islamic state as well as preexisting internal disputes and governance challenges .

iraqi prime minister haider al abadi sought reelection , but his electoral list's third - place showing and lack of internal cohesion undermined his chances for a second term .

he is serving in a caretaker capacity as government - formation negotiations continue .

in september 2018 , a statement from the office of leading shia religious leader grand ayatollah ali al sistani called for political forces to choose a prime minister from beyond the ranks of current or former officials .

nevertheless , on october 2 , iraq's council of representatives chose former kurdistan regional government prime minister and former iraqi deputy prime minister barham salih as iraq's president .

salih , in turn , named former oil minister adel abd al mahdi as prime minister - designate and directed him to assemble a slate of cabinet officials for approval by the council of representatives ( cor ) .

paramilitary forces have grown stronger and more numerous since 2014 , and have yet to be fully integrated into national security institutions .

some figures associated with the popular mobilization forces ( pmf ) militias that were organized to fight the islamic state participated in the 2018 election campaign and won seats in the cor , including individuals with ties to iran .

since the ouster of saddam hussein in 2003 , iraq's shia arab majority has exercised new power in concert with the sunni arab and kurdish minorities .

despite ethnic and religious diversity and political differences , many iraqis advance similar demands for improved security , government effectiveness , and economic opportunity .

large , volatile protests in southern iraq during august and september 2018 highlighted some citizens' outrage with poor service delivery and corruption .

iraqi politicians have increasingly employed cross - sectarian political and economic narratives in an attempt to appeal to disaffected citizens , but identity - driven politics continue to influence developments across the country .

iraq's neighbors and other outsiders , including the united states , are pursuing their respective interests in the country , at times in competition .

the kurdistan region of northern iraq ( kri ) enjoys considerable administrative autonomy under the terms of iraq's 2005 constitution , and the kurdistan regional government ( krg ) held legislative elections on september 30 , 2018 .

the krg had held a controversial advisory referendum on independence in september 2017 , amplifying political tensions with the national government and prompting criticism from the trump administration and the united nations security council .

in october 2017 , the national government imposed a ban on international flights to and from the kri , and iraqi security forces moved to reassert security control of disputed areas that had been secured by kurdish forces after the islamic state's mid - 2014 advance .

much of the oil - rich governorate of kirkuk — long claimed by iraqi kurds — returned to national government control , and resulting controversies have riven kurdish politics .

iraqi and kurdish security forces remain deployed across from each other along contested lines of control while their respective leaders are engaged in negotiations over a host of sensitive issues .

internally displaced iraqis are returning home in greater numbers , but stabilization and reconstruction needs in areas liberated from the islamic state are extensive .

an estimated 1.9 million iraqis remain as internally displaced persons ( idps ) , and iraqi authorities have identified $88 billion in reconstruction needs over the next decade .

in general , u.s. engagement with iraqis since 2011 has sought to reinforce iraq's unifying tendencies and avoid divisive outcomes .

at the same time , successive u.s .

administrations have sought to keep u.s. involvement and investment minimal relative to the 2003-2011 era , pursuing u.s. interests through partnership with various entities in iraq and the development of those partners' capabilities — rather than through extensive deployment of u.s. military forces .

u.s. economic assistance bolsters iraq's ability to attract lending support and is aimed at improving the government's effectiveness and public financial management .

the united states is the leading provider of humanitarian assistance to iraq and also supports post - is stabilization activities across the country through grants to united nations agencies and other entities .

the trump administration has sustained a cooperative relationship with the iraqi government and has requested funding to support iraq's stabilization and continue security training for iraqi security forces .

the size and missions of the u.s. military presence in iraq has evolved as conditions on the ground have changed since 2017 and could change further if newly elected iraqi officials revise their requests for u.s. and other international assistance .

to date , the 115 th congress has appropriated funds to continue u.s. military operations against the islamic state and to provide security assistance , humanitarian relief , and foreign aid for iraq .

appropriations and authorization legislation enacted or under consideration for fy2019 would largely continue u.s. policies and programs on current terms .

for background on iraq and its relations with the united states , see crs report r45025 , iraq: background and u.s. policy .

as congress has considered the trump administration's requests for fy2019 foreign assistance and defense funding , iraqis have been engaged in competitive electioneering and government formation negotiations , while working to rebuild war - torn areas of their country .

the final fy2018 appropriations acts approved in march 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) made additional u.s. funding available for u.s. defense programs and contributions to immediate post - is stabilization efforts , while also renewing authorities for u.s. economic loan guarantees to iraq .

defense authorization ( p.l .

115-232 ) and appropriation ( division a of p.l .

115-245 ) legislation enacted for fy2019 extends congressional authorization for u.s. training , equipping , and advisory programs for iraqi security forces until december 2020 and makes $850 million in additional defense funding available for security assistance programs through fy2020 .

congress has limited the availability of these funds , authorizing the obligation or expenditure of no more than $450 million for iraq train and equip efforts until the administration submits required strategy and oversight reporting .

the fy2018 ndaa [section 1224 ( c ) of p.l .

115-91 ] modified the authority of the office of security cooperation at the u.s. embassy in iraq ( osc - i ) to widen the range of forces that the office may engage with professionalization and management assistance from ministry of defense and counter terrorism service personnel to include all "military and other security forces with a national security mission. .

the administration's fy2019 defense funding request outlines plans for u.s. training of iraqi border security forces , energy security forces , emergency response police units , counterterrorism service forces , and ranger units .

the fy2019 continuing appropriations act ( division c of p.l .

115-245 ) makes funds available for foreign operations programs in iraq on the terms and at the levels provided for in fy2018 appropriations through december 7 , 2018 .

foreign operations appropriations bills considered by the house and senate would appropriate fy2019 funds for iraq programs differently .

the house version of the fy2019 foreign operations appropriations bill ( h.r .

6385 ) would make funds available "to promote governance and security , and for stabilization programs , including in the kurdistan region of iraq …in accordance with the constitution of iraq. .

the accompanying report ( h.rept .

115-829 ) would direct $50 million in funds made available by the act for stabilization and recovery be used "for assistance to support the safe return of displaced religious and ethnic minorities to their communities in iraq. .

the senate version ( s. 3108 ) and accompanying report ( s.rept .

115-282 ) would make $429.4 million available in fy2019 funding across various accounts , including $250 million in foreign military financing assistance not requested by the trump administration .

the senate version also would direct that additional assistance monies in various accounts be made available for a $250 million relief and recovery fund ( rrf ) for areas liberated or at risk from the islamic state and other terrorist organizations , and the accompanying report contains a further direction that $100 million in funds appropriated for rrf purposes in prior acts be made available for programs in iraq .

the trump administration signaled that decisions about future u.s. assistance efforts will be shaped by the outcome of iraqi government formation talks .

in september 2018 , u.s. officials suggested they would like to see prevailing patterns of u.s. assistance continue , but an unnamed senior u.s. official also said that the administration is prepared to reconsider u.s. support to iraq if individuals perceived to be close to or controlled by iran assume positions of authority in iraq's new government .

legislation enacted and under consideration in the second session of the 115 th congress would require annual reporting on iraqi entities and individuals receiving iranian support and would codify authorities currently available to the president under executive order to place sanctions on individuals threatening the security or stability of iraq ( see " the united states and iran in iraq " below ) .

negotiations among iraqi factions following the may 2018 election have not fully resolved outstanding questions about the future of u.s. - iraqi relations .

prime minister abadi , with whom the u.s. government worked closely , could not translate his list's third - place finish into a mandate for a second term .

his designated successor , prime minister - designate adel abd al mahdi served in abadi's government and is an individual with whom u.s. officials have worked positively in the past .

yet , the nature and durability of the political coalition arrangements supporting his leadership are unclear , and he lacks a strong personal electoral mandate .

similarly , iraqi president barham salih is familiar to u.s. officials as a leading and friendly figure among iraqi kurds , but his election comes at time of significant political differences among kurds and amid strained relations between kurds and the national government .

there is little public indication at present that iraqi authorities intend to request that the united states dramatically alter its assistance approach to or end its military presence in iraq , including with regard to the kurdistan region .

however , the united states could face countervailing requests from its various iraqi partners in the event that anti - u.s. political forces emerge more empowered from remaining government formation steps or through the new government's policies .

it remains possible that the national government could more strictly assert its sovereign prerogatives with regard to the presence of foreign military forces and foreign assistance to sub - state entities , and / or that krg representatives could seek expanded or more direct foreign support .

some iraqi groups , such as the shia militant organization kata'ib hezbollah , remain vocally critical of the remaining u.s. and coalition military presence in the country and argue that the defeat of the islamic state's main forces means that u.s. and other foreign forces should depart .

these and similar groups also accuse the united states of seeking to undermine the popular mobilization forces or otherwise subordinate iraq to u.s. preferences .

most mainstream iraqi political movements or leaders did not use the u.s. military presence as a major wedge issue in the run - up to or aftermath of the may 2018 election and have not directly called for an end to security partnership with the united states .

members of congress and u.s. officials face difficulties in developing policy options that can secure u.s. interests on specific issues without provoking levels of opposition from iraqi constituencies that may jeopardize wider u.s. goals .

debates over u.s. military support to iraqi national forces and sub - state actors in the fight against the islamic state illustrated this dynamic , with some u.s. proposals for the provision of aid to all capable iraqi forces facing criticism from iraqi groups suspicious of u.s. intentions or fearful that u.s. assistance could empower their domestic rivals .

u.s. aid to the kurds to date has been provided with the approval of the baghdad government , though some members have advocated for assistance to be provided directly to the krg .

u.s. assistance to baghdad is provided on the understanding that u.s. equipment will be responsibly used by its intended recipients , and some members have expressed concerns about the use of u.s. - origin defense equipment by actors or in ways that congress has not intended , including a now - resolved case involving the possession and use of u.s. - origin tanks by elements of the popular mobilization forces .

the strained relationship between national government and kurdish forces along the disputed territories and the future of the popular mobilization forces implicate these issues directly and may remain relevant to debates over the continuation of prevailing patterns of u.s. assistance .

once negotiations over cabinet positions are completed and a new government is seated , debate over the 2019 budget , reform of the water and electricity sectors , employment initiatives , and national security issues are expected to define the political agenda in iraq .

it seems reasonable to expect that iraqis will continue to assess and respond to u.s. initiatives ( and those of other outsiders ) primarily through the lenses of their own domestic political rivalries , anxieties , and agendas .

reconciling u.s. preferences and interests with iraq's evolving politics and security conditions may thus require continued creativity , flexibility , and patience .

