as congress continues to deliberate whether and how to address climate change , a key question has been the degree to which humans and natural factors have influenced observed global climate change .

members of congress sometimes stress that policies or actions "must be based on sound science. .

officials in the trump administration have expressed uncertainty about the human influence , and some have called for public debate on the topic .

to help inform policymaking , researchers and major scientific assessment processes have analyzed the attribution of observed climate change to various possible causes .

scientific assessments of both climate change and the extent to which humans have influenced it have varied in expressed confidence over time but have achieved greater scientific consensus .

the latest major u.s. assessment , the climate science special report ( cssr ) , was released in october 2017 by the u.s .

global change research program ( usgcrp ) .

it stated it is extremely likely [ > 95% likelihood] that human influence has been the dominant cause of the observed warming since the mid - 20 th century .

for the warming over the last century , there is no convincing alternative explanation supported by the extent of the observational evidence .

this crs report provides context for the cssr's statement by tracing the evolution of scientific understanding and confidence regarding the drivers of recent global climate change .

climate change science can be traced back to the early 1800s .

through the 20 th century , academic institutions , federal and state agencies , foreign governments , and other entities invested significant time and billions of dollars in climate research .

this investment has led to substantial advances in empirical observations , atmospheric and ocean physics and chemistry , climate and economic simulation models , statistical methods , and other achievements .

as a result , scientists have increased their confidence in their detection and understanding of climate change and attribution of observed changes to their causes .

there is now high scientific confidence that the global climate is warming , primarily as a result of increased human - related greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions and other activities .

this confidence has evolved from nearly two centuries of research and assessments .

this report describes a chronology ( in the appendix ) of 200 years of major scientific statements , selected to represent views at each time , regarding the human and natural contributions to global climate change .

the chronology demonstrates how scientific views and confidence in those views evolved over time .

that ghgs , including carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) , water vapor , and other gases , warm the earth's climate is not a recent concept .

the greenhouse effect , as it is sometimes called , was deduced as early as 1827 with relatively little dispute since the 19 th century among scientists about the role of ghgs: some level of ghgs in the atmosphere is necessary for maintaining a temperate climate on earth .

instead , the debate that unfolded involved whether the climate had been warming overall and , if so , to what the changes may be attributable ( such as industrial releases of ghgs , volcanoes , solar activity , or other natural variations ) .

 ( see text box , human and natural influences on climate . ) .

as indicated by the information presented in table a - 1 , scientists have noted , dating back to early in the 19 th century , both human and natural factors potentially influencing climate .

as one scholar observed , "by 1900 , most of the chief theories of climate change had been proposed , if not yet fully explored. .

there were a number of contending theories — including changes in solar energy , the earth's orbital geometry , volcanoes , the geography of continents , and changes in ghgs — in the late 1800s as the quotations in table a - 1 indicate .

well into the 1900s , the state of the science relating co 2 concentrations in the atmosphere to the earth's temperature was primarily theoretical inference .

scientists debated whether increases in co 2 in the atmosphere due to increasing emissions from fossil fuels would lead to further warming .

since then , a number of factors — including better measurement technologies ; development of physics - and empirically based simulation models ; more research , review , and revision ; and longer series of observations — have improved the foundations of climate science .

as a result , scientists have improved quantification of the relationships between observed conditions: 1 .

natural and human - related ghg emissions ( the latter mostly from fossil - fuel - based energy ) to the atmosphere ; 2 .

increasing ghg concentrations in the atmosphere and changes in other influences on climate ( eg , changes in solar and volcanic activity ) ; 3 .

rising global average surface temperature ; and 4 .

other observed changes in the spatial and temporal patterns of climate .

the magnitudes of factors , and therefore their influences on climate , vary over time .

with acceleration of human population growth and industrialization since the 19 th century , the factors related to human activities have increased relative to those of natural processes .

increased scientific capacity has made climate change increasingly detectable and attributable to the varying influences over the past two centuries .

in the late 1930s , guy callendar compiled existing data on atmospheric co 2 concentrations and regional temperatures .

through imprecise calculations , he showed a correlation between observed increases in both over time .

some scientists considered the correlation merely coincidence .

callendar's calculations provided early quantitative indications of a climate warming as a result of human activity .

at the time , however , the relative contribution of human activity compared with natural factors could not be determined .

david keeling later established more consistent and repeatable measurements of atmospheric co 2 in the 1950s .

keeling's precise measurements provided strong evidence of a connection between increasing human - related co 2 emissions and the increasing co 2 concentrations in the atmosphere .

the measurements established a quantitative benchmark for later studies examining the linkage between increasing co 2 concentrations and rising global temperatures .

keeling's concentration data facilitated additional research on the global carbon cycle , the oceans , and the effects of human activities .

in the middle of the 20 th century , scientists ( and many in the public ) recognized that a general warming of the climate had occurred ( table a - 1 ) .

this was followed by a 30-year period of relatively flat or decreasing global average temperatures from around 1946 to 1977 ( figure 1 ) .

arguably , the apparent change in trajectory heightened scientific uncertainty about the direction of future climate changes and any human influence on them .

it coincided with concerns about "global dimming," at least in part attributed to sulfur and particulate pollution , which increased rapidly during that period before leveling off around 1980 .

current assessments indicate that the mid - 20 th century warming hiatus may have been due to a combination of human ( ghg , pollution ) and natural influences ( solar variability , volcanoes ) .

as temperatures began to rise again in the late 1970s , authoritative scientific assessments performed by various governmental and nongovernmental institutions , supported by an expanding body of peer - reviewed published research , pointed to an emerging consensus regarding a probable human contribution to climate change , primarily due to increasing ghg emissions .

the relative role of human versus natural influences became more clear in the early 2000s .

longer series of improved observations ( eg , solar radiation , clouds , land cover change ) , statistical methods , and computational models enabled more robust analyses and comparisons of research methods and results .

major , collaborative , authoritative assessments — u.s .

and international — were established to compile , debate , and consider the strengths or weaknesses of scientific analysis regarding climate change in order to inform policymakers .

table a - 2 contains the relevant conclusions regarding human and natural influences on climate change from the major assessments conducted , with those of nas beginning in 1977 , ipcc beginning in 1990 , and the usgcrp beginning in 2001 .

these inclusive assessments underpinned growing scientific confidence that human activities were likely the major cause of the observed global warming since the mid - 20 th century .

many factors have contributed to increased scientific confidence in quantifying the human and natural contributions to climate change .

longer records of observational data have provided more evidence of the concordance between higher ghg levels and temperature increases .

satellites have provided important observations of temperatures ; atmospheric pollution ; and land , snow , and ice cover beginning in the late 1970s .

additionally , improved scientific understanding of atmospheric physics , together with vastly more powerful computers , has led to climate models that better simulate atmospheric and oceanic conditions .

uncertainties in the models remain on how they simulate the effects of clouds , for example , and the model simulations are at smaller scales of space and time .

despite these uncertainties , current climate scientific assessment states high confidence ( extremely likely ) that human influence is the dominant cause of the observed warming over the past half - century .

while the near consensus has developed relatively recently , it has evolved based on increasing confidence through research on scientific concepts established as early as 200 years ago .

future climate outcomes depend on many additional factors , such as the future rates and character of socio - economic development and efforts to curtail the growth of ghg emissions .

this appendix contains bibliographic references and quotations regarding scientific understanding of global climate change and the influence of co 2 , other ghgs , and natural factors on observed and prospective global climate .

because the capacities and methods of science have changed markedly over the past 200 years , the references appear in two tables representing selected scientific literature and national or international scientific assessments .

table a - 1 presents representative statements excerpted from key scientific literature from 1827 to 1987 regarding human - related and other contributions to climate change .

sources include selected , widely cited academic papers , government reports , and nas reports .

the table's selections largely precede the establishment of broadly inclusive scientific assessments to compile and assess the weight of scientific evidence .

for the period up to 1987 , crs selected key academic scientific papers and reports that were influential to scientific contemporaries during and after their respective times .

scientific assessments began in the mid - 20 th century to more systematically and inclusively evaluate the full body of scientific literature on specific topics .

table a - 2 compiles the conclusions pertinent to this report from major u.s. and international scientific assessments , beginning in 1977 , that address the human contribution to global climate change .

the assessments have been produced by the usgcrp , nas , and ipcc .

revise .

