the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , the federal government's lead public health agency , has identified teen pregnancy as a major public health issue because of its high cost for families of teenage parents and society more broadly .

in addition , teen pregnancy disproportionately affects certain minority communities and selected states and territories .

the teen birth rate has been in decline ; however , given the consequences associated with teen births , congress has continued to authorize , and the executive branch has administered , programs to delay sexual activity and prevent pregnancies among teenagers .

four current programs have an exclusive focus on teenage pregnancy prevention education: the teen pregnancy prevention ( tpp ) program , which is authorized under appropriations law ; the personal responsibility education program ( prep ) , which is authorized under title v of the social security act ; the sexual risk avoidance education program , which is authorized under title v of the social security act ( and formerly known as the title v abstinence education grant program ) ; and the sexual risk avoidance education program , which is authorized under appropriations law .

this report will refer to the latter two programs as the title v sexual risk avoidance education program and the sexual risk avoidance education program , respectively , to avoid confusion .

the four programs are administered by the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

this report begins with a brief discussion of recent developments in funding for the four teen pregnancy prevention programs .

it then provides background on the role of congress and the executive branch in preventing teen pregnancy .

the remainder of the report focuses on the four programs , examining the types of grants they provide as well as related funding , requirements , and research activities .

table a - 1 in appendix a summarizes key programmatic information and allows for comparisons across the programs .

table a - 2 in appendix a describes the changes made by the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( bba of 2018 , p.l .

115-123 ) , enacted on february 9 , 2018 , to section 510 of the social security act .

the bba of 2018 renamed the title v abstinence education grant program as the title v sexual risk avoidance education program and made other programmatic changes , retroactively effective october 1 , 2017 .

appendix b includes a table that indicates whether the states and territories , or entities within those jurisdictions , receive funding under each of the four programs .

this report accompanies crs report r45184 , teen birth trends: in brief .

the federal government has long played a role in educating teens and the public generally about preventing pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections ( stis ) .

this has involved public awareness campaigns ; providing public health services , including information and access to contraceptives ; publishing materials about stis ; and funding organizations to provide sexual education .

the federal approach to teen pregnancy prevention has often reflected prevailing public views about sexuality and the role that the federal government should play in the private lives of its citizens .

since the early 1980s , the federal government has supported programs that have an exclusive focus on preventing teen pregnancy .

discussion about these programs has often focused on the type of approaches to pregnancy prevention they should take .

some policymakers and other stakeholders in the teen pregnancy prevention field have contended that teens should not engage in sex before marriage to avoid unplanned pregnancies and protect against stis .

further , they support the idea that teenagers need to hear a single , unambiguous message that sex outside of marriage is harmful to their physical and emotional health .

this approach is sometimes referred to as "abstinence - only," and more recently as "sexual risk avoidance. .

other stakeholders have prioritized an approach that provides broad information to teenagers to help them make informed decisions about whether to engage in sex , and about using contraceptives if they do .

they contend that such an approach allows young people to make choices regarding abstinence , gives them the information they need to set relationship limits and resist peer pressure , and provides them with information on the use of contraceptives and the prevention of stis .

congress has authorized and provided funding for programs that take one or both of these approaches to preventing teen pregnancy .

of the current programs , the title v sexual risk avoidance education and the sexual risk avoidance education programs focus exclusively on abstaining from premarital sex .

the prep program requires most grantees to place "substantial emphasis on both abstinence and contraception for the prevention of pregnancy among youth and sexually transmitted infections. .

the tpp program does not necessarily focus on any one approach , and some grantees use multiple program models to meet the various needs of youth .

for example , a tpp program grantee in south carolina uses an evidence - based model that provides abstinence - only education and other evidence - based models that have broader approaches .

the general public appears to support educating teenagers about both abstinence and contraception .

a nationally representative telephone survey conducted in 2017 for power to decide , an organization focused on preventing unplanned pregnancy , found that about 8 out of 10 adults believe teens should receive more information about abstinence and birth control and protection from sexually transmitted infections .

the consolidated appropriations act , fy2010 ( p.l .

111-117 ) established and provided annual funding for the teen pregnancy prevention ( tpp ) program .

the tpp program has been funded via the appropriations process in subsequent years , including through fy2018 .

funding has ranged from approximately $98 million to $110 million annually .

the program primarily provides funds to public and private entities for evidence - based or promising programs that reduce teen pregnancy , including those that focus on sexual risk avoidance and / or use of contraceptives .

however , hhs is in the process of discontinuing funding for the current cohort of tpp program grantees .

see "recent developments" at the beginning of this report for further detail about the status of current funding .

generally , the appropriations laws have specified that no more than 10% of tpp funding is for training and technical assistance , outreach , and other program support .

of the remaining amount , the appropriations laws have further stated the following: 75% is for grants to replicate programs that have been proven through rigorous evaluation to be effective in reducing teenage pregnancy , behavioral factors underlying teen pregnancy , or other related risk factors .

hhs refers to these as "tier 1" grants .

25% is for research and demonstration grants to develop , replicate , and refine additional models and innovative strategies for reducing teenage pregnancy .

hhs refers to these as "tier 2" grants .

appropriation laws generally have not included additional guidance on how the program is to be administered .

hhs has established eligibility and other requirements via funding announcements and other publications .

funding recipients must ensure they provide "age appropriate" and "medically accurate" information to their teen clients , as these terms have been defined in program funding announcements .

the hhs office of adolescent health ( oah ) , which administers the program , must approve the materials used by grantees for this purpose .

a range of public and private entities have been eligible to apply for tpp funding .

such entities include nonprofit and for - profit organizations , universities and colleges , faith - and community - based organizations , hospitals , and research institutions , among other entities .

prep is a broad approach to teen pregnancy prevention that seeks to educate adolescents ages 10 through 19 and pregnant and parenting youth under age 21 on both abstinence and contraceptives to prevent pregnancy and stis .

the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 ) established prep , appropriating $75 million annually in mandatory spending for fy2010 through fy2014 .

prep authorization has been extended three times ( p.l .

113-93 , p.l .

114-10 , and p.l .

115-123 ) with mandatory funding of $75 million for each of fy2015 through fy2019 .

prep funds states and other entities to carry out sexual education programs that places "substantial emphasis on both abstinence and contraception. .

recipients of prep funds must fulfill requirements outlined in the law , including that they must implement programs that provide youth with information on at least three of six specified adulthood preparation subjects ( healthy relationships , adolescent development , financial literacy , parent - child communication , educational and career success , and healthy life skills ) ; are "medically - accurate and complete" ; include activities to educate youth who are sexually active regarding responsible sexual behavior with respect to both abstinence and the use of contraception ; and provide age - appropriate information and activities , while ensuring these are delivered in the most appropriate cultural context for the individuals served in the program .

as with the tpp program , prep uses a tier - evidence approach .

some grantees replicate evidence - based effective programs that have been proven to delay sexual activity , increase condom or contraceptive use for sexually active youth , or reduce pregnancy among youth .

other grantees substantially incorporate elements of effective programs that have been proven to change behavior .

prep includes four types of grants: ( 1 ) state prep grants , ( 2 ) competitive prep grants , ( 3 ) tribal prep , and ( 4 ) personal responsibility education innovative strategies ( preis ) .

most of the prep appropriation is allocated to states and territories via the state prep grant .

funding for states and territories that did not apply for this grant is available to local entities under competitive prep grants .

the law specifies certain levels of funding for the other components , including $10 million for the preis grants .

after this set - aside , hhs must reserve 5% for grants to indian tribes and tribal organizations ( tribal prep ) and 10% for training , technical assistance , and evaluation .

total fy2017 funding for the four grants was $63.7 million ( the most recent information available ) .

of this amount , $40.5 million was for state prep , $10.3 million was for competitive prep , $3.3 million was for tribal prep , and $9.6 million was for preis .

the 1996 welfare reform law ( p.l .

104-193 ) established the "separate program for abstinence education" under section 510 in title v of the social security act .

the program had long been known as the title v abstinence education grant program .

the bba of 2018 ( p.l .

115-123 ) replaced section 510 , thereby changing the name of the program to the sexual risk avoidance education program ; revising the program purpose areas ; and adding new requirements on financial allotments , educational elements , research and data , and evaluation .

table a - 2 in appendix a includes a side - by - side comparison of the statutory changes made by the bba , which went into effect on october 1 , 2017 .

the overall purpose of the program remains essentially the same , which is to provide youth ages 10 through 19 with education that focuses on refraining from sexual activity before marriage .

the title v sexual risk avoidance education program is funded through mandatory spending .

p.l .

104-193 provided $50 million per year for five years ( fy1998-fy2002 ) .

the program was subsequently funded through june 30 , 2009 , by various legislative extensions .

the aca reauthorized the program , providing $50 million for each of fy2010 through fy2014 .

three subsequent laws extended the program: the protecting access to medicare act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-93 ) , which provided $50 million in fy2015 ; the medicare access and chip reauthorization act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-10 ) , which provided $75 million per year for fy2016 and fy2017 ; and the bba of 2018 , which provides $75 million for each of fy2018 and fy2019 .

states are eligible to request mandatory title v sexual risk avoidance education funds for fy2018 and fy2019 if they submit an application for maternal and child health ( mch ) block grant funds for those same fiscal years .

the mch block grant , authorized under title v of the social security act , is a flexible source of funds that states use to support maternal and child health programs .

title v sexual risk avoidance education funds are allocated to each jurisdiction based on two factors: ( 1 ) the amount provided to the program minus any reservations ( up to 20% ) made by hhs for administering it , and ( 2 ) states' relative proportion of low - income children nationally .

the law does not require states to provide a match .

hhs may competitively award fy2018 and fy2019 funds to one or more entities within a state / territory that had not previously applied for its share of funding .

the entity or entities would receive the amount that would have been otherwise allotted to that state .

 ( the law does not define the entities that would be eligible. ) .

the hhs secretary is required to publish a notice to solicit grant applications for the remaining competitive funds .

the solicitation must to be published within 30 days after the deadline for states to apply for mch services block grant funds .

eligible states are required to apply for the title v sexual risk avoidance education funds no later than 120 days after the deadline closed for states to apply for mch services block grant funds .

the 50 states , the district of columbia , and the territories ( puerto rico , u.s. virgin islands , guam , american samoa , commonwealth of the northern mariana islands , federated states of micronesia , the republic of the marshall islands , and republic of palau ) are eligible to apply .

in fy2017 , 37 states and two territories ( puerto rico and the federated states of micronesia ) applied for and received funding ( under the title v abstinence education grant program ) .

states / territories or other entities are required to implement sexual risk avoidance education that is medically accurate and complete , age - appropriate , and based on adolescent learning and developmental theories for the age group receiving the education .

the education must also be culturally appropriate , recognizing the experiences of youth from diverse communities , backgrounds , and situations .

as described in the previous text box , sexual risk avoidance education must address six topics .

if sexual risk avoidance education includes any information about contraception , such information must be medically accurate and ensure that students understand that contraception reduces physical risk but does not eliminate risk .

in addition , sexual risk avoidance education may not include demonstration , simulations , or distribution of such contraceptive devices .

a state or other entity that receives title v sexual risk avoidance education funding must , as specified by the hhs secretary , collect information on the programs and activities funded through their allotments and submit reports to hhs on the data collected from such programs and activities .

under the title v abstinence education grant program , hhs has required all jurisdictions to measure the success of their abstinence programs through at least two outcome measures , one of which must be abstinence as a means for preventing teen pregnancy , births , and / or stis .

additionally , hhs has encouraged jurisdictions to identify programs that have demonstrated effectiveness in delaying the initiation of sexual activity or promoting abstinence from sexual activity .

hhs has directed grantees to the tpp evidence review , though has not require grantees to use the models identified in the review .

as noted , federal funding has supported abstinence - only education through the community - based abstinence education program ( fy2001 through fy2009 ) and the competitive abstinence - only program ( fy2012 through fy2015 ) .

in each of fy2016 through fy2018 , annual omnibus appropriations laws provided funding to support abstinence - only education through the sexual risk avoidance education program .

funding was $5 million in fy2016 , $15 million in fy2017 , and $25 million in fy2018 .

the appropriations laws have specified that sexual risk avoidance education grants are to be awarded by hhs on a competitive basis ; use medically accurate information ; "implement an evidence - based approach integrating research findings with practical implementation that aligns with the needs and desired outcomes for the intended audience ; " and "teach the benefits associated with self - regulation , success sequencing for poverty prevention , healthy relationships , goal setting , and resisting sexual coercion , dating violence , and other youth risk behaviors such as underage drinking or illicit drug use without normalizing teen sexual activity. .

the appropriations law provided that up to 10% of the funding for sexual risk avoidance can be made available for technical assistance and administrative costs .

through the grant application process for the sexual risk avoidance education program , hhs has identified multiple types of entities that are eligible for funding , including states , territories , and localities ( county , city , township , special districts ) ; school districts ; public and state - controlled institutions of higher education ; federally recognized tribal governments ; native american tribal organizations ; public and indian housing authorities ; nonprofit organizations other than institutions of higher education ; private institutions of higher education ; small business ; and for - profit organizations other than small businesses .

acf awarded 10 grants in fy2015 , 21 grants in fy2016 , and 27 grants in fy2017 .

as specified in the funding announcement , grantees must incorporate an evidence - based program and / or effective strategies that have demonstrated impacts on delaying the initiation of sexual activity .

hhs advises sexual risk avoidance education grantees to review evidence - based program models that are included as part of the tpp evidence review .

in addition , grantees must link program participants to services with community agencies that support the health , safety , and well - being of participants .

appropriations law and program funding announcements do not direct hhs or grantees to carry out evaluation activities .

hhs tracks sexual risk avoidance education grantee performance — related to youth served , fidelity to curriculum , implementation , outcome measures , and community data — for monitoring purposes , not to measure the impacts of the program .

appendix a .

federal teen pregnancy prevention programs appendix b. grantees funded under the federal teen pregnancy prevention programs , by stat .

