members of congress and administrations have periodically considered reorganizing the federal government's trade and development functions to advance various u.s. policy objectives .

in the 115 th congress , these issues have come to the fore in the context of development finance .

"development finance" is a term commonly used to describe government - backed financing to support private sector capital investments in developing and emerging economies .

it can be viewed on a continuum of public and private support , situated between pure government support through grants and concessional loans and pure commercial financing at market - rate terms .

development finance institutions ( dfis ) are specialized entities that supply such finance .

in the united states , the primary provider of development finance is the overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) , but other agencies , such as the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , also provide development finance .

president trump renewed the debate over the future of u.s. development finance at the asia - pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) ceo summit in danang , vietnam in november 2017 , where he announced that the united states is committed "to reforming our development finance institutions so that they better incentivize private sector investment in your economies and provide strong alternatives to state - directed initiatives that come with many strings attached. .

the trump administration's national security strategy , released in december 2017 , identified modernizing u.s. development finance tools as a priority to advance u.s. global influence .

it noted that , "[w]ith these changes , the united states will not be left behind as other states use investment and project finance to extend their influence. .

competition for influence with china , which is a major supplier of development finance , especially appears to be a prominent driver of the administration's interest in development finance reform .

moreover , potential reorganization of the executive branch has been a broader interest of the trump administration .

the president's fy2019 budget proposed the consolidation of opic and other agency development finance functions , specifically noting the development credit authority ( dca ) of usaid , into a new u.s. development finance agency to advance a number of u.s. policy objectives .

in february 2018 , two proposed versions of the better utilization of investments leading to development ( build ) act , h.r .

5105 in the house and s. 2463 in the senate , were introduced on a bipartisan , bicameral basis to create a new u.s. international development finance corporation ( idfc ) .

both bills would consolidate all of opic's functions and the development credit authority ( dca ) , enterprise funds , and development finance technical support functions of usaid .

a major difference between the two bills , as introduced , was that s. 2463 h.r .

5105 would authorize the new dfi for seven years , while would authorize it until september 30 , 2038 .

however , the house - passed ( july 17 , 2018 ; h.rept .

115-814 ) and senate committee - reported ( june 27 , 2018 ) versions bridge some differences , including both now providing a seven - year authorization .

the trump administration issued a statement strongly supporting the build act , noting that it was broadly consistent with the administration's goals and fy2019 budget proposal .

at the same time , the administration called for some modifications to the bills to enhance the proposed dfi's alignment with national interests and institutional linkages , as well as to address risk management and other concerns .

stakeholders differ in their views of particular aspects of the dfi proposal and certain issues remain open questions .

in june 2018 , the white house published a government - wide reorganization plan .

it included a proposal to consolidate the u.s. government's existing development finance tools , citing opic and dca as examples .

the administration appears to view the build act as the primary vehicle for implementing its development finance consolidation proposal .

while some executive branch reorganizations can happen administratively , the changes contemplated here would likely require changes to u.s. law .

this section discusses issues raised by the potential reorganization of u.s. government development finance functions .

while many of the issues draw from the administration's development finance reform proposal and the build act bills , the discussion has applicability to other proposals congress may consider for development finance reorganization .

while congress has demonstrated bipartisan , bicameral support for moving forward with development finance reorganization , the current proposals present congress with a number of issues in terms of structuring the proposed new dfi and the implications of reorganization .

development finance is a cross - cutting issue implicating u.s. interests in terms of foreign policy , national security , economic interests , and international investment .

combining public support with private sector capital , development finance also intersects with a range of stakeholder interests and any reorganization may raise questions about how to balance various policy goals .

thus , consideration of the build act or any other legislation introduced to reorganize federal development finance functions may be an active area of debate for congress .

