unauthorized childhood arrivals is a general term used to describe foreign nationals who as children were brought to live in the united states by their parents or other adults .

sometimes referred to as dreamers , they represent a subset of the larger unauthorized alien population in the united states .

many observers view them more sympathetically than other unauthorized aliens because they do not consider them responsible for their unlawful status , and they support establishing a process for them to obtain legal immigration status .

others , however , argue that unauthorized childhood arrivals should not be afforded any special treatment under the immigration system .

bills on unauthorized childhood arrivals have been introduced in the house and the senate since the 107 th congress .

legislative activity in the 115 th congress comes in response to a decision announced by the trump administration on september 5 , 2017 , to terminate the deferred action for childhood arrivals ( daca ) policy established by the obama administration in 2012 .

under the daca policy , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) granted deferred action to certain individuals without lawful immigration status who met a set of requirements , including initially entering the united states before age 16 , continuously residing in the country since june 15 , 2007 , and being under age 31 as of june 15 , 2012 ( i.e. , having a birthdate after june 15 , 1981 ) .

daca applicants also had to meet educational requirements ( i.e. , enrolled in school , completed high school , or obtained a general education development ( ged ) certificate ) or military requirements ( i.e. , honorably discharged from the u.s. armed forces ) , and were subject to specified criminal and security - related ineligibilities .

individuals granted deferred action under the daca policy received protection against removal from the united states and could also receive work authorization .

initial daca grants were for two years and could be renewed in two - year increments .

under the trump administration's daca phase - out plan , as presented by dhs in september 2017 , a daca beneficiary whose grant of deferred action was due to expire on or before march 5 , 2018 , could submit a renewal request .

a beneficiary whose daca grant was due to expire after march 5 , 2018 , could not request a renewal and , thus , would lose daca protection on the grant's expiration date .

as of the date of this report , however , dhs continues to process requests to renew daca , in accordance with federal court orders .

according to data published by dhs's u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) in february 2018 , the agency had approved a cumulative total of 807,447 initial daca requests through january 31 , 2018 .

as of that same date , there were approximately 682,750 active daca recipients .

in january 2018 , the white house produced a "legislative framework" for immigration reform .

as part of that framework , the trump administration called on congress to "provide legal status for daca recipients and other daca - eligible illegal immigrants. .

against this backdrop , the senate considered several immigration proposals containing provisions on unauthorized childhood arrivals in february 2018 .

the house has not considered legislation on unauthorized childhood arrivals in the 115 th congress as of the date of this report .

legislative proposals on unauthorized childhood arrivals in the 115 th congress build on related legislation introduced and considered in earlier congresses .

measures receiving legislative action prior to the 115 th congress would have enabled eligible unauthorized childhood arrivals to become u.s. lawful permanent residents ( lprs ) .

under most of these proposals , individuals meeting an initial set of criteria would have been granted some type of conditional or transitional legal status and then , after meeting additional criteria , would have been granted full - fledged lpr status .

in the past , legislation proposing such a pathway to lpr status for unauthorized childhood arrivals was often referred to as the dream act , whether or not a particular measure carried the bill title associated with that acronym ( i.e. , the development , relief , and education for alien minors act ) .

congressional action to grant lpr status to certain unauthorized childhood arrivals dates to the early 2000s .

the senate judiciary committee reported different dream act bills in the 107 th congress ( s. 1291 ) and the 108 th congress ( s. 1545 ) .

neither bill saw further action .

since then , legislative proposals on unauthorized childhood arrivals have been introduced as both stand - alone bills and parts of larger immigration reform bills .

while some of these measures have seen legislative action , none have been enacted .

in the 109 th congress , the senate passed a comprehensive immigration reform bill with a dream act title ( s. 2611 ) ; the house did not consider that bill .

in the 110 th congress , there were unsuccessful efforts in the senate to invoke cloture on a comprehensive immigration reform proposal that included a dream act title ( s. 1639 ) and to invoke cloture on a motion to proceed to a stand - alone dream act bill ( s. 2205 ) .

more recently , the house approved dream act language as part of an unrelated bill in the 111 th congress ( h.r .

5281 ) ; the senate rejected a motion to invoke cloture on a motion to agree to the house - passed dream act amendment .

in the 113 th congress , the senate passed a comprehensive immigration reform bill with dream act provisions ( s. 744 ) ; the house did not consider that bill .

a number of bills have been introduced in the 115 th congress to provide immigration relief to unauthorized childhood arrivals .

some of these measures would provide a pathway to lpr status , like the bills considered in past congresses , while others would provide daca - like temporary protection from removal and employment authorization .

in february 2018 , the senate considered three proposals on unauthorized childhood arrivals on the senate floor .

all three included a pathway to lpr status for successful applicants , although the particular provisions in the proposals differed .

the discussion in this section is limited to provisions on unauthorized childhood arrivals in the relevant measures .

it does not address any other provisions in these measures .

each proposal on unauthorized childhood arrivals considered on the senate floor in february 2018 would have established a pathway to lpr status for eligible beneficiaries .

at the same time , there were significant differences among the proposals with respect to the eligible population , the legalization process and timeline , and the implications for the parents of beneficiaries .

in addition , the proposals were parts of larger measures that addressed other components of the immigration system in different ways .

it remains to be seen whether the 115 th congress will take up other immigration measures with provisions on unauthorized childhood arrivals along the same lines as the senate amendments or opt to consider alternative approaches .

