congressional oversight of the intelligence community ( ic ) enables members to gain insight into and offer advice on programs and activities that can significantly affect or influence u.s. foreign policy .

this in brief responds to congress's ongoing interest in oversight of covert action and clandestine activities in particular .

the distinction between military and intelligence activities described as covert and clandestine can be confusing .

what agencies are authorized to conduct covert action and clandestine activities ? .

what are their legal authorities for doing so ? .

which military terms describe activities that might seem similar but are distinct from covert action ? .

prior to 1974 , no statute existed that enabled congress to conduct oversight of the intelligence community .

congress exercised what some have described as "benign neglect" of intelligence .

in earlier instances , when it could have exercised greater oversight — such as over the cia's orchestration of the 1953 coup in iran — congress trusted that the executive branch and intelligence community were acting in accordance with the law .

congress also did not question whether particular covert actions or other sensitive intelligence activities were viable as a means of supporting u.s. national security .

in the 1970s , controversy over public disclosure of cia's covert action programs in southeast asia and the agency's domestic surveillance of the antiwar movement spurred congress to become more involved in intelligence oversight .

in 1974 , the hughes - ryan amendment of the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( §32 of p.l .

93-559 ) provided the first statutory basis for congressional oversight and notification to congress of covert action operations .

investigations by two congressional committees — in the senate , chaired by idaho senator frank church , and in the house , chaired by representative otis pike — provided the first formal effort to understand the scope of intelligence activities .

these committees became the model for a permanent oversight framework that could hold the intelligence community accountable for spending appropriated funds legally and supporting identifiable national security objectives .

in 1975 , congress established the senate select committee on intelligence ( ssci ) and the house permanent select committee on intelligence ( hpsci ) .

congress later refined its oversight of the intelligence community when the executive branch directed covert action operations without notifying congress in advance .

in august 1980 , out of concern for maintaining operational security , president carter chose not to inform congress prior to the attempt to rescue american hostages held by the iranian regime .

in the mid - 1980s , the reagan administration did not inform congress about a covert initiative to divert funds raised from the sale of arms to iran to support the contras in nicaragua .

through the intelligence authorization acts ( iaa ) of 1981 ( p.l .

96-450 ) and 1991 ( p.l .

102-88 ) , congress revised procedures to try to ensure that the executive branch would , in the future , provide timely , comprehensive notification of all covert action and other "significant anticipated intelligence activity. .

the evolution of congressional oversight of intelligence , which emphasized the exclusive jurisdiction of the ssci and hpsci , vice the congressional defense committees , was , however , arguably out of alignment with the evolution of military operations and intelligence activities in the field .

in the field , the military and intelligence communities increasingly integrated their activities for greater effect in the post - 9 / 11 environment .

a reportable intelligence activity , therefore , was often of interest to the congressional defense as well as intelligence committees .

yet , in congress , the intelligence and defense committees have different notification standards and processes .

the statutory authority for a particular intelligence or defense activity has determined the jurisdiction thereof: title 50 of the u.s. code provides the statutory authority for intelligence activities , regardless of which agency carries them out ; title 10 of the u.s. code provides the statutory authority for military activities .

notification of congress , therefore , has had the potential for artificially defining intelligence activities as separate and distinct from military activities .

as a result , congressional committees may be unevenly informed about both kinds of activities , some of which may be indistinguishable regarding the respective risks they pose in terms of compromise , loss of life , and impact on u.s. national security .

it is easier to sort out how the intelligence and military activities defined in this report are categorized ( and , consequently , determine how or whether congress is notified ) by first understanding their statutory authorities .

the united states code , which compiles and codifies laws of the united states , is organized into titles by subject matter .

title 10 of the u.s. code provides much of the legal framework — sometimes referred to as authorities — for the roles , missions , and organization of dod and the military services .

title 50 , among other matters , provides much of the legal framework for many of the roles and responsibilities of the intelligence community , including the operations and functions of the cia and the legal requirements and congressional notification procedures associated with covert action .

references to title 10 authorities and title 50 authorities are sometimes used as colloquial shorthand by observers and experts to signify executive decision - making processes , congressional oversight structures , chains of command , legal authorizations to carry out certain types of activities , and legal constraints preventing certain types of activities that govern the respective operations and activities of dod and the ic .

legal observers , however , have cautioned that such references reinforce a misperception that a clear distinction may be drawn between activities conducted under title 10 authorities and activities conducted under title 50 authorities .

some therefore assert that title 10 and title 50 authorities should instead be viewed as "mutually reinforcing" rather than "mutually exclusive" authorities .

others further emphasize that title 10 is not the sole source of legal authorities for u.s. military operations , pointing to the president's authority under article ii of the constitution as commander in chief of the u.s. armed forces , as well as laws enacted by congress , such as the war powers resolution of 1973 ( p.l .

93-148 ; 50 u.s.c .

§1541-1548 ) and the 2001 authorization for use of military force ( p.l .

107-40 ; 50 u.s.c .

§1541 note ) .

some also cite the dual role of the secretary of defense under title 10 and title 50 to exercise authority , direction , and control over those elements of the ic that reside within the dod organizational structure as support for the argument that title 10 and title 50 should be viewed as "mutually reinforcing. .

