hunting and fishing , often referred to as sportsmen and sportswomen ( sportsperson ) activities , on federal lands is a perennial issue for congress .

members of congress routinely introduce legislation and debate issues pertaining to recreational opportunities and access , federal land use , and the federal government's regulatory roles related to sportsperson activities .

hunting and fishing are also regularly addressed in the executive branch through executive and secretarial orders and federal rulemakings .

these issues cut across all of the federal land management agencies — including department of the interior ( doi ) agencies and the u.s. forest service ( fs ) in the department of agriculture ( usda ) and other land management agencies and departments such as the department of defense ( dod ) and u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) .

this report addresses hunting and fishing activities on federal lands .

it includes background information on the status of hunting and fishing activities in the united states ( including related statistics ) , as well as major federal statutes that address hunting and fishing .

it also discusses administrative actions relating to hunting and fishing and concludes with a section on potential hunting and fishing issues facing congress , including a discussion of selected legislative proposals .

this report focuses on recreational hunting and freshwater fishing activities on federal lands and freshwaters ; it generally does not address hunting and fishing activities on state or private property , commercial activities , or ocean / marine recreational fishing .

similarly , although policy debates related to firearms are central to hunting issues , this report does not address in detail issues and legislation pertaining specifically to firearms and firearm - tax - related topics .

hunting and fishing are considered by many to be traditional american pastimes and are frequently cited as being integral to conservation and wildlife management .

sportsperson activities are further put forth as a means to connect participants to the land , promote conservation activities , and generate revenue .

proponents of this view often contend that throughout history , conservation leaders — such as president theodore roosevelt or aldo leopold — were avid sportspersons and supported land conservation needed for hunting and fishing .

however , some have raised concerns that conservation interests and sportsperson activities can potentially conflict .

for example , some have noted that unless closely regulated using sound science , hunting and fishing can become unsustainable and negatively affect some ecosystems and species .

identifying an appropriate balance among multiple authorized uses for federal lands is seen by some as a role for congress .

hunting and fishing activities are included in the management plans for many federally owned areas , and are authorized under law for some federal lands ( see " hunting and fishing on federal lands " section below ) .

the extent to which sportsperson activities should be allowed or prioritized on federal lands is often debated by congress and stakeholders .

although hunting and fishing occur on federal , state , and private properties , some stakeholders claim that federal lands offer many participants their only or best opportunity to conduct sportsperson activities .

proponents of greater access to sportsperson activities on federal lands cite the importance of federal lands for these activities and contend that federal lands should be managed in a way that benefits and provides opportunities for all americans , including hunters and anglers .

others have expressed concerns that prioritizing sportsperson activities can marginalize other users and negatively affect conservation efforts .

hunting and fishing are also drivers of local and regional economies and contribute to the multibillion - dollar outdoor economy , which includes other outdoor activities such as wildlife viewing , hiking , and camping .

since 1955 , the u.s .

fish and wildlife service ( fws ) has conducted a national survey of hunting , fishing , and wildlife - associated recreation ( i.e. , wildlife - watching and other related activities ) every five years .

as part of the survey , the fws estimates both the number of participants taking part in these activities and expenditures arising from them .

figure 1 displays data on hunting and fishing participation between 1996 and 2016 as well as wildlife watching over the same period .

between 1996 and 2016 , participation in hunting ranged from 11.5 million to 14.0 million sportspersons .

participation in fishing has been similarly variable , with a range between 30.0 million and 35.8 million individuals .

for both hunting and fishing , there has not been a consistent trend across the 20-year period .

during the same time period , however , participation in wildlife watching was estimated to have increased , from 62.9 million individuals in 1996 to 86.0 million in 2016 .

for 2016 , fws found that over 101 million americans , or approximately 40% of the population , participated in one or more wildlife - related activity , which resulted in an estimated $156 billion in expenditures , or approximately 1% of u.s. gross domestic product ( gdp ) ; see figure 2 .

within that total , nearly 40 million people were estimated to have participated in hunting and fishing , each spending an average of over $2,000 .

however , the 2016 survey estimated that there were 2.2 million fewer hunters in the united states in 2016 than in 2011 , a fact highlighted by doi in subsequent administrative actions .

wildlife watching accounted for 86.0 million participants , who spent an average of $882 per participant .

overall , the survey results consistently indicate that a large portion of the u.s. population participates in hunting and fishing activities and that these activities contribute to both local and national economies .

supporters of hunting and fishing point to the wide base of participants in these activities and use these data to support arguments for providing greater access to federal lands and waters for hunting and fishing .

others have highlighted that , in light of the increase in wildlife watching , land management agencies may need to shift management plans to support nonconsumptive wildlife - related activities , such as bird watching .

still others have highlighted the importance of hunting and fishing for conservation and have suggested that wildlife watchers could disturb habitats .

federal lands and waters are a significant provider of opportunities for sportspeople to participate in hunting and fishing .

the federal government owns approximately 640 million acres of land , accounting for about 28% of land within the united states .

in 2011 , 36% of hunters ( 4.9 million of 13.7 million hunters total ) used public lands , which include federal lands as well as state , local , and municipal lands , although the percentage of hunters using public lands varied across u.s. regions .

for example , in the western united states , nearly 1.5 million hunters ( 71% of hunters in this region ) utilized public lands ; in the eastern united states , 1.3 million hunters ( 33% of hunters in this region ) used public lands .

within the public lands utilized by hunters and anglers , the federal lands and waters are managed by a number of different agencies , including agencies within the doi and usda as well as the dod .

however , states maintain ownership over some of the submerged lands ( eg , lakebeds ) within some federal land units ( eg , certain national wildlife refuges and bureau of land management [blm] lands ) .

four agencies — blm , national park service ( nps ) , and fws in doi and fs in usda — account for roughly 95% of all federal acreage ; dod and usace manage about 2% each ; and the remainder is managed by a variety of other agencies .

each land management agency has its own established mission and purpose , which can lead to different approaches to managing specific activities on lands they oversee .

policies related to hunting and fishing on federal lands and waters are variable and reflect overall agency missions and the specified unit or installation purposes .

for example , although a land management agency may have a policy to allow hunting and fishing , an individual unit within the agency may not allow hunting and fishing in parts of the unit because of a specific purpose or need at the unit level .

furthermore , many federal and state laws can influence how hunting and fishing is regulated in agency units ( see " federal statutes related to hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting " for more information ) .

in particular , states are responsible for managing wildlife within their borders , and hunters and anglers are , almost always , required to have relevant state licenses .

hunting and fishing management on federal lands and waters can be roughly divided into two categories based on agency policy .

land can be managed for hunting and fishing as open unless closed ( eg , blm lands ) , or , conversely , as closed unless open ( eg , hunting on nps lands ) .

these two management conditions reflect the default status of the land management agency under its authorities , and whether the responsible agency head is tasked with justifying closing or opening of lands to hunting and fishing .

this justification is typically derived as a result of whether these sportsperson activities are deemed compatible or consistent with the mission of the agency and the purpose of an individual unit .

implementation of these laws is outlined in agency policies , service manuals , and the code of federal regulations .

overall , there appears to be a wide variation in the portion of lands that are open to hunting and fishing .

among open unless closed lands , over 246 million acres ( 99% ) of blm lands are open to hunting and fishing , while the fs reports that 99% of the 193 million acres it administers are open to hunting and at least 99% of fs administered rivers , streams , and lakes are open to fishing .

among closed unless opened lands , 374 ( 66% ) of the 566 fws - administered wildlife refuges offer some form of hunting and / or fishing ( hunting is allowed on 336 , and fishing is allowed on 277 ) , and 37 of 38 wetland management districts allow hunting and 34 permit fishing .

in total , fws administers about 86 million acres that allow hunting .

within the national park system , 70 ( 17% ) of 417 units managed by the nps are statutorily mandated to allow hunting , and 6 units ( 1% ) are authorized but not mandated to allow it .

although it is not possible to determine the precise percentage of federal acres open to hunting and / or fishing , based on these data , more than 80% of federal lands and waters appear to be open to hunting in some capacity .

the below sections provide an overview of hunting and fishing policy for several of the major land management agencies and departments .

not all agencies managing federal lands and waters are included in this report ( eg , u.s .

postal service ) .

many federal laws are relevant to hunting and fishing on federal lands and waters .

furthermore , federal land management agencies manage lands and waters they administer pursuant to federal laws , even when they may conflict with state law .

federal laws can be specific to a particular land management agency , such as the agency - specific statutes cited above ; to a particular species ; or to a particular parcel of federal land , such as a wildlife refuge .

these laws outline the purpose and mission of specific agencies and determine whether lands and waters managed by these agencies are open unless closed or closed unless open .

 ( see " hunting and fishing on federal lands " for more information on agency - specific laws. ) .

in contrast , other laws pertain to hunting and fishing at the national scale or are related to hunting - or fishing - related programs or taxation .

this section will focus on the federal statutes applicable to hunting and fishing more generally .

hunting and fishing issues have been addressed in administrative actions through a number of policy mechanisms , including executive , secretarial , and director's orders and the rulemaking process .

presidents have on many occasions worked to promote and protect opportunities for hunting and fishing on federal lands and waters as well as conservation and resource management efforts .

for example , presidents have used executive orders through their authority under the antiquities act of 1906 to designate national monuments , many of which have both conservation and recreation embedded within their purposes .

these efforts to conserve federal lands and promote hunting and fishing have continued in recent administrative efforts .

table 1 contains a list of selected recent administrative actions pertaining to hunting and fishing .

issues related to hunting and fishing are routinely considered by congress .

many of these issues pertain to federal lands and waters and how to balance opportunities for hunting and fishing with the conservation of ecosystems and species .

some issues related to hunting and fishing that are deliberated by congress include establishing what federal lands can be accessed for hunting and fishing ; determining what types of land should be open to hunting and fishing ; how to regulate the opening and closing of land to hunting and fishing ; whether to reauthorize or amend existing laws that are related to hunting and fishing ; and regulating the use of ammunition and tackle on federal lands .

these issues , which represent only a subset of the broader array of hunting and fishing issues congress might consider , are discussed below .

 ( see appendix for more information on legislation proposed in the 115 th congress. ) .

access to federal lands and waters is a concern for hunters and anglers .

access can refer to whether lands and waters are open to hunting and fishing , as well as what procedures are required to prohibit hunting and fishing , and whether individuals can physically access federal lands and waters .

the latter is a concern when federal lands and waters are blocked from entry due to inholdings , historic land ownership patterns , or inadequate entry points , or when lands are barred from entry .

some contend that limited access to federal lands and waters can reduce opportunities for outdoor recreation , including hunting and fishing , and have suggested that congress should increase efforts to authorize acquisition and expansion to ensure public lands are accessible .

others argue that the federal estate of lands and waters is too large and that there should be greater attention on managing existing lands and addressing the maintenance backlog rather than acquiring new lands .

others have also supported transferring federal lands to the states , but this suggestion has been contentious , and some have expressed concerns that transferring would diminish access for hunters and anglers .

in the 115 th congress , several bills aim to identify barriers and opportunities to improve access for recreation on federal lands and waters .

for example , h.r .

4489 ( title xv ) , s. 733 ( §206 ) , and s. 1460 ( §8106 ) would require the secretaries responsible for nps , fws , blm , and fs to identify federal lands and waters that have limited or no access for hunting and fishing .

the bills would also require the secretaries to identify opportunities for improving access options .

some bills also identify ways to improve access to restricted federal lands and waters , whereas others aim to improve opportunities for recreation on already accessible federal lands and waters .

for example , h.r .

3400 and s. 1633 seek to streamline the permitting and renewal process for special recreation permits ( including for cross - jurisdictional activities ) , provide increased opportunities for servicemembers and veterans to have access to outdoor recreation and volunteer activities , extend recreation seasons , and designate new national recreation areas .

although there is general support by many stakeholders for the concepts of streamlining permitting and increasing opportunities for veterans , some have commented that the bill language could be adjusted to clarify the intent of the bills as well as to ensure that the streamlining authority is provided through statute .

whether lands and waters are open to hunting and fishing is determined by authorizing statutes and missions for land management agencies as well as the purpose of individual units within the various land management systems .

some stakeholders contend that more federal lands and waters should be open to hunting and fishing .

they support their position by stating that federal lands and waters are owned by all americans and should be managed for the benefit of all americans , including hunters and anglers .

others temper this sentiment by arguing that some lands should be kept off - limits for hunting and fishing , and that although multiple use is appropriate for some areas , it is inappropriate for some lands that should be set aside for conservation and preservation .

some also believe that hunting and fishing should be regulated where they affect other recreational activities on federal lands .

several bills in the 115 th congress would also address opening and closing some federal lands to hunting and fishing .

for example , h.r .

3668 ( title iv ) , h.r .

4489 ( title xii ) , s. 733 ( title ii ) , and s. 1460 ( title viii ) would all clarify that blm and fs lands are open to hunting and fishing unless specifically closed .

each bill also outlines the necessary procedures that would be required to close lands and waters to sportsperson activities .

these requirements would include public comment and increased notification of local stakeholders .

these bills would also codify the open unless closed policy for fs and blm with regard to hunting and fishing activities .

although blm and fs are the focus of these bills , both s. 733 and s. 1460 would also establish that it is the policy of the united states for all agencies and departments , in line with their missions , to facilitate the expansion and enhancement of hunting and fishing .

some titles within the legislation have been subject to controversy .

specific to the blm and fs hunting and fishing provisions , some have argued that these provisions will ensure hunting and fishing are protected in the multiple - use mandates for fs and blm , whereas others suggest that enactment of these changes could unjustifiably prioritize hunting and fishing activities while marginalizing other purposes , such as wilderness .

congress routinely considers reauthorizing appropriations and / or programmatic authorities that are either directly or indirectly related to hunting and fishing .

within the deliberations regarding the reauthorization or modification of these laws , issues related to hunting and fishing on federal lands may surface .

for example , several stakeholder groups have highlighted that certain conservation programs , such as the land and water conservation fund ( lwcf ) and the north american wetlands conservation act ( nawca ) , directly relate to hunting and fishing because they can lead to greater access to federal lands and support the wildlife populations needed for hunting and fishing .

others have contended that programs that support acquiring more federal land are not the best means to support conservation or provide greater access for hunters and fishers .

for example , some have suggested that lwcf should be made available for maintenance of existing federal land rather than acquisition of new lands .

similarly , hunting and fishing stakeholders have argued that the pittman - robertson wildlife restoration act needs to be amended to reflect the needs of the states and provide greater support for hunter and angler retention and recruitment .

several bills in the 115 th congress would address these and other concerns ( for specific examples , see appendix ) .

extension of lwcf has been proposed in several bills in the 115 th congress .

h.r .

502 , h.r .

4489 ( title iii ) , s. 896 , and s. 1460 ( §5102 ) would provide a permanent authorization for lwcf and would require funds within lwcf to be used specifically for projects to secure recreational public access on existing federal lands for hunting , fishing , and other recreational purposes .

s. 1460 would also amend lwcf to set minimum percentages for certain uses of the fund .

perspectives on if and how to reauthorize lwcf have been mixed .

proponents have stated that it is a necessary source of funding to acquire and protect lands , which is necessary to enhance public access ; opponents have argued that lwcf , in its current form , is flawed and that the federal estate should not prioritize acquiring new lands through lwcf .

several bills have proposed reauthorization of nawca in the 115 th congress .

h.r .

1099 , h.r .

3668 ( title xiii ) , and h.r .

4489 ( title i ) would all extend nawca through fy2022 ; s. 1460 ( §8403 ) would extend authorization through fy2023 .

however , although h.r .

1099 would only extend authorization , the other bills would also amend nawca in other ways , including through requirements for notification ( h.r .

4489 and s. 1460 ) , provision for the long - term management of any acquired property or interest ( h.r .

4489 ) , and limitation on acquisition of lands administered by the federal government ( h.r .

3668 ) .

some also argue that nawca supports hunting and fishing activities by supporting projects to improve bird populations and wetland habitat .

some have also argued that language to limit acquisition authority under nawca ( such as that proposed in h.r .

3668 ) is contrary to its purpose .

several bills — h.r .

788 , h.r .

3668 ( title ii ) , h.r .

4489 ( title xi ) , s. 593 , s. 733 ( §401 ) , and s. 1460 ( §8401 ) — would amend the pittman - robertson wildlife restoration act to allow more funding allocated to the states to be used for target ranges .

h.r .

2591 and s. 1613 would amend pittman - robertson to allow for the provision of financial and technical assistance to the states for the promotion of hunting and recreational shooting .

supporters of these bills note that they would allow pittman - robertson funds to be used in a way that is more in line with states' needs .

others may view them as diverting money from existing priority wildlife restoration activities .

regulation of ammunition and tackle based on lead content is a contentious issue .

federal regulations for lead differ depending on both the hunting and fishing activity as well as location .

broadly , lead in ammunition is currently regulated for hunting waterfowl , coots , and those species included in aggregate bags and concurrent seasons with waterfowl and coots .

although lead in other ammunition and tackle is generally not regulated at the federal level , use of lead ammunition and tackle may be regulated for specific federal land units , such as on some national wildlife refuges , pursuant to federal regulations and / or state law .

some stakeholders have argued that regulating lead in other ammunition and fishing tackle is unnecessary and cost prohibitive .

they note that the use of lead ammunition is already regulated for waterfowl hunting since regulations were phased in starting in 1987 and implemented nationwide in 1991 .

other stakeholders argue that lead in fishing tackle and ammunition is dangerous to the environment and can poison species and threaten the health of consumers who eat animals killed by lead ammunition and tackle .

currently , ammunition is exempt from regulation under the toxic substances control act ( tsca ) , and tackle has recently been exempted from regulations based on lead content through annual appropriations bills .

this issue has been addressed through administrative actions .

for example , fws director's order 219 , issued on january 19 , 2017 , would phase out the use of lead ammunition and tackle on fws - managed lands .

however , on march 2 , 2017 , doi secretary zinke issued s.o .

3346 , rescinding the previous order .

the rescinding action received mixed reactions , with supporters claiming that it would ease unnecessary restriction on hunters and anglers and opponents arguing that continued use of lead ammunition and tackle will threaten wildlife and pollute the environment .

this issue has also been addressed in legislation in the 115 th congress .

in addition to p.l .

115-31 , which prohibited the use of funds to regulate tackle based on lead content in fy2017 , the issue of regulating lead tackle has been raised in several other bills .

for example , h.r .

3354 ( the house version of the fy2018 interior and environment appropriations bill ) would extend the prohibition on using federal funds to regulate tackle , as has been mandated in recent years .

similarly , s. 1460 would prohibit the environmental protection agency from regulating tackle based on lead content until 2028 , and h.r .

3668 would prohibit any doi or usda bureaus or agencies from regulating ammunition or tackle based on lead content .

the following table presents issues addressed within selected hunting and fishing legislation introduced in the 115 th congress .

these four bills were selected from the many that have been introduced because they each address multiple sportsperson - related issues .

table a - 1 includes selected sportsperson and general federal land issues included within these bills and , as such , includes certain issues that are outside the scope of this report .

