the higher education act of 1965 ( hea ; p.l .

89-329 , as amended ) authorizes programs and activities that make federal financial assistance available to individuals who are pursuing a postsecondary education and to institutions of higher education ( ihes ) .

it also authorizes a number of other activities and functions related to postsecondary education .

the hea was last comprehensively reauthorized by the higher education opportunity act of 2008 ( heoa ; p.l .

110-315 ) .

the heoa extended the authorization of the appropriation of funds for most hea programs through fy2014 , while the general education provisions act ( gepa ) provided an extension of that authority for an additional year , through fy2015 .

many hea programs have continued beyond fy2015 with funding provided under a variety of appropriations legislation and continuing resolutions .

during the 115 th congress , the house committee on education and the workforce marked up and reported with amendments the promoting real opportunity , success , and prosperity through education reform act ( prosper act ; h.r .

4508 ) , which would provide for the comprehensive reauthorization of the hea .

the proposed h.r .

4508 amendments would extend the authorization of most hea programs through fy2024 .

in general , for programs with discretionary funding h.r .

4508 would authorize the appropriation of funds in specific , as opposed to indefinite , amounts for each year in which funding would be authorized to be provided .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates that the enactment of h.r .

4508 would reduce mandatory spending outlays by $2.2 billion over the fy2018-fy2022 period and by $14.6 billion over the fy2018-fy2027 period .

also , according to cbo estimates and assumptions , the enactment of h.r .

4508 would lead to discretionary spending outlays increasing by $87.5 billion over the fy2018-fy2022 period and by $210.1 billion over the fy2018-fy2027 period .

this report focuses on changes h.r .

4508 would make to the hea's programs .

it begins with an overview identifying and discussing a number of key themes in h.r .

4508 .

this discussion highlights major changes proposed in the bill .

it may be sufficient to meet the needs of readers seeking a general understanding of the primary proposals included in h.r .

4508 .

the next section of the report examines in more detail the major features of h.r .

4508 and how they relate to current law .

the appendix contains two tables that present information on the proposed authorization of appropriations or budget authority for new programs and for programs currently specified in the hea and related laws ( eg , the education of the deaf act ) .

the report focuses on the larger changes proposed in h.r .

4508 ; it does not aim to provide a comprehensive summary of the bill or of technical changes that would be made by the bill .

h.r .

4508 , as reported with amendments on february 8 , 2018 , would provide for the comprehensive reauthorization of the hea , amending numerous programs and activities that make up a large portion of the federal effort to support postsecondary education .

taken collectively , the changes that would be made by h.r .

4508 reflect several key themes: ( 1 ) simplifying the federal approach to providing student aid ; ( 2 ) modifying federal student aid rules ; ( 3 ) eliminating or winding down programs ; ( 4 ) revising the educational quality and financial accountability requirements applicable to ihes ; ( 5 ) revising public accountability , transparency , and consumer information requirements ; and ( 6 ) establishing specified limitations to the secretary of education's ( the secretary's ) authority .

this section of the report highlights how these themes are reflected in the provisions of h.r .

4508 .

title iv of the hea contains provisions authorizing numerous federal student aid programs to assist students and their families finance the cost of a postsecondary education .

this section of the report describes some of the changes to the title iv student aid programs and student aid eligibility criteria that would be made by h.r .

4508 .

to participate in the title iv federal student aid programs , postsecondary institutions and their educational programs must meet numerous criteria .

this section of the report describes some of the changes to institutional and programmatic participation requirements that would be made by h.r .

4508 .

the department of education ( ed ) administers the various programs authorized under the hea .

in administering these programs , the secretary has authority to undertake a variety of functions including engaging in rulemaking , monitoring and enforcing program requirements , and entering into contracts for supplies and services .

multiple offices within ed may undertake any or all of these tasks ; however , two primary offices performing hea administrative functions are the office of postsecondary education ( ope ) and the office of federal student aid ( fsa ) .

several statutes specify provisions that apply to ed administrative functions in general ; and the hea supplements or provides specificity to these provisions .

this section of the report describes the changes h.r .

4508 would make to the several hea administrative functions .

the hea contains several provisions relating to public accountability , transparency , and consumer information .

many of these provisions are aimed at providing information to consumers to enable them to make informed college - going decisions .

h.r .

4508 would make several changes relating to these topics .

the hea expresses the sense of congress relating to the protection of student speech and association rights and addresses the treatment of religious ihes by accrediting agencies .

this section of the report describes some of the changes h.r .

4508 would make related to these topics .

the hea contains several provisions related to helping ensure the safety of students and faculty on college campuses .

in general , these provisions require ihes to disclose campus crime statistics and to establish and disseminate campus safety and security policies and procedures .

h.r .

4508 would make several changes to the hea that relate to campus security in general and specifically to sexual violence .

titles iii and v of the hea are the primary sources of institutional support authorized by the hea .

both titles contain a variety of programs intended to provide grants and other financial support to institutions that serve high concentrations of minority and / or needy students to help strengthen their academic , administrative , and financial capabilities .

h.r .

4508 would make several changes to multiple programs authorized under titles iii and v .

as described above , h.r .

4508 would repeal the entirety of the existing title ii and replace it with a competitive grant program to expand "earn - and - learn programs" developed by partnerships of employers and ihes .

an earn - and - learn program would be defined as "an education program , including an apprenticeship program , that provides students with structured , sustained , and paid on - the - job training and accompanying , for credit classroom instruction[.] .

qualified programs would be between three months and two years in length and lead to a recognized postsecondary credential .

the bill would provide an authorization of appropriations of $183,204,000 annually for fy2019 through fy2024 .

eligible grantees would be partnerships of one or more businesses and one or more ihes .

the duration of grants would be not less than one year and not more than four years .

the maximum grant amount would be $1.5 million .

grantees would be required to provide a match equal to or greater than 50% of the amount of the grant .

title vi of the hea authorizes a variety of grants to ihes and related entities to enhance instruction in foreign language and area studies ( flas ) .

the two primary title vi programs are national language and area centers ( nlacs ) and flas fellowships .

this pair of programs under title vi has been the primary recipients of funds authorized while the other programs are smaller scale and often support supplementary activities or serve narrower goals .

h.r .

4508 would amend the nlac and flas fellowship programs and eliminate some of the smaller title vi programs .

specifically , the bill would make more explicit the secretary's authority to approve applications for nlac and flas fellowship awards based on assurances that grantee's "activities will reflect diverse perspectives and a wide range of views" and would require the secretary annually to report on compliance with these assurances .

h.r .

4508 would eliminate the following six programs or activities: ( 1 ) undergraduate international studies and foreign language programs , ( 2 ) technological innovation and cooperation for foreign information access , ( 3 ) american overseas research centers , ( 4 ) education and training programs , ( 5 ) institute for international public policy , and ( 6 ) science and technology advanced foreign language education grant .

the hea contains several programs intended to support students in entering into and succeeding in postsecondary education .

these programs include the trio programs , gear up , and programs to support special populations such as migrant and seasonal workers and low - income students who are parents .

h.r .

4508 would make several changes to these programs and would create a new trio program , impact grants .

h.r .

4508 would amend laws related to higher education , but separate from the hea .

these laws include the education of the deaf act and the tribally controlled colleges and universities assistance act of 1978 .

the education of the deaf act ( p.l .

99-371 ) authorizes programs and activities to foster improved educational programs for deaf individuals , including providing federal funding for gallaudet university and the national technical institute for the deaf .

h.r .

4508 would repeal several programs under the education of the deaf act that have not received funding in recent years ( eg , cultural experiences grants ) and would provide an authorization of appropriations for gallaudet university and the national technical institute for the deaf for each of fy2019 through fy2024 .

the tribally controlled colleges and university assistance act of 1978 ( tccuaa ; p.l .

95-471 , as amended ) is administered by the u.s. department of the interior .

the act funds the operation , improvement , and expansion of tccus to ensure continued and expanded educational opportunities for indian students .

tccuaa title i authorizes grants for general tccu operations , planning grants , technical assistance contracts , eligibility studies , facilities' studies , and construction grants .

title ii authorizes grants for diné college .

title iii authorizes a tccu endowment program .

title iv authorizes the tribal economic development program , and title v authorizes grants to tribal technical colleges .

the technical assistance contracts have been authorized to receive discretionary appropriations at $3.2 million for fy2009 and an indefinite amount for each of the five succeeding fiscal years .

title iii has been authorized to receive discretionary appropriations at $10 million for fy2009 and an indefinite amount for each of the five succeeding fiscal years .

the programs for general tccu operations , tccu renovation and reconstruction , tccu construction grants , diné college construction , and diné college maintenance and operation and titles iv and v have each been authorized to receive indefinite discretionary appropriations for each of fy2009-fy2014 .

h.r .

4508 would extend the authorization of appropriations for the programs at a total of approximately $78.4 million , the same as provided through the fy2017 appropriations , for each of fy2019-fy2014 .

approximately $57.4 million would be authorized for titles i and iv .

the authority for title i planning grants would be repealed .

approximately $13.6 million would be authorized for title ii .

finally , approximately $7.4 million would be authorized for title v , the same amount as specified in the explanatory statement to the fy2017 appropriation .

h.r .

4508 would make several amendments to the allocation and payment of funds for general tccu operations under title i , which accounts for a majority of tccuaa appropriations .

under the current tccuaa , title i funds are allocated to eligible colleges on the basis of the full - time equivalent number of registered indian students at the conclusion of the third week of each academic term of the preceding academic year .

h.r .

4508 would allocate title i funds on the basis of the prior - prior academic year full - time equivalent number of enrolled indian students ( 1 ) at the conclusion of the third week of each academic term or ( 2 ) on the fifth day of a shortened program beginning after the third full week of an academic term .

h.r .

4508 would further expand the credit hours used to determine full - time equivalency by including credit hours used to obtain a high school degree or its equivalent as long as those credit hours were also used for other purposes such as postsecondary credit .

h.r .

4508 would shift the grant payment schedule from october 15 and january 1 of each fiscal year to july 1 and september 30 in accordance with the shift to forward - funding initiated by the fy2010 appropriations act .

under the current tccuaa , title ii , the navajo community college act , authorizes grants to diné college , formerly known as navajo community college .

h.r .

4508 would rename title ii as the diné college act and change references from 'navajo community college' to 'diné college. .

under the current tccuaa , title iii authorizes grants for the establishment and funding of tccu endowments .

h.r .

4508 would repeal that authority ; however previously funded endowments would be held to the title iii requirements as in effect prior to the bill's enactment for 20 years .

after the 20-year period , tccus may use the endowment for operations or academic programs .

as discussed through this report , h.r .

4508 , as reported on february 8 , 2018 , with amendments , would amend the hea to extend the authorization of appropriations or budget authority for previously established hea programs , to authorize the appropriation or budget authority for newly established programs , and to repeal the authorization of appropriations or budget authority of several programs .

this appendix presents two tables that provide information on the authorization of appropriations or budget authority of programs currently specified in the hea or related laws ( eg , the education for the deaf act ) as they would be affected by h.r .

4508 .

table a - 1 presents information on the authorization of appropriations and budget authorities for hea programs and activities that would be authorized under the hea , should the amendments proposed in h.r .

4508 be enacted .

table a - 2 presents information on programs specified under the hea and related laws that , under h.r .

4508 , would be eliminated , would have their authorization of appropriations or budget authority repealed , or would not have their authorization of appropriations or budget authority extended .

table a - 1 lists , by title and part as they would appear in the hea if h.r .

4508 were enacted , programs for which funds would be authorized or for which mandatory budget authority would be provided under h.r .

4508 .

table a - 1 does not include information on programs that are addressed in h.r .

4508 but that would not appear in the hea .

for each program , the table identifies the section of the hea ( as amended should h.r .

4508 be enacted ) under which the authorization of appropriations or budget authority would be provided ; whether the program is a continuing program ( c ) that is currently specified in the hea , or would be newly established ( n ) by h.r .

4508 ; and whether appropriations or budget authority for the program are discretionary ( d ) or mandatory ( m ) .

for continuing programs , the table also shows the amount of funding that was provided in fy2017 ; notations of a dash ( — ) for new programs mean that fy2017 appropriations are not applicable .

for all programs , the table shows the amount of authorization of appropriations or budget authority for fy2019 through fy2024 , as applicable .

appropriations figures are shown in thousands of dollars ; the phrase "such sums" indicates that the amount authorized to be appropriated for a particular fiscal year is such sums as may be necessary ( i.e. , an indefinite amount ) .

in general , in the absence of legislation to extend or repeal a program , the authorization of appropriations for a program for which ed has responsibility to administer would be extended for an additional fiscal year under section 422 of the general education provisions act ( gepa ; p.l .

90-247 ) .

therefore , although the authorization of appropriations provided under h.r .

4508 would expire in fy2024 for most programs , gepa would automatically extend those authorizations through fy2025 .

 ( the table , however , does not reflect this extension ) .

table a - 2 lists existing hea programs and other related programs ( eg , programs authorized under the education for the deaf act ) that under h.r .

4508 would be repealed , for which authorizations of appropriations of would be repealed , or for which authorization of appropriations of would not be extended .

hea programs are listed in the order in which they appear in the hea .

for each program , the table identifies the current statutory citation for the program , a brief description of the program , how the program is treated under h.r .

4508 ( i.e. , program is repealed ; authorization of appropriations is repealed ; authorization of appropriations are not extended ) and the most recent appropriation or budget authority provided for fy2009 or after .

 ( fy2009 was the first year for which authorizations of appropriations were provided under the heao amendments to the hea. ) .

