cybersecurity issues are gaining national prominence , generating extensive media coverage , and affecting constituents nationwide .

the frequency of cybersecurity incidents and their effects on the u.s. economy and national security have elevated congressional interest in cybersecurity issues .

this report provides an overview of cybersecurity concepts , the role of selected federal agencies in addressing cybersecurity threats , and a discussion of cybersecurity issues that may be of interest to congress , including the following: protecting critical infrastructure ; data breaches and data security ; education and training ; encryption ; information sharing ; insurance ; international issues ; the internet of things ; oversight of federal agency information technology ; and incident response .

this is a coordinated report with multiple authors , who are listed with their contact information in footnotes at the beginning of the section ( s ) they authored as well as at the end of the report .

essentially , cybersecurity is the security of cyberspace .

cyberspace can be considered to be the services that use the infrastructure of the internet to deliver information to users through their devices .

in practical terms , a person becomes a user of cyberspace when they use devices to access services , such as access to online banking , shopping , email , streaming video , social media , or the news .

those services do not exist independently , but rather rely on a common infrastructure of servers and switches ; cable and wireless spectrum ; and routers to ensure that a user has access to the service .

that same infrastructure is used by other services too , such as utilities and shipping companies to ensure that products arrive as intended — or by businesses to develop new products more efficiently and to manage their operations .

therefore , for policymaking purposes , each of those elements ( i.e. , the services , infrastructure , devices , and user ) are parts of cyberspace .

the internet is a publicly accessible network within cyberspace , but cyberspace also contains private networks used by businesses and other users to help obtain greater confidentiality of their communications .

the united states government does not have a single definition of cybersecurity .

however , the report on securing and growing the digital economy by the u.s. commission on enhancing national cybersecurity offers the following definition of cybersecurity: the process of protecting information and information systems by preventing , detecting , and responding to unauthorized access , use , disclosure , disruption , modification , or destruction in order to provide confidentiality , integrity , and availability .

the concepts of "confidentiality," "integrity," and "availability" are defined in u.s. code as part of the "information security" triad .

"confidentiality" refers to the attribute that data are known only to authorized parties and not made available or disclosed to unauthorized parties .

"integrity" refers to the attribute that data have not been altered or destroyed in an unauthorized manner .

"availability" refers to the attribute that data are available for access by an authorized party when they choose .

these terms apply to the data stored , processed , and transmitted by information technology ( it ) systems , but also to the it systems themselves .

a fourth term for information security is gaining prominence in discussions on cybersecurity: "authentication," or the ability to confirm that parties using a system and accessing data are who they claim to be and have legitimate access to that data and system .

elements to ensure cybersecurity involve policies spanning a range of fields , including education , workforce management , investment , entrepreneurship , and research and development .

software development , law enforcement , intelligence , incident response , and national defense may be involved in the response when something goes awry in cyberspace .

below is a list of selected policy issues related to cybersecurity which may be of interest to congress .

these issues are organized alphabetically rather than by theme or priority .

a complete list of bills considered during the 115 th congress may be found in crs report r43317 , cybersecurity: legislation , hearings , and executive branch documents , by [author name scrubbed] .

more than 10 bills received consideration and action during the first session of the 115 th congress to address several issues , including management of federal it , assisting state and local governments investigate cybercrimes , improving information sharing , and the development of voluntary guidelines on ways to reduce cyber risks .

more than 30 bills were introduced in the 114 th congress that would have addressed several issues , including data - breach notification , incidents involving other nation - states , information sharing , law enforcement and cybercrime , protection of critical infrastructure ( ci ) , workforce development , and education .

the obama administration released proposals for three bills — on information sharing , data - breach notification , and revision of cybercrime laws .

several bills received committee or floor action .

on december 18 , 2015 , h.r .

2029 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 , was signed into public law ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

the omnibus law's cybersecurity provisions are located in division n ( cybersecurity act of 2015 ) , including title i , cybersecurity information sharing ; title ii , national cybersecurity advancement ; title iii , federal cybersecurity workforce assessment ; and title iv , other cyber matters .

the bill encourages private companies to voluntarily share information about cyber threats with each other as well as the government .

firms that participate in the information sharing are to receive liability protection .

in the 113 th congress , five cybersecurity - focused bills were signed into law on december 18 , 2014: h.r .

2952 , the cybersecurity workforce assessment act , which requires the dhs to develop a cyber - workforce strategy ( p.l .

113-246 ) ; s. 1353 , the cybersecurity enhancement act of 2014 , which codifies the national institute of standards and technology's ( nist's ) role in cybersecurity ( p.l .

113-274 ) ; s. 1691 , the border patrol agent pay reform act of 2014 , which gives dhs new authorities for cybersecurity hiring ( p.l .

113-277 ) ; s. 2519 , the national cybersecurity protection act of 2014 , which codifies dhs's cybersecurity center ( p.l .

113-282 ) ; and s. 2521 , the federal information security modernization act of 2014 , which reforms federal it security management ( p.l .

113-283 ) .

the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2014 , which became p.l .

113-66 on december 26 , 2013 , included a variety of cybersecurity - related provisions .

the below tables summarize recent legislative actions .

the white house has taken actions independent of congress to address a variety of cybersecurity issues .

recent executive actions are described below in reverse chronological order , starting with the most recent action .

in may 2017 , the trump administration issued an executive order ( e.o .

13800 ) designed to improve the cybersecurity of both federal networks and critical infrastructure .

it requires federal agencies to manage cybersecurity risks holistically across the government .

it also directs federal agencies to take specific steps to assist the private sector in managing cyber risks .

previously , the obama administration issued an executive order ( e.o .

13757 ) amending e.o .

13694 to allow for the imposition of sanctions on individuals and entities determined to be responsible for tampering , altering , or causing the misappropriation of information with the purpose or effect of interfering with or undermining election processes or institutions .

five entities and four individuals were identified in the annex of the amended executive order and added to the u.s. department of the treasury's office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) list of specially designated nationals and blocked persons ( sdn list ) .

on april 1 , 2015 , the obama administration issued an executive order ( e.o .

13694 ) placing sanctions on certain persons engaging in significant malicious cyber - enabled activities .

the executive order established the first sanctions program to allow the administration to impose penalties on individuals overseas who engage in destructive attacks or commercial espionage in cyberspace .

the order declares "significant malicious cyber - enabled activities" a "national emergency" and enables the treasury secretary to target foreign individuals and entities that take part in the illicit cyber activity for sanctions that could include freezing their financial assets and barring commercial transactions with them .

in february 2015 , the obama administration issued executive order 13691 , which , along with a legislative proposal , is aimed at enhancing information sharing in cybersecurity among private sector entities .

it promotes the use of information sharing and analysis organizations ( isaos ) , which were defined in the homeland security act ( 6 u.s.c .

§131 ( 5 ) ) as entities that gather , analyze , and share information on the security of critical infrastructure to assist in defense against and recovery from incidents .

these initiatives broadened the reach of isaos beyond ci to any affinity group ( eg , geography , business sector , etc. ) .

in that sense , they differ from the more familiar information sharing and analysis centers ( isacs ) , created in response to presidential decision directive ( pdd ) 63 in 1998 specifically to address information - sharing needs in ci sectors .

also in february 2015 , the obama administration created the cyber threat intelligence integration center ( ctiic ) , established by the dni .

its purposes are to provide integrated analysis on foreign cybersecurity threats and incidents affecting national interests and to support relevant government entities , including the national cybersecurity and communications integration center ( nccic ) at dhs , as well as other entities at dod and doj .

in february 2013 , the obama administration issued an executive order ( e.o .

13636 ) designed to improve the cybersecurity of u.s. critical infrastructure .

it attempts to enhance the security and resiliency of critical infrastructure through voluntary , collaborative efforts involving federal agencies and owners and operators of privately owned critical infrastructure , as well as the use of existing federal regulatory authorities .

given the absence of comprehensive cybersecurity legislation , some security observers contend that e.o .

13636 is a necessary step in securing vital assets against cyber threats .

others have expressed the view that the executive order could make enactment of a bill less likely or could lead to government intrusiveness into private - sector activities through increased regulation under existing statutory authority .

below is a table of executive action on cybersecurity - related issues .

the house has held over 30 hearings during the first session of the 115 th congress on cybersecurity issues , and the senate has held over 25 .

the house held 84 cybersecurity hearings during the 114 th congress and the senate held 35 .

the house committees holding the most hearings during the 114 th congress were homeland security ( 17 ) , oversight and government reform ( 16 ) , science , space , and technology ( 8 ) , and energy and commerce ( 7 ) .

the senate committees holding the most hearings were armed services ( 8 ) , commerce , science , and transportation ( 6 ) , and homeland security and governmental affairs ( 6 ) .

a few topics of interest to 114 th congress committees were cybercrime ( including privat - sector and federal data breaches and the office of personnel management's 2015 cyber intrusions ) , critical infrastructure vulnerabilities , oversight of federal and military cybersecurity programs , and the internet of things .

