the year 2014 was pivotal for the north atlantic treaty organization ( nato , or the alliance ) .

russia's annexation of crimea , the conflict in ukraine , and instability in europe's southern neighborhood sparked recognition of nato's need to adapt to a changing security environment .

nato shifted its focus from what had been a global security orientation during the post - cold war period toward a renewed focus on defense and deterrence in europe .

since 2014 , nato has sought to ensure that it has the political and military tools needed to remain an "unparalleled community of freedom , peace , security and shared values" in this new environment .

several factors are driving nato's desire to adapt .

among them is the challenge of protecting nato's military technological superiority over its potential adversaries , and staying ahead of political and technological change .

nato faces both conventional and hybrid challenges , but threats could expand to include new challenges related to the diffusion of technology , the accelerating pace of technological change , or nato's military and societal dependence on commercial technologies .

operating domains have already expanded to include cyberspace , land , sea , and air , and could soon include space .

policymakers from across the alliance , concerned that nato's technological edge is eroding across domains , have urged nato to address the risks and opportunities associated with technological change .

in the future , nato might have to rely as much on its agility and capacity for innovation as it has previously relied on its military technological advantage .

this report provides analysis for congress on how nato is responding to the technology landscape , and includes sections on the evolving threat environment and how nato is affected by global trends in defense spending and advancing technology ; u.s. defense strategy and its increasing focus on strategic competition for technological superiority and innovation ; nato's response , including institutional strategies as well as national responses from europe's top - three defense spenders ( the uk , france , and germany ) ; and the opportunities and the challenges that nato faces in fostering a nato capacity for innovation in light of technological change .

congress may consider what role it can play in supporting nato's adaptation to the changing technology environment .

for decades , congress has helped steer u.s. nato policy and the nato agenda itself .

during the cold war , congress played a role in the burden - sharing debates , and it promoted nato enlargement as a priority in u.s. nato policy after the cold war .

more recently , congress has supported u.s. efforts to promote national defense innovation , and it has supported a stronger u.s. military presence in europe .

in february 2018 , a group of senators reconstituted the nato observer group .

the group's revival is a signal of senate attention , and the group is to focus on nato's emerging challenges , including burden - sharing and defense spending , military capabilities , and nato's preparedness for unconventional warfare .

congress already has strong relationships with nato allies as a result of decades of cooperation and its active participation in the nato parliamentary assembly and the transatlantic policy network .

through these and other channels , congress may be in a position to help nato anticipate how technology will be used and by whom , and develop the right set of tools to strengthen euro - atlantic security .

at the 2014 wales summit , nato heads of state and government described 2014 as a "pivotal moment. .

russia's annexation of crimea and its aggression in eastern europe , they argued , presented a "fundamental" challenge to their vision of a "europe whole , free and at peace. .

russia's cyberattacks and political influence operations were widely seen in europe as a violation of the established security order .

russia's resurgence continues .

in march 2018 , nato accused russia of a "clear pattern of reckless and unlawful behavior" to destabilize the west , including its support for separatists in ukraine , its military presence in moldova and georgia , its meddling in elections , and its involvement in the war in syria .

in the last few years russia has expanded its anti - western rhetoric and shown willingness to use force in pursuit of its political objectives .

it has modernized its military and increased investments in unmanned systems and other emerging technologies .

russia reportedly now has sophisticated sensors , space capabilities , and cyber capabilities , as well as long - range precision missiles , which can be used to deliver nuclear weapons or for anti - access / area denial ( a2ad ) in local conflicts .

the latter undermines nato dominance in operating domains and increases the risks associated with nato deployments into those areas .

some analysts believe that russia is reducing the once "gaping qualitative and technological gap" between russian and nato military forces .

on nato's southern flank , technologies are also reshaping the threat environment , including through the proliferation of conventional weapons , small arms , and munitions ; the evolution of cybersecurity and social media ; and the rapid development of technologies that can be used by terrorists or harnessed in nato's counterterrorism or crisis - management operations .

syria is in its eighth year of war , libya remains unstable , and poor governance , demographic pressures , and natural resource constraints threaten security .

the mediterranean has become a transit hub for refugees from war - torn countries , economic migrants , foreign fighters , and organized crime networks .

the growing influence of china and russia is challenging the prominence of western actors in the mediterranean , and nonstate groups are more empowered to shape security outcomes .

transnational threats , including terrorism , have become priorities for several european allies , including france and others that are more exposed to the security challenges emanating from the south .

u.s. policymakers have had concerns about the development and proliferation of disruptive technologies and their implications for defense for more than a decade .

in the 2006 quadrennial defense review report , u.s. strategymakers officially identified china as having the "greatest potential to compete militarily with the united states and to field disruptive military technologies that could over time offset traditional u.s. military advantages absent u.s. counter strategies. .

u.s. policy toward china at the time continued to focus on encouraging china to play a constructive role on common security challenges , but u.s. strategic thinkers also focused their attention on the need for modernization and for innovation in u.s. defense strategy .

by 2014 , u.s. policymakers had grown increasingly concerned about china's and russia's comprehensive and long - term military modernization programs , and the possibility that one or the other might close the capabilities gap with the united states .

policymakers were also concerned that relatively unsophisticated militaries , militias , or other nonstate armed groups were gaining access to disruptive technologies and to weapons that were once solely possessed by governments .

these developments led to a push for new concepts , and they sparked a robust debate in the united states about defense innovation or what came to be known as the "third offset strategy. .

the debate focused on how the united states should plan its defense strategy , shape operational concepts , and organize its r&d investments and acquisition processes to "offset" the impact of disruptive technologies on the security environment and their use by potential adversaries .

the u.s. architects of the third offset strategy envisioned collaboration with allies , but the strategy has not been well understood among allies and partners .

u.s. defense innovation strategies raise questions for the united states and its allies about their expectations of one another in terms of technology and innovation , and about their willingness to collaborate on technology development .

u.s. defense innovation also prompts concerns about interoperability , about nato's level of dependence on u.s. technology , and about the implications of technology — unmanned systems or long - range bombers , for example — on the u.s. military presence in europe .

nato faces some of the same challenges that led the united states to pursue defense innovation .

namely , it confronts a major state rival with sophisticated military capabilities as well as an expanding group of nonstate challengers with potential access to disruptive technologies .

its networks — command and control , communications , intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance ( isr ) — and the national assets that comprise those networks , may be increasingly vulnerable to competitors or others with access to disruptive technology .

in the face of these challenges , nato allies are increasingly aware of the importance of agility , resilience , and innovation .

nato depends on the allies for capabilities , and the changing technology environment could affect their willingness to share technology or develop it jointly .

on one hand , technology can reduce nato's reliance on the allies for certain capabilities .

nato has been operating a fleet of airborne warning & control system ( awacs ) aircraft for command and control , air and maritime surveillance , for example , and a new allied ground surveillance system is coming into service on behalf of the alliance .

this system could reduce nato's reliance on a handful of member states for ground surveillance , and enable nato to produce its own comprehensive assessments of situations on the ground .

technology could also offer nato an affordable , open - source intelligence or isr capability , when traditionally it has had to rely on the intelligence that member states have been willing to provide .

technology could equally divide the alliance , on the other hand , as some allies are developing sensitive technologies in areas like cybersecurity , which they are less comfortable sharing .

this has prompted concern among some nato officials about allies' potential reluctance to share technology widely .

as a result nato officials push continuously to develop processes and procedures that integrate such technologies into nato structures and to assess how they might be tested in a contingency .

if the allies continue to increase defense spending , more funding is expected to become available in europe for r&d and capabilities development .

a nato debate about defense innovation could help set priorities in such a way that manages risk and enhances interoperability across the atlantic .

such a debate could help reduce duplication in europe and balance short - term priorities with preparations for future warfare .

as is the case in the united states , operational costs are expected to continue rising for european militaries .

defense innovation could help allies develop tools to control costs while finding ways to counter the asymmetric use of inexpensive technologies against allied forces .

if the united states continues to pursue a technology - driven defense strategy and european countries do not , interoperability and alliance cohesion could be reduced .

for the united states , working with allies could become more constraining or risky , and europeans could face trade - offs between buying more technology from the united states and investing in their own r&d , both of which would have consequences for european and transatlantic industry and for european autonomy vis - a - vis the united states .

historically , european states have tended to focus on preserving national self - sufficiency in defense .

in recent years , however , some european governments have begun to realize that their defense aspirations are inhibited by relatively limited national defense budgets , duplication , and inefficiencies across the european continent .

many european states are now taking steps to increase their defense budgets and , at the same time , balance commitments to national sovereignty in defense with efforts to increase practical cooperation with european partners .

the uk and france remain committed to preserving full - spectrum national capabilities ; however , like other governments in europe , they are working to determine which technologies they would like to develop nationally , which they could develop jointly with european partners , and which they are prepared to buy off - the - shelf in the global market .

the united states , the uk , france , and germany together represent approximately 85% of nato's total defense spending .

they broadly share the assessments of the security environment that led to the development of the u.s. third offset strategy , and they have strategic and industrial interests in promoting defense innovation , at least at the national level .

if nato is to develop a coherent approach to defense innovation or a response to developments in the united states , it will likely depend on one or more of these large member states showing political leadership and driving change at the nato level .

given limited resources , however , these governments and others in europe are focused on short - term priorities , including support for operations and readiness challenges .

when it comes to defense innovation , investments in r&d , and reforms to improve access to commercial innovation , european nations are in the early stages of formulating predominantly national strategies .

even as some nato allies develop defense innovation strategies , nato faces a series of obstacles to coordinating these initiatives , aligning national perspectives , and forging a unified approach .

without legal or financial mechanisms to steer the allies in a particular direction , or the ability to effect a step change across the alliance , nato relies on its efforts to build and share knowledge among the allies , set agendas , establish priorities , and promote multinational cooperation .

generally speaking , nato's innovation challenges relate to securing resources for innovation and engaging commercial industry ; balancing short - term priorities with preparations for the future ; preserving interoperability and transatlantic burden - sharing ; harmonizing defense planning processes , including with the eu ; and using allies' diversity to foster more effective innovation .

looking ahead , nato might have to rely as much on its agility and capacity for innovation as it has previously relied on its military technological advantage .

a key question for congress relates to what role the united states should play in nato to help allies make more effective use of increased defense spending , build flexibility and responsiveness while protecting interoperability , and capitalize on commercial investments in technology and innovation .

a second question is: what role might congress play in that effort ? .

for decades , congress has played an important role in shaping u.s. nato policy and steering the nato agenda itself .

it helped shape the cold war burden - sharing debates by exerting pressure on allies to increase their defense spending , and it used a combination of oversight and legislation to promote post - cold war nato enlargement as a priority in u.s. policy toward the alliance .

the nato parliamentary assembly has facilitated a transatlantic dialogue among legislators for decades , as has the nongovernmental transatlantic policy network .

in february 2018 , a group of senators reconstituted the nato observer group to help strengthen congressional relations with nato in light of evolving challenges .

other channels exist , or could be reconstituted to suit current circumstances .

in defining congress's role , there are a number of questions that could be considered: congress has generally supported defense innovation in the united states by authorizing and appropriating funding for r&d and mandating dod reform to bring commercial technology , talent , and innovation into the department .

should dod efforts require a nato component or a framework for allied participation ? .

does congress accept that european innovation can play a role in the u.s. military renewal ? .

might congress consider balancing u.s. technology exports to europe with a willingness to facilitate technology imports from europe ? .

or revising export controls to facilitate joint r&d and industrial collaboration ? .

what are the risks and opportunities ? .

for european allies , increases in defense spending could be expected to support european firms and strengthen european autonomy .

this could mean fewer opportunities for u.s. firms , but it could also mean more european capabilities .

what posture should congress take toward these possibilities ? .

also , what can congress do to help allies invest more effectively , especially in terms of r&d and procurement ? .

global commercial investments in r&d are growing , and commercial innovation is increasingly important for defense and security .

government and commercial actors contribute to different parts of the innovation cycle , and they can leverage one another's advantages in areas like intelligence and cybersecurity .

can congress help nato reach a broader group of technology stakeholders by building links or facilitating public - private partnerships ? .

the united states national technology and industrial base now includes the united states , the uk , australia , and canada .

what are the risks and opportunities associated with closer collaboration with these partners ? .

might congress consider expanding this base to include another tier group of nato allies or a wider group of associated countries ? .

what role can congress play in expanding nato's access to commercial technology and innovation ? .

should the united states pursue this agenda with a small group of nato allies or seek coherence at the nato level ? .

europeans feel pressure from washington to take more responsibility for their security and to have capabilities to manage crises in their neighborhood .

they have also , at times , seen u.s. dissatisfaction with eu initiatives that could potentially close markets to u.s. industry .

congress may wish to reconcile u.s. narratives in its messaging to nato and to the eu .

