securing the electric power grid is among the highest priorities for critical infrastructure protection in the united states .

in the past , power grid facilities have had varying degrees of access control and surveillance depending upon the facility type and location .

these measures were largely focused on public safety ( reflecting liability concerns ) and preventing vandalism and theft .

more recently , federal agencies , congress , and the utility industry have focused greater attention on the vulnerability of the power grid , especially the high voltage transmission ( bulk power ) system , to terrorist attacks which could cause widespread , extended blackouts .

until 2013 , the emphasis of analysts and policymakers was on power grid cybersecurity — protecting the computer controls and communication systems used to operate the grid .

however , a 2013 rifle attack on an electric transmission substation in metcalf , ca , shifted more attention to the physical security of power grid critical assets .

in response to the metcalf attack , as well as other grid incidents and findings from utility security exercises , congress passed new legislation to strengthen power grid physical security and to facilitate recovery in the event of a successful attack .

congress also sought stronger physical security standards from the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) under the commission's existing statutory authority to regulate the reliability of the bulk power system .

ferc , in turn , ordered the north american electric reliability corporation ( nerc ) — the not - for - profit organization responsible for ensuring grid reliability — to promulgate new requirements for the physical security of bulk power critical infrastructure .

after consultation within the utility industry , nerc proposed new physical security standards in may 2014 .

ferc approved them , with minor changes , the following november .

since 2014 , security risks to the power grid have become an even greater concern in the electric utility industry .

addressing them has remained a concern of congress .

an emphasis on physical risk to the power grid was underscored in september 2016 by another successful rifle attack on a transformer substation — in utah .

reflecting ongoing security concerns , legislative proposals in the 115 th congress include provisions directed at power grid physical security .

congress also continues its oversight of ferc's grid security activities and the implementation of nerc's physical security standards .

this report examines changes to the physical security of the electric power grid since the promulgation of nerc's physical security standards .

the report discusses the current risk environment for the bulk power system .

it summarizes the key requirements of nerc's security standards , including its applicability to specific assets , implementation deadlines , and oversight .

the report reviews observable changes in the utility sector related to physical security .

it concludes with an overview of proposed legislation and a discussion of policy issues for congress .

this report focuses primarily on physical security efforts to prevent successful physical attacks on the bulk power system .

for analysis of issues specifically related to power grid cyberattacks and cybersecurity , see crs report r43989 , cybersecurity issues for the bulk power system , by richard j. campbell .

this report also does not address issues related to security incident recovery or restoration , except in the context of preventive physical security .

grid security analysts and policymakers have long been aware of physical risks to bulk power critical infrastructure , especially to high voltage ( hv ) transformer stations and substations , which serve as key nodes within the electric transmission system .

the 2013 metcalf attack , in which an unknown perpetrator firing a .30 caliber rifle disabled a critical 500 kilovolt ( kv ) transformer substation , demonstrated that such facilities face real and potentially sophisticated threats .

the september 2016 rifle attack on a 69 kv transformer substation in utah — which reportedly left 13,000 rural customers without power for up to eight hours — showed that similar incidents could occur almost anywhere on the grid .

a successful cyberattack on ukraine's power grid in 2015 , which was reportedly attributed to russian hackers , showed that foreign entities could view power grids as attractive targets .

a 2017 report from the national academy of sciences concludes: "while to date there have been only minor attacks on the power system in the united states , large - scale physical destruction of key parts of the power system by terrorists is a real danger .

some physical attacks could cause disruption in system operations that last for weeks or months. .

the persistent threat environment has been changing the perception of physical threats among power grid owners and operators .

for example , surveys of electric utility employees show that their physical ( and cyber ) security concerns are growing .

exelon corporation , one of the nation's largest utility holding companies , stated in its 2016 annual report threat sources continue to seek to exploit potential vulnerabilities in the electric…utility industry associated with protection of sensitive and confidential information , grid infrastructure and other energy infrastructures , and such attacks and disruptions , both physical and cyber , are becoming increasingly sophisticated and dynamic.…the risk of these system - related events and security breaches occurring continues to intensify.… xcel energy , another major utility owner , likewise states in its 2016 annual report our generation plants , fuel storage facilities , transmission and distribution facilities and information systems may be targets of terrorist activities… the potential for terrorism has subjected our operations to increased risks and could have a material effect on our business .

accordingly , electricity sector - wide security exercises conducted by nerc have simulated attacks on power grid critical assets combining both cyber and physical dimensions .

these exercises are further discussed later in this report .

on march 7 , 2014 , ferc ordered nerc to submit proposed reliability standards requiring transmission owners meeting certain criteria "to take steps or demonstrate that they have taken steps to address physical security risks and vulnerabilities related to the reliable operation" of the power grid .

in its order ferc stated that physical security standards were necessary because "the current reliability standards do not specifically require entities to take steps to reasonably protect against physical security attacks. .

according to the ferc order , the new reliability standards were to require transmission owners or operators to perform a risk assessment of their systems to identify "critical facilities," evaluate the potential threats and vulnerabilities to those identified facilities , and develop and implement a security plan designed to protect against physical attacks on those identified critical facilities .

the order required that each of these steps be verified by nerc or another third party qualified to review them .

on may 23 , 2014 , nerc filed with ferc its proposal for mandatory physical security standards .

on november 20 , 2014 , ferc approved the proposed standard , with minor changes , as nerc's new physical security reliability standard ( cip - 014-1 ) .

following publication in the federal register , ferc's order approving the standard became effective on january 26 , 2015 .

ferc approved a revised version of the standard ( cip - 014-2 ) on july 14 , 2015 .

required compliance for the standard began on october 1 , 2015 with completion of the final parts required by november 24 , 2016 for all applicable entities .

three entities play key roles in standards oversight and implementation support for bulk power physical security .

nerc and ferc directly oversee implementation of the cip - 014 standards , while the department of energy ( doe ) plays a supporting role in helping bulk power asset owners to protect their critical assets .

most grid security analysts consider the 2013 metcalf substation attack to have been the "wake up call" which both changed electric sector attitudes toward grid physical security and motivated the promulgation of nerc's physical security regulations .

since that time , there have been a number of apparent changes within the electricity sector related to increasing bulk power physical security .

it is not clear whether these changes have been driven more by changes in utility perceptions of grid threats or by nerc's mandatory security standards .

furthermore , there is currently no comprehensive accounting of changes in physical security throughout the sector .

nonetheless , anecdotal information in the public domain suggests that such changes may be significant and widespread .

they are discussed in the following sections .

given the relatively recent promulgation of nerc's new physical security standards , bulk power physical security has not been a major legislative focus in the 115 th congress .

nonetheless , several bills include provisions intended to enhance bulk power physical security — primarily by establishing new doe grid security programs rather than by imposing new requirements on ferc or on bulk power asset owners directly .

the relevant provisions of these bills , and a related resolution , are summarized below .

the enhancing grid security t hrough public - private partnerships act ( h.r .

5240 ) would require doe to establish a program to facilitate public - private partnerships for electric utility physical security and cybersecurity , among other provisions .

program activities would support voluntary implementation of maturity models , self - assessment , and security auditing ; sharing of best practices and data collection in the electric sector ; and training and technical assistance to utilities ( §2 ( a ) ) .

the energy emergency leadership act ( h.r .

5174 ) would amend the department of energy organization act to include "energy emergency and energy security" to the functions assigned to assistant secretaries .

these functions would include responsibilities with respect to emerging threats , supply , and emergency planning , among others .

they would also include "provision of technical assistance , support , and response capabilities with respect to energy security threats , risks , and incidents" ( §2 ) .

the energy and natural resources act of 2017 ( s. 1460 ) would require doe to develop an advanced energy security program to secure energy networks , including electric transmission and delivery .

eligible activities would include developing "capabilities to identify vulnerabilities and critical components that pose major risks to grid security if destroyed or impaired," modeling national level impacts from human - made events , developing a physical security maturity model , conducting grid security exercises , conducting research on critical asset hardening , and other related measures ( §2002 ( e ) ) .

the leading infrastructure for tomorrow 's america act ( h.r .

2479 ) would establish a grant program administered by doe "to enhance energy security through measures for electricity delivery infrastructure hardening and enhanced resilience and reliability" ( §31101 ( a ) ) .

the advancing grid storage act of 2017 ( s. 1851 ) would establish a competitive grant program for pilot energy storage systems administered by doe with one objective being to "improve the security of critical infrastructure and emergency response systems" in the electric grid ( §5 ( a ) ( 4 ) ( a ) ) .

the grid cybersecurity research and development act ( h.r .

4120 ) would require doe , together with bulk power asset owners , and in collaboration with the national laboratories , to "utilize a range of methods , including voluntary vulnerability testing and red team - blue team exercises , to identify vulnerabilities in physical and cyber systems" ( §6 ( a ) ) .

the flexible grid infrastructure act of 2017 ( s. 1875 ) would require doe to: develop model standards for the electric distribution grid , in part to improve security with respect to physical threats ( §5 ( d ) ( 1 ) ) , evaluate whether new performance standards and testing procedures are needed to ensure electrical equipment resilience in the face physical threats ( §5 ( d ) ( 2 ) ) , and submit to congress methods and guidelines for calculating the costs and benefits of investments in resilience and security solutions for the electric grid ( §5 ( e ) ( 1 ) ) .

house resolution 334 states that it should be the policy of the united states to , among other things , "bolster the reliability , affordability , diversity , efficiency , security , and resiliency of domestic energy supplies , through advanced grid technologies," and to promote advanced grid tools "to increase data security , physical security , and cybersecurity awareness and protection. .

although nerc's cip - 014 standards have been promulgated , and bulk power asset owners have begun enhancing physical security , congress continues to be concerned about the current state of electric grid physical security .

among many issues of potential interest , congress may focus on several with overarching policy significance: security implementation oversight , cost recovery , hardening vs. resilience , and the quality of threat information .

the 2013 attack on the metcalf transformer substation marked a turning point for the u.s. electric power sector .

the attack prompted utilities across the country to reevaluate and restructure their physical security programs .

it also set in motion proceedings in congress and at ferc which resulted in the promulgation of nerc's cip - 014 mandatory physical security standards in 2015 .

based on discussions with ferc and nerc staff about utility compliance , as well as a review of public information about the activities of bulk power asset owners ( and the vendors supplying them ) , there appear to be physical security improvements underway among owners of bulk power critical assets .

the public record is too anecdotal to assert conclusively that these changes are occurring uniformly and at every relevant utility , but nerc's summary compliance reports so far have been positive , especially for such a new standard .

as nerc concluded in its state of reliability 2017 report what nerc can measure is that no major cyber - and few physical - related load losses have happened to date ; that extremely low numbers of incidents have occurred on the operating side , and that attention to security performance has been excellent on the corporate side .

although the electric power sector seems to be moving in the direction of more extensive physical security , many measures have yet to be implemented and the process of corporate realignment around physical security is still underway .

as the cpuc has stated , it appears that the north american electric industry is in intermediate stages of fully harnessing the potential of security technologies and staff expertise , and integrating security and risk assessment values into the utility culture such that utility physical security ultimately is prioritized on par with safety and reliability .

therefore , although it is probably accurate to conclude that , based on the objectives of the cip - 014 standards , the u.s. electric grid is more physically secure than it was five years ago , it has not necessarily reached the level of physical security needed based on the sector's own assessments of risk .

bulk power physical security remains a work in progress .

as cip - 014 implementation and other physical security initiatives proceed , congress may seek to maintain its focus on the power sector's overall progress , not only on short term compliance with nerc's security standards , but also on structural changes supporting physical security as a priority far into the future .

