with 33 countries — ranging from the caribbean nation of st. kitts and nevis , one of the world's smallest states , to the south american giant of brazil , the world's fifth - largest country — the latin american and caribbean region has made significant advances over the past three decades in terms of both political and economic development .

 ( see figure 1 for a map of the region and table 1 for basic facts on the region's countries. ) .

in the early 1980s , 16 latin american and caribbean countries were governed by authoritarian regimes , both on the left and the right .

today , most governments are elected democracies , at least formally .

the threat to elected governments from their own militaries has dissipated in most countries .

free and fair elections have become the norm in most countries in the region , although elections in several countries have been controversial and contested .

in 2017 , the bahamas , ecuador , and chile held successful elections for heads of government .

elections in honduras in november 2017 , however , were characterized by significant irregularities , with the secretary general of the organization of american states ( oas ) calling for new elections to be held .

despite a series of mass civil protests , incumbent president juan orlando hernández was certified as the winner in december 2017 .

in 2018 , nine countries in the region — antigua and barbuda , barbados , brazil , costa rica , colombia , grenada , mexico , paraguay , and venezuela — held elections for head of government .

with the exception of venezuela , all of these elections were free and fair .

the venezuelan election , boycotted by most opposition parties , was significantly flawed .

in addition , cuba underwent a political transition in april , when raúl castro stepped down from power and cuba's legislature selected a new president .

 ( see table 1 for a listing of leaders and elections. ) .

u.s. interests in latin america and the caribbean are diverse and include economic , political , security , and humanitarian concerns .

geographic proximity has ensured strong economic linkages between the united states and the region , with the united states being the major trading partner and largest source of foreign investment for many latin american and caribbean countries .

free - trade agreements ( ftas ) have augmented u.s. economic relations with 11 countries in the region .

latin american nations , led by venezuela , mexico , and colombia , supplied the united states with almost 28% of its imported crude oil in 2016 .

the western hemisphere is a large source of u.s. immigration , both legal and illegal ; geographic proximity and economic and security conditions are major factors driving migration trends .

curbing the flow of illicit drugs from latin america and the caribbean has been a key component of u.s. relations with the region and a major interest of congress for more than three decades .

over the past decade , the united states has engaged in close security cooperation with mexico , central america , and the caribbean to combat drug trafficking and related violence .

as described above , although most countries in the region have made enormous strides in terms of democratic political development since the 1980s , communist cuba has remained under authoritarian rule since the 1959 cuban revolution and undemocratic practices have risen in several countries , particularly in venezuela , which many observers characterize as a dictatorship , and nicaragua , which has grown increasingly authoritarian .

congress traditionally has played an active role in policy toward latin america and the caribbean in terms of both legislation and oversight .

given the region's geographic proximity to the united states , u.s. foreign policy toward the region and domestic policy often overlap , particularly in areas of immigration and trade .

the 115 th congress rejected many of the trump administration's proposed cuts in foreign assistance to latin america and the caribbean for fy2018 in the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) , enacted in march 2018 .

congress provided an estimated $1.7 billion in foreign aid to the region , about 55% more than the administration had requested for fy2018 .

likewise , for fy2019 , both the house and senate appropriations committees reported out bills ( h.r .

6385 and s. 3108 , respectively ) that would have funded key countries and initiatives at levels approaching fy2017 levels .

the 115 th congress approved two short - term continuing resolutions , p.l .

115-245 and p.l .

115-298 , providing fy2019 foreign aid appropriations at fy2018 levels through december 21 , 2018 , but did not complete full - year fy2019 funding , leaving it for the 116 th congress .

two additional fy2019 house appropriations committee bills , h.r .

5952 ( commerce ) and h.r .

6258 / h.r .

6147 ( financial services ) , had provisions that would have tightened economic sanctions on cuba , but the senate appropriations committee's versions did not did not have similar provisions and the 115 th congress did not complete action on these appropriations measures .

the john s. mccain national defense authorization act for fy2019 , p.l .

115-232 ( h.r .

5515 ) , signed into law in august 2018 , has several latin america provisions .

section 1032 extended a prohibition on the use of funds in fy2019 to close or relinquish control of the u.s .

naval station at guantanamo bay , cuba ( similar provisions were included in p.l .

115-244 , fy2019 military construction appropriations , and p.l .

115-245 , fy2019 department of defense appropriations ) .

section 1287 required a report from the secretary of state , in coordination with the secretary of defense and other appropriate agencies , regarding narcotics trafficking corruption and illicit campaign finance in honduras , guatemala , and el salvador , including the naming of officials involved in such activities .

the conference report to the bill , h.rept .

115-874 , also directed the defense intelligence agency to submit a report on security cooperation between russia and cuba , nicaragua , and venezuela .

in december 2018 , the 115 th congress enacted the nicaragua human rights and anticorruption act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-335 , h.r .

1918 ) .

as approved , the measure requires the united states to vote against any loan from the international financial institutions to nicaragua , except to address basic human needs or promote democracy .

the law also authorizes the president to impose sanctions ( visa restrictions and assets blocking ) on persons responsible for human rights violations or acts of corruption .

in other action , the house approved h.r .

2658 in december 2017 .

among its provisions , the bill would have authorized humanitarian assistance for venezuela .

similar bills were introduced in the senate — s. 1018 in may 2017 and a newer version , s. 3486 , in september 2018 , but action was not completed on these initiatives .

both houses approved several resolutions on u.s. policy toward the region over the course of the 115 th congress .

on venezuela , the senate passed s.res .

35 in february 2017 , which called for the release of political prisoners and support for dialogue and efforts at the oas ; the house passed h.res .

259 in december , which urged venezuela to hold free , fair , and open elections , release all political prisoners , and open a channel for international humanitarian assistance .

on september 27 , the house committee on foreign affairs approved h.res .

1006 , amended , which condemns the deteriorating situation in venezuela and the regional humanitarian crisis it has caused ; the committee agreed to seek house consideration of the bill under suspension of the rules .

on mexico , the senate passed s.res .

83 in march 2017 , which called for the united states to support efforts by mexico and china to stop the production and trafficking of illicit fentanyl into the united states ; the house approved h.res .

336 in december 2017 , reaffirming its strong commitment to a bilateral partnership based on mutual respect .

on argentina , the house passed h.res .

54 in april 2017 , which expressed commitment to the bilateral partnership and commended argentina for making far - reaching economic reforms ; the senate foreign relations committee reported a similar resolution , s.res .

18 , in june 2017 .

on central america , the house passed h.res .

145 in may 2017 , which reaffirmed that combating corruption in el salvador , guatemala , and honduras is an important u.s. policy interest .

on cuba , the senate passed s.res .

224 in april 2018 , commemorating the legacy of cuban democracy activist oswaldo payá .

on nicaragua , the house passed h.res .

981 in july 2018 , "condemning the violence , persecution , intimidation , and murders committed by the government of nicaragua against its citizens. .

for a discussion of potential issues for consideration in the 116 th congress , see " outlook for the 116th congress ," below .

many of the u.s. economic , political , and security concerns discussed in this report likely will sustain congressional interest in latin america and the caribbean in the 116 th congress .

congress still faces completing action on fy2019 foreign aid appropriations that propose significant cuts in assistance to the region , and in early 2019 it will begin consideration of the trump administration's fy2020 foreign aid budget request .

the 116 th congress likely will pay close attention to the crisis in venezuela and consider steps to influence the venezuelan government's behavior in returning to democratic rule and to relieve the humanitarian crisis .

the proposed united states - mexico - canada agreement ( usmca ) will face congressional examination and likely consideration in the 116 th congress ; congress must approve the agreement before it can enter into force .

in central america , a potential oversight issue is the effectiveness of u.s. assistance to the northern triangle countries related to efforts to combat insecurity , corruption , and human rights violations ; of particular concern are efforts to undermine anticorruption efforts in guatemala and honduras , especially the guatemalan president's action against the u.n. - backed cicig .

congress also potentially could consider immigration legislation related to the termination of tps for nicaragua , haiti , el salvador , and honduras and the rescission of daca .

other potential oversight issues for the 116 th congress include the surge in colombian coca cultivation and cocaine production and the effectiveness of u.s. assistance focusing on counternarcotics and counterterrorism ; the effectiveness of u.s. assistance to mexico given the high level of drug trafficking - related violence in the country ; how to respond to the increase in political repression and violence in nicaragua ; the extent and significance of chinese and russian engagement in the region and the appropriate u.s. policy response ; and u.s. relations with brazil under newly elected president jair bolsonaro , as well as concerns about the state of democracy and human rights in the country .

