in october 2017 , the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) proposed to repeal the clean power plan ( cpp ) , a rule that the agency had finalized in 2015 to limit carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) emissions from existing fossil - fuel - fired power plants .

the cpp has been controversial since its inception , was quickly litigated , and has not gone into effect due to a stay issued by the supreme court in february 2016 .

disagreements about the cpp have centered on the rule's legal justification , design , and scope .

in addition , stakeholders have disagreed about whether the rule's benefits would outweigh the costs .

under the authority of the clean air act section 111 ( d ) , the cpp established national co 2 emission rates measured in pounds of co 2 per megawatt - hour ( mwh ) of electricity generation for existing fossil - fuel - fired power plants .

based on these national emission rates , epa calculated state - specific goals and gave states two compliance choices .

states could demonstrate compliance through either a "rate - based" approach , under which it would implement measures to achieve a statewide emissions rate goal , or a "mass - based" approach , under which the state would implement measures to achieve a statewide total emissions goal .

this formulation , along with other options , allowed states flexibility in how to achieve the standards while minimizing costs or meeting other objectives .

the emission reductions achieved would depend on how states chose to comply with the rule and other factors , such as the fuel source used and quantity of electricity generated .

given that the cpp qualified as an economically significant regulatory action , epa provided a regulatory analysis of it in 2015 that analyzed the benefits and costs .

in this analysis , epa projected a 32% reduction in total power sector co 2 emissions nationwide by the time the rule was fully implemented in 2030 .

the proposed repeal of the cpp marks a significant change from the previous administration's stance on its policy and legal issues .

epa based the proposed repeal on a change in the agency's interpretation of the authority it has under section 111 ( d ) of the clean air act ( 42 u.s.c .

§7411 ( d ) ) .

under the current administration , epa determined that the cpp exceeds the legal authority under section 111 ( d ) by setting co 2 emission goals for existing power plants that could "only realistically be" achieved using measures "that cannot be employed to , for , or at a particular source" — that is , a location some characterize as "outside the fence line" of the power plants .

the agency also estimated the benefits and costs of the proposed repeal because it qualified as an economically significant regulatory action .

under the trump epa's current legal interpretation — that epa lacked statutory authority to promulgate the cpp in 2015 — the benefits and costs are not germane to the decision about the proposed repeal .

the benefit - cost analysis of the proposed repeal is nonetheless consequential because it reveals methodological changes relative to epa's 2015 analysis .

such changes , which are discussed in this report , may influence the way epa estimates benefits and costs of other proposed regulations .

members of congress may have an interest in understanding epa's analysis of the proposed repeal , in particular how some of the agency's 2017 benefit - cost comparisons differ from those in the 2015 analysis .

a group of 19 senators submitted a letter to epa requesting more information about the benefit - cost analysis for the proposed repeal , including about changes in the way the agency estimated benefits and costs relative to the analysis conducted in 2015 for the final cpp rule .

some of the changes in epa's 2017 analysis may set a precedent for the way federal agencies account for climate benefits and human health benefits when developing regulations to limit greenhouse gases ( ghgs ) or conventional pollutants , such as particulate matter .

this report summarizes the analysis that epa conducted of the cpp's impacts as part of its proposed repeal .

the report also identifies how the economic analysis of the 2017 proposed repeal differs from the approach that epa used in developing the 2015 cpp final rule .

the first section provides background on the regulatory analysis requirements for executive branch agencies , an overview of epa's 2015 analysis , and a summary of the agency's 2017 analysis .

the next section compares the conclusions of epa's 2015 and 2017 benefit - cost analyses .

the report then describes three primary changes in the 2017 analysis — namely , the estimation of climate benefits , consideration of human health co - benefits , and the accounting treatment of energy savings impact — and finishes with concluding observations .

for details about epa's rationale for the proposed repeal , see crs report r44992 , reconsidering the clean power plan , by [author name scrubbed] ; for details about the legal aspects of the proposed repeal , see crs legal sidebar lsb10016 , epa proposes to repeal the clean power plan , by [author name scrubbed] .

epa prepares benefit - cost analyses for significant regulatory actions , such as the cpp , in accordance with executive order ( e.o. ) .

12866 and office of management and budget ( omb ) circular a - 4 .

issued in 1993 , e.o .

12866 replaced regulatory analysis directives from prior administrations with similar but not identical requirements .

the analytical principles and requirements for the development and review of federal regulations outlined in e.o .

12866 remain in effect today .

in particular , e.o .

12866 directs federal agencies to examine the benefits and costs of significant regulatory actions and ensure that the benefits justify the costs .

it defines significant regulatory actions as rules that meet any one of the following four conditions: 1 .

it would have an annual impact on the economy of $100 million or more ; 2 .

it would "create a serious inconsistency or otherwise interfere with" other agency actions ; 3 .

it would "materially alter the budget impact of entitlements , grants , user fees , or loan programs or the rights and obligations of recipients thereof ; " or 4 .

it would "raise novel legal or policy issues. .

rules that meet the first condition are considered to be economically significant and are required to have a more detailed regulatory analysis .

whereas e.o .

12866 articulates the principles for regulatory analysis and the overarching requirements , a 2003 guidance document , "omb circular a - 4," elaborates on what constitutes a "good regulatory analysis" and how to develop one .

omb circular a - 4 defines a good regulatory analysis as one that ( 1 ) explicitly states the need for the proposed regulatory action , ( 2 ) analyzes alternative approaches to the proposed regulatory option , and ( 3 ) assesses the benefits and costs .

the circular describes best practices and aims to standardize the measurement and reporting of benefits and costs of economically significant regulatory actions across federal agencies .

consistent with e.o .

12866 , omb circular a - 4 notes that good regulatory analysis informs consideration of whether benefits of an action "are likely to justify the costs. .

the "justify" criterion does not require monetized benefits to outweigh monetized costs .

e.o .

12866 and circular a - 4 recognize that quantified benefit and cost estimates may not capture all of the anticipated benefits and costs of a regulatory proposal , because it is difficult to quantify some impacts .

while circular a - 4 directs agencies to quantify the benefits and costs of economically significant regulations "whenever possible" by applying "sound and defensible values or procedures," it also directs analysts to identify which non - quantified impacts "are of sufficient importance to justify consideration in the regulatory decision. .

epa's 2015 analysis concluded that the monetized benefits of the cpp outweighed the monetized costs .

the 2017 analysis presented less favorable benefit - cost comparisons of the cpp .

traditionally , benefit - cost comparisons are shown as estimates of the "net impact," which is the difference between total benefits and total costs .

"net benefits" result when the benefits outweigh the costs , and "net costs" result when the costs outweigh the benefits .

all of the net impact estimates presented in the 2015 analysis showed benefits outweighing the costs , with the difference ranging from $25 billion to $45 billion in 2030 .

in contrast , the 2017 net impact estimates ranged from costs outweighing benefits ( i.e. , net costs of the proposed repeal ) to benefits outweighing costs ( i.e. , net benefits of the proposed repeal ) .

the estimates for 2030 ranged from $28.3 billion in net costs of the proposed repeal to $14 billion in net benefits of the proposed repeal .

the 2017 analysis did not explicitly state the agency's view about whether the benefits of the repeal are likely to outweigh the costs of the proposed repeal .

table 1 presents the highest and lowest net impacts reported for each analysis year in the 2015 and 2017 analyses .

the benefit - cost estimates derived from the aeo 2017 projections likewise showed a range of net costs and net benefits of the proposed repeal under different assumptions .

half of these benefit - cost comparisons showed net benefits to repeal the cpp , and the other half showed net costs to repeal .

the aeo - based benefit - cost estimates are generally the same order of magnitude as proposed repeal estimates in table 1 , though as previously noted , they are not directly comparable due to modeling differences .

the aeo - based estimates of the proposed repeal for 2030 ranged from $30.6 billion in net costs to $14.0 billion in net benefits .

the effect of updated power sector projections on the proposed repeal's benefit - cost estimates is unclear .

epa noted that the benefit - cost estimates based on its 2015 power sector modeling did not reflect changes that have since occurred in the power sector .

these changes are potentially important and include changes in expected electricity demand , expected growth in electricity generation by renewable energy technologies , retirements of older generating units , changes in the prices and availability of different fuels and renewables , and state and federal regulations .

the aeo 2017 projections showed a shift from higher - emitting sources to lower - emitting sources , suggesting potentially lower co 2 emission reductions and compliance costs under the cpp relative to 2015 estimates .

epa did not specify whether such trends would alter the agency's conclusions about the benefit - cost comparisons of the proposed repeal .

rather , epa said it plans to update its power sector modeling and make it available for public comment before it finalizes the proposed repeal .

the aeo 2017 projections also suggested greater so 2 reductions under the cpp than those epa estimated in 2015 .

specifically , aeo 2017 scenarios showed higher human health co - benefits , due to higher so 2 reductions , compared to epa's 2015 estimates .

one recent study by resources for the future analyzed the aeo 2017 projections by fuel type and observed that it projected a greater reduction in coal emissions under the cpp in 2030 relative to what epa estimated in 2015 .

the study concluded that it is unclear what mechanisms are "behind the result and to what extent the differences between models used in the 2015 regulatory impact analysis ( ria ) projections and the 2017 aeo projections play a role. .

compared to the 2015 analysis , epa changed its analysis of the cpp's benefits and costs in three primary ways .

specifically , epa: 1 .

revised estimates of the scc by ( a ) excluding international impacts of u.s. emissions and ( b ) more strongly discounting the future benefits of co 2 reductions ; 2 .

assumed no human health co - benefits below set thresholds of pollution levels in most of the benefit - cost comparisons ; and 3 .

counted demand - side energy efficiency savings as benefits rather than as offsetting costs .

the first two changes accounted for the differences in the conclusions of epa's 2015 analysis compared to the 2017 analysis .

the third change did not alter the conclusions — whether benefits outweigh the costs — but modified the separate estimates of the cpp compliance costs and benefits .

this section details all three changes .

benefit - cost analysis is a core tenet of the regulatory process that informs potentially complex policy decisions .

it can strengthen the effectiveness of policymaking by providing decisionmakers a consistent framework for evaluating the potential effects of proposed regulatory options .

though it is informative , benefit - cost comparisons — whether the monetized benefits exceed the costs — do not drive a decision on a regulatory proposal .

first , there may be important qualitative impacts not captured in the monetized estimates that would inform a determination as to whether the benefits justify the costs of an action .

second , decisionmakers consider an array of factors — including legal considerations , technical feasibility , statutory criteria , and ethical considerations — when developing and finalizing regulatory proposals .

for example , epa based the proposed cpp repeal on a change in the agency's legal interpretation of section 111 ( d ) of the clean air act and is required to adhere to the rulemaking procedures under section 307 ( d ) of the act .

quantifying and monetizing the benefits and costs of a proposed regulation can be a complex task .

it may draw upon scientific data from multiple disciplines and involve ethical or policy - based decisions , such as the selection of an intergenerational discount rate .

epa's analyses of the 2015 cpp and the 2017 proposed repeal provide examples of ways that changes in policy priorities and technical information , such as updated information about dynamic factors such as the u.s. power sector , may influence the estimation of benefits and costs .

epa's 2017 benefit - cost analysis reached different conclusions than the 2015 analysis due in large part to the changes in the way it estimated economic impacts .

the two changes driving the difference in conclusions were ( 1 ) use of new scc estimates that lowered climate benefit estimates and ( 2 ) use of thresholds that reduced human health co - benefit estimates .

members of congress have taken divergent views on epa regulatory policy , in particular the development and promulgation of ghg - related regulations .

as epa considers its proposal to repeal the cpp , congress , in its oversight role , may consider the extent to which policy priorities influence regulatory decisions .

decisions on regulations such as the cpp have the potential to affect major industries , such as the u.s. energy sector and the health and welfare of u.s. citizens .

this report described how epa's assessment of the benefits and costs of the cpp changed between two administrations .

these changes appear to reflect differences in policy priorities between the trump and obama administrations .

for example , epa's 2017 analysis used "interim" scc estimates developed in response to e.o .

13783 , which characterized the obama administration's iwg scc estimates as "no longer representative of governmental policy. .

the interim scc estimates generally followed the iwg's methodology except with respect to the scope of the estimates — global versus domestic measures of climate change impacts — and discount rates .

the domestic perspective and use of a 7% rate lowered the interim scc estimates , thereby reducing the estimated cpp climate benefits ( i.e. , the forgone climate benefits of the proposed repeal ) .

congress may also consider whether the withdrawal of the iwg scc estimates — which harmonized the way federal agencies valued ghg impacts in regulatory analysis — will lead to differences across federal agencies in their decisions on ghg - related regulations .

epa's 2017 analysis provided few details about next steps for the scc and the implications , if any , for other federal analyses .

for example , epa stated that the interim scc estimates values were developed "for use in regulatory analyses until an improved estimate of the impacts of climate change to the u.s. can be developed based on the best available science and economics" but did not provide a timeline for updates .

it is unclear whether other agencies and departments will use the same interim estimates in their own regulatory analyses .

to date , at least one other agency — the u.s. bureau of land management ( blm ) — has followed a similar approach as the epa .

on the other hand , the department of energy continued to use the iwg scc estimates in one rulemaking , which was published several months after the administration withdrew those estimates .

in addition , congress may consider whether epa's changes to the health co - benefits analysis will set a precedent for future air pollution rulemakings .

the human health co - benefits reported in epa's 2017 analysis reflected different policy determinations than did the 2015 analysis .

epa described the same health impacts literature in the 2015 and 2017 analyses , stating in both analyses that while there is lower confidence in benefits occurring from pm reductions at lower concentrations , the "scientific evidence provides no clear dividing line" to set a threshold .

while previous epa analyses , including the 2015 cpp analysis , explored uncertainty in benefit estimates relative to benchmark concentrations , the 2017 analysis differed by using a threshold to calculate pm mortality impacts .

furthermore , the exclusion of health co - benefits from one of the benefit - cost comparisons departed from the 2015 cpp analysis and federal guidance to consider both direct and ancillary impacts .

