in september 2017 , hurricanes irma and maria , both category 5 storms , caused catastrophic damage to the u.s. virgin islands ( usvi ) .

on september 6 , the eye of hurricane irma passed over portions of the usvi — including st. thomas and st. john — with maximum winds of 185 miles per hour ( mph ) .

on september 20 , the eye of hurricane maria swept near st. croix with maximum winds of 175 mph .

the usvi government estimates that uninsured damage from the hurricanes will exceed $7.5 billion .

according to the virgin islands water and power authority ( viwapa ) , the public water and power utility on the usvi , the estate richmond ( st. croix ) and krum bay ( st. thomas ) power plants fared "relatively well during the passage of hurricane maria" and provided uninterrupted electrical service to hospitals .

however , according to the usvi recovery funding requests , the government estimates that 80-90% of the power transmission and distribution systems across the usvi were damaged .

recovery efforts from the hurricanes initially focused on maintaining electricity to hospitals and restoring electricity to water treatment plants and some industries .

governor kenneth mapp announced on january 10 , 2018 , that the goal to restore power to 90% of "eligible customers" had been met .

according to the u.s. department of energy ( doe ) , as of january 31 , power has been restored to 93% of total customers ( 99% of eligible customers ) across the usvi .

before the 2017 hurricane season , viwapa was already challenged with fiscal problems and aging infrastructure .

although the usvi has never defaulted on its obligations , it shares similar fiscal challenges as other islands in the caribbean .

these include high debt levels , pension obligations , decreasing tax bases , and outdated infrastructures .

policymakers are currently considering possible options for rebuilding the electricity grid on the islands , given the financial debt before the damage from the storms .

viwapa's financial obligations , according to 2016 financial statements , include $232 million in outstanding debt along with an adjusted net pension liability of $259 million .

the usvi government's much larger public debt , described in more detail below , may also affect rebuilding and investments in infrastructure .

should congress consider funding for electric power restoration , management of the electric power system by viwapa or alternatives to viwapa may be considered .

this report presents a history of viwapa , describes issues related to the debt in usvi , and offers some options if congress considers restructuring the electricity system .

improving the resiliency of usvi's grid will be expensive .

congress may consider whether investment incentives to form public - private partnerships could provide alternatives for modernizing the usvi's grid .

congress may also consider the role of comprehensive energy planning and whether the efforts to restore electric power in usvi will need to progress beyond simple restoration of electricity , and require new investment and oversight by the federal government .

the virgin islands water and power authority ( viwapa ) is an independent governmental agency of the usvi .

it was created in 1964 by the virgin islands legislature .

viwapa provides water and electricity services to customers across the usvi .

it is a monopoly provider of electric power services and serves approximately 55,000 customers throughout the territory .

it is not considered a monopoly provider of water services , providing desalinated potable water to approximately 13,000 customers in the major commercial and residential centers of st. thomas , st. croix , and st. john .

rates for both the electric and water systems are regulated by the public services commission ( psc ) of the usvi ; the systems are independently financed with separate liens on net revenues securing the outstanding debt of each system .

like many remote island communities , the usvi is dependent on fuel oil for the generation of electricity .

in the caribbean region , approximately 71% of the installed generation capacity utilized fuel oil in 2010 .

overall , nearly 95% of electricity generation in the region relies on fossil fuel sources with fuel oil the predominant source .

by contrast , in 2015 fuel oil accounted for less than 1% — and fossil fuel accounted for less than 65% — of the electricity generated in the united states .

historically , viwapa was able to purchase fuel from the hovensa refinery at below market prices due to the contractual agreement between the usvi and hovensa ; however , viwapa was still subject to the price volatility of the market .

higher oil prices have led to higher electricity prices , and the closure of hovensa has increased viwapa's exposure to volatility .

the price of electricity in the usvi exceeds 32 cents per kilowatt - hour ( kwh ) , which is about three times the average price on the mainland .

viwapa's reliance on fuel oil for the bulk of power generation leaves customer rates vulnerable to fuel price increases — fuel surcharges have resulted in electricity rates up to five times higher than the average price on the mainland .

this vulnerability to fuel price increases is accounted for in monthly utility bills , which include a levelized energy adjustment clause ( leac ) factor ( or fuel factor ) .

the leac factor is a customer surcharge that allows viwapa to address increases or decreases in fuel prices .

viwapa's customer rates and adjustments to the leac factor are subject to approval by the virgin islands public service commission .

viwapa has experienced cash flow challenges .

the government of the u.s. virgin islands — viwapa's largest customer — has been slow in providing payment for services .

chronic slow payment in addition to incidents of nonpayment for electricity services has hindered the utility's ability to recover costs and maintain equipment .

furthermore , cash flow concerns are exacerbated because revenues from recovered rates do not adequately cover expenses , resulting in delays in major equipment maintenance and repair , decreases in inventory levels of spare parts , and deferrals in preventative maintenance .

these actions have increased the frequency of equipment outages and failures , which not only decreases power generation efficiency but also increases the cost of supplying energy to the customers .

the usvi were hit by both hurricanes , and damage on two of the three main islands ( st. thomas and st. john ) was extensive .

as noted , the usvi government estimates that 80-90% of the power transmission and distribution systems across the usvi were damaged .

as of january 29 , 2018 , power had been restored to nearly 93% of total customers across the usvi .

viwapa reported that approximately 3,900 customers ( 7% ) remained without power within the territory .

st. thomas had approximately 2,900 total customers ( 11% ) without power , which includes data from water island ( 100% power restored ) and hassel island ( 0% power restored ) .

st. john had approximately 160 total customers ( 4% ) without power .

st. croix had approximately 800 total customers ( 3% ) without power .

as of january 31 , 2018 , nearly 800 "supplemental utility personnel" were assisting in restoration efforts across the territory .

u.s. coast guard had reopened all ports that receive marine delivery of petroleum products .

on st. john , work to restore infrastructure and reopen the virgin islands national park has started .

st. croix is accepting hotel guests and received its first posthurricanes cruise ship on november 11 , 2017 .

the usvi and viwapa engaged in several energy planning efforts prior to the 2017 hurricane season .

efforts focused on evaluating future power needs and cost - effective options as well as comprehensive energy planning .

this planning process is consensus - based , involving various stakeholders , and includes assessing future energy needs within the context of existing policies .

electric system reliability is a key measure of a utility's performance , and is often mentioned by electric utilities simply as their ability to "keep the lights on. .

as such , it can be measured based on the frequency and duration of power outages during a period ( usually as hours of power outage during a year ) .

the amount of power a utility generates must be kept in balance with the amount of power customers need ( i.e. , customer demand ) .

utilities seek to have enough power generation ( in terms of megawatt - hours ) from a system's installed capacity and a capacity reserve ( both in megawatts ) to serve the peak power demand from customers .

each of the usvi's two grids maintains enough capacity and reserve margin to separately meet customer demand on the st. thomas and the st. croix systems , as described earlier in this report .

maintaining reliability is therefore planned uniquely for each of the two grids , and thus conceivably made more difficult and expensive since the two electricity systems are not presently interconnected .

the resiliency of a power system is another matter .

according to the doe , there are no commonly used metrics for measuring grid resilience .

while doe says that several resilience metrics and measures have been proposed , it recognizes that to date "there has been no coordinated industry or government initiative to develop a consensus on , or implement , standardized resilience metrics. .

if power outages are to be minimized , electric power systems must be able to recover quickly from weather - related events which challenge the system's reliability .

electric utilities generally approach planning for weather - related events from the potential for an event to result in an outage .

extreme weather events , such as hurricanes , present another level of risk to the reliability of a system , especially for electric utility systems on isolated caribbean and atlantic islands that face such risks annually .

as of 2010 , viwapa had completed $29 million of hazard mitigation projects , $18 million of which has been financed through fema's hazard mitigation grant program .

in the november 2017 hurricane recovery funding request , the usvi estimated that $300 million is needed to meet the mitigation and resiliency needs for the energy sector .

hurricanes irma and maria damaged approximately 80% to 90% of the transmission and distribution systems in the usvi .

the usvi estimates that total uninsured hurricane - related damages will likely exceed $7.5 billion ( including but not limited to electrical system damage ) .

prior to the release of the usvi's recovery funding request , the office of management and budget ( omb ) submitted an additional request for fiscal year ( 2018 ) funding for $44 billion to address ongoing recovery efforts in multiple states and territories hit by hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria .

the $44 billion supplemental request does not include the final funding requirements requested by the territories .

congress may consider appropriating supplemental funds above the administration's request of $44 billion , as recovery cost estimates subsequently provided by puerto rico and the usvi exceed the amount requested by omb for all states and territories affected by disasters in 2017 .

congress may want to also consider options to assist the territories with comprehensive energy planning to develop modern and resilient electric power systems .

of the $7.5 billion requested by the usvi , the total request for the energy sector is $850 million .

the usvi estimated that for the energy sector request approximately $550 million would be requested from fema , while $300 million would be requested from the department of housing and urban development's community development block grant disaster recovery grants ( cdbg - dr ) program .

the requested funds for the energy sector would be directed to repair the grid ( estimated at approximately $300 million ) , increase system resiliency to extreme weather ( estimated at another $300 million ) , and provide backup generation ( estimated at $250 million ) .

risk mitigation for outages involves performing routine and necessary maintenance of systems and equipment , and mitigating circumstances , such as vegetation management .

the resiliency effort would attempt to mitigate damage to components of the t&d systems which were impaired .

this would involve undergrounding of electric distribution for key feeder lines serving 10,000 residential customers and numerous critical facilities ( eg , police , fire , hospitals , government offices , and port terminals ) .

about $48 million would be used to replace wooden poles with composite poles to harden overhead systems for main trunks of transmission and distribution feeders .

pole - mounted transformers would be replaced by pad - mounted transformers at an estimated cost of $10 million .

mitigation would include an emergency power generation system for st. john .

a further $250 million is proposed for emergency backup power systems .

improvements are proposed to harden onsite generators at key facilities to ensure continuity of operations , and to acquire portable generators for noncritical and temporary staging areas or base camps .

several bills have been introduced in the 115 th congress that would provide disaster assistance to impacted areas from the 2017 hurricanes .

omb requested $44 billion in supplemental funds in november ; on december 21 , 2017 , the house passed an $81 billion emergency aid bill to help rebuild communities that were affected by the hurricanes and wildfires in 2017 ( h.r .

4667 , fy2018 further supplemental for disaster assistance for hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria and 2017 wildfires and other purposes ) .

as part of the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-123 ) , $89.3 billion in additional emergency disaster relief was enacted .

this appropriation is in addition to p.l .

115-56 and p.l .

115-72 , two supplemental appropriations enacted in response to 2017 hurricanes .

in the senate , s. 2165 — puerto rico and virgin islands equitable rebuild act of 2017 — would provide disaster recovery assistance specifically for the territories impacted by hurricanes irma and maria .

congress may consider other legislative action in addition to federal disaster assistance .

the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) amended 48 u.s.c 1492 to authorize doe and doi to provide technical and financial assistance to insular area governments .

assistance under doi authority includes grants for power line projects designed to protect the system from damage caused by hurricanes and typhoons .

congress may consider providing appropriations to facilitate energy planning or improving system resiliency .

congress may also consider changes to existing authorizations addressing federal assistance for energy planning and rebuilding or modernizing the electric power systems of insular areas .

further , congress may consider legislation to enable debt adjustments for the usvi and other territories not covered by the provisions of the puerto rico oversight , management , and economic stability act ( promesa ; p.l .

114-187 ) .

