l aw enforcement officials in the united states and abroad increasingly seek access to electronic communications , such as emails and social media posts , stored on servers and in data centers located in foreign countries .

the architecture of the internet allows technology companies significant flexibility as to the geographic location where they may store collected data .

as a result , electronic communications that may be evidence of a crime are not necessarily housed in the same country where the crime occurred .

this disconnect has caused governments around the world , including the united states , to seek data stored outside their territorial jurisdictions in the course of law enforcement investigations .

it also has led to debate over the extent to which national governments can compel private companies to disclose data stored in foreign nations and the degree to which civil liberties and privacy concerns should inform the proper procedure for sharing such data .

in the united states , this debate largely has centered on the stored communications act ( sca ) , which is part of the broader electronic communications privacy act ( ecpa ) .

although the sca generally prohibits certain technology companies from disclosing the contents of electronic communications to third parties , it mandates disclosure to the u.s. government pursuant to a warrant based on probable cause that the communications contain evidence of a crime .

in united states v. microsoft corp. , the supreme court was set to address whether the united states could compel microsoft to release emails housed in a data center in ireland through a warrant issued under the sca .

but less than one month after oral argument , congress passed and the president signed into law the clarifying lawful overseas use of data act ( cloud act ) as part of the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 .

the cloud act amends the sca and requires service providers subject to the sca to release data in their possession , custody , or control in response to an sca warrant — regardless of whether the data is located in the united states .

after the u.s. government obtained a new warrant for the emails held in ireland under the authority of the cloud act , the supreme court deemed microsoft moot .

a second facet of the cloud act addresses the reciprocal issue of foreign governments' desire to access data in the united states as part of their investigation and prosecution of crimes .

prior to the cloud act , foreign nations seeking data in the united states generally were required to request the assistance of the u.s. government through either procedures established by mutual legal assistance treaties ( mlats ) or judicial requests known as letters rogatory .

requests under either instrument are reviewed by u.s. courts before disclosure to the foreign nation is authorized , but u.s. and foreign officials have criticized these processes as inefficient and unable to accommodate the increasing cross - border data demands in the digital era .

the cloud act responds to calls for modernization by authorizing the executive branch to conclude a new form of international agreement through which select foreign governments can seek data directly from u.s. technology companies without undergoing individualized review by the u.s. government .

agreements authorized by the cloud act would remove legal restrictions on certain foreign nations' ability to seek data directly from u.s. providers in cases involving "serious crimes" when not targeting u.s. persons , provided that the united states has determined that the foreign nation's laws adequately protect privacy and civil liberties , among other requirements .

this report reviews the development of cross - border data sharing laws in criminal matters in the united states .

it begins with an overview of ecpa and the sca .

next , the report discusses the questions raised in the microsoft litigation and the impact of the cloud act on those issues .

finally , the report examines the new form of international agreements authorized by the cloud act and the commentary on the benefits and drawbacks of the potential new international data sharing agreements .

enacted in 1986 , ecpa is one of the primary federal laws regulating disclosure of electronic communications held by private entities .

ecpa is structured on three main titles .

title i , commonly referred to as the wiretap act , governs the interception of real - time wire , oral , or electronic communications .

title ii added a new chapter to the united states code entitled "stored wire and electronic communications and transactional records access," and generally is referred to as the stored communications act or sca .

the sca applies to many forms of electronic communications and associated data , including emails ; text messages ; private messages , wall postings , and other comments made on or via social media sites ; and private youtube videos .

title iii of ecpa regulates the use of a pen register , a device that allows users to capture the routing information associated with communications , such as telephone numbers dialed .

each title in ecpa contains restrictions on the circumstances in which the relevant data can be used or disclosed .

as technology has evolved since ecpa's enactment in 1986 , law enforcement has shifted its primary focus from the interception of live communications pursuant to the wiretap act to seeking the now - common forms of stored communications governed by the sca .

but the sca does not apply the same provisions to every communication or data that falls under its ambit .

rather , the scope of the sca may be impacted by whether the law is applied to a provider of "electronic communication services" ( ecs ) or "remote computing services" ( rcs ) .

although some sca requirements vary depending on the provider , the act has two core components that apply to both forms of provider: ( 1 ) prohibitions on disclosure of certain data and ( 2 ) mandatory disclosure provisions .

while the complexities of the sca coupled with major changes in technology have led some to call for broad reforms to the law , one discrete issue — the extraterritorial application of the sca — became the subject of particular interest as a result of a 2016 federal appellate court decision .

as noted above , the sca mandates that service providers disclose the content of electronic communications when the government obtains a warrant based on probable cause .

in 2013 , federal law enforcement officials sought an sca warrant requiring microsoft to disclose all emails and other information associated with an account with one of its customers .

after finding that the united states demonstrated probable cause that the account was being used to further illegal drug trafficking , a united states magistrate judge issued a warrant requiring microsoft to disclose the contents of an email account and all records or information associated with the account "[t]o the extent that the information .

 .

 .

is within [microsoft's] possession , custody , or control. .

microsoft complied with the portion of the warrant seeking metadata about the user's account ( eg , the name , ip address , and telephone number associated with the account ) , which was stored in the united states , but it determined that the contents of the user's emails were held in a data center in dublin , ireland .

microsoft stores its users' emails in one of its many data centers around the world — most often the one closest to where users state they are from when signing up for the email service .

although microsoft did not dispute that it had the ability to access the emails in ireland using computers inside the united states , it declined to comply with the portion of the warrant seeking data stored overseas on the ground that the sca's mandatory disclosure provisions did not apply extraterritorially .

the district court initially overruled microsoft's objections , and it held the company in civil contempt for failing to produce the emails .

but the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit ( second circuit ) reversed those rulings in 2016 .

relying on the presumption established by the supreme court that u.s. laws do not have effect outside u.s. territorial jurisdiction unless the law specifies otherwise , the second circuit held that the sca does not authorize the seizure of emails stored exclusively on foreign servers .

the united states appealed the second circuit's decision , and the supreme court granted certiorari in 2017 in united states v. microsoft , corp. — a widely followed case that drew attention and amici curie briefs from a range of groups including privacy advocates , law enforcement officials , members of congress , 34 u.s. states and territories , and several foreign nations .

in addition to expressly expanding the ability of the u.s. government to require service providers to release data stored outside the united states , the cloud act addresses a reciprocal issue: limitations on foreign governments' ability to obtain data in the united states .

as internet - based communications have become commonplace , evidence of criminal conduct frequently is derived from data stored on servers located outside the territorial jurisdiction of the nation where the crime was committed .

because technology companies headquartered in the united states hold a majority of the world's electronic communications on their servers , foreign governments frequently seek data held by u.s. companies .

at the same time , ecpa prohibits service providers from disclosing the content of electronic communications directly to foreign governments absent a statutory exception or a warrant from a federal court .

with ecpa acting as a "blocking statute" that prevents foreign governments from directly acquiring certain third - party data stored by private entities in the united states , foreign nations have sought the u.s. government's assistance in obtaining warrants that authorize disclosure .

prior to the cloud act , there were two common international legal processes for obtaining a warrant in the united states: letters rogatory requests and mlats .

while the cloud act is likely to more clearly define the scope of u.s. officials' right to seek certain data stored overseas in the custody of u.s. providers , its broader impact on the international data sharing regime is less certain .

as the internet continues to expand and become more globalized , law enforcement officials worldwide can be expected to continue to seek access to data stored on servers outside their territorial jurisdictions .

although the major technology companies responsible for maintaining a large share of the world's data are located in the united states , the united states accounts for less than 10% of the estimated 3 billion internet users worldwide .

these demographics potentially could lead many nations to pursue cloud act agreements , which would provide faster access to data held by u.s. providers .

whether the united states ultimately enters such agreements will depend on the willingness of the executive branch to certify foreign nations' eligibility and congress's desire to block a proposed agreement through a joint resolution of disapproval enacted into law .

the impact of the cloud act on privacy , human rights , and civil liberties interests similarly is difficult to predict .

the act has the potential to create a three - tiered system of international data sharing , with the united states' most trusted foreign partners able to obtain data directly from u.s. companies without individualized review by the u.s. government .

because this system of direct access differs from existing international data sharing regimes , the manner in which data requests are administered , the type of data that is collected , and the degree of potential for abuse of the system , if any , may become more apparent over time .

