" no vehicles in the park. .

for decades , lawyers have debated the proper scope of this hypothetical law .

the rule at first appears admirably straightforward , but thought experiments applying the law quickly reveal latent complications .

does this law forbid bicycles ? .

baby strollers ? .

golf carts ? .

drones ? .

does it encompass the service vehicles of the park's caretakers , or an ambulance responding to a parkgoer's injury ? .

would it prevent the city from bringing in a world war ii truck and mounting it on a pedestal as part of a war memorial ? .

while many would read the hypothetical law to prohibit an enthusiastic mother from driving a minivan full of young soccer players into the park , it may not be so simple to justify that seemingly reasonable interperetation .

if the soccer mom challenged the decision of a hypothetical department of parks and recreation to prohibit her from entering , how would the department's lawyers justify this position ? .

should they refer primarily to the law's text , or to its purpose ? .

what tools should they use to discover the meaning of the text or the lawmaker's purpose ? .

how does their theory of interpretation influence their answers to the harder problems of application ? .

this deceptively simple hypothetical has endured because it usefully illustrates the challenges of statutory interpretation .

even a statutory provision that at first appears unambiguous can engender significant difficulties when applied in the real world .

supreme court justice felix frankfurter once aptly described the problem of determining statutory meaning as inherent in "the very nature of words. .

the meaning of words depends on the context in which they are used and might change over time .

words are "inexact symbols" of meaning , and even in everyday communications , it is difficult to achieve one definite meaning .

these "intrinsic difficulties of language" are heightened in the creation of a statute , which is crafted by a complicated governmental process and will likely be applied to an unforeseeable variety of circumstances .

statutes are usually written in general terms , which may compound the difficulty of applying a provision to specific situations .

however , this generality — and the ensuing ambiguity — is often intentional: statutes are frequently drafted to address " categories of conduct. .

the enacting legislature may have sought to ensure that the statute would be general enough to capture the situations it could not foresee , or may have intended to delegate interpretive authority to the agency responsible for enforcing the statute .

vague or ambiguous language might also be the result of compromise .

or a statute might be silent with respect to a particular application because congress simply did not anticipate the situation .

when a statute becomes the subject of a dispute in court , judges usually must interpret the law , ambiguous or not .

as chief justice john marshall stated in marbury v. madison : "it is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law is. .

judicial pronouncements about statutes are generally the final word on statutory meaning and will determine how the law is carried out — at least , unless congress acts to amend the law .

in the realm of statutory interpretation , many members of the judiciary view their role in "say[ing] what the law is" as subordinate to congress's position as the law's drafter .

indeed , the legitimacy of any particular exercise in statutory interpretation is often judged by how well it carries out congress's will .

judges have taken a variety of approaches to resolving the meaning of a statute .

the two theories of statutory interpretation that predominate today are purposivism and textualism .

proponents of both theories generally share the goal of adhering to congress's intended meaning , but disagree about how best to achieve that goal .

judges subscribing to these theories may employ different interpretive tools to discover congress's meaning , looking to the ordinary meaning of the disputed statutory text , its statutory context , any applicable interpretive canons , the legislative history of the provision , and evidence about how the statute has been or may be implemented .

understanding the theories that govern how judges read statutes is essential for congress to legislate most effectively .

as a practical matter , judicial opinions interpreting statutes necessarily shape the way in which those statutes are implemented .

if congress knows how courts ascribe meaning to statutory text , it might be able to eliminate some ambiguity regarding its meaning by drafting according to the predominant legal theories .

if congress follows courts' methodologies for statutory interpretation , it may better communicate its policy choices not only to courts , but also to the general public .

members of the public frequently interpret statutes in the same way as courts , whether because they look to courts as the final arbiters of statutes or because courts often intentionally mimic general understandings of how language is naturally interpreted .

finally , as this report discusses in detail , judges and legal scholars are engaged in an ongoing and evolving debate over the best way to determine the meaning of statutes .

for members of congress and their staff to participate meaningfully in this discussion , they must be aware of the scope and intricacies of that debate .

to help provide congress with a general understanding of how courts interpret statutory languge , this report begins by discussing the general goals of statutory interpretation , reviewing a variety of contemporary and historical approaches .

the report then describes the two primary theories of interpretation employed today , before examining the main types of tools that courts use to determine statutory meaning .

the report concludes by exploring developing issues in statutory interpretation .

courts "say what the law is" by resolving legal disputes in individual cases .

this is true whether a court is interpreting a positive law , such as a statute or regulation , or reasoning from a prior judicial precedent , drawing from a body of law known as the common law .

with regard to the common - law tradition of making law through judicial opinions , a court reasons by example , applying general "principles of equity , natural justice , and .

 .

 .

public policy" to the specific circumstances before the court .

case by case , a common - law court decides more or less anew whether each set of circumstances should follow the rule of a previous decision .

but in resolving a statutory dispute , courts generally do not simply determine , based on equity or natural justice , what would have been a reasonable course of action under the circumstances .

instead , the court must "figure out what the statute means" and apply the statutory law to resolve the dispute .

the predominant view of a judge's proper role in statutory interpretation is one of "legislative supremacy. .

this theory holds that when a court interprets a federal statute , it seeks "to give effect to the intent of congress. .

under this view , judges attempt to act as "faithful agents" of congress .

they "are not free to simply substitute their policy views for those of the legislature that enacted the statute. .

this belief is rooted in the constitutional separation of powers: in the realm of legislation , the constitution gives congress , not courts , the power to make the law .

the judicial power vested in the courts entails only "the power to pronounce the law as congress has enacted it. .

accordingly , courts must remain faithful to what the legislature enacted .

it was not always the case that judges described their role in statutory interpretation as being so constrained .

this section broadly reviews the evolution of statutory interpretation in u.s. courts , noting the various schools of legal thought that predominated at particular periods in the nation's history .

however , while these other interpretive theories no longer represent a majority view , all continue to exist in some form today , and critically , they influenced the development of the theories that do dominate modern legal theory .

the two predominant theories of statutory interpretation today are purposivism and textualism .

as discussed , both theories share the same general goal of faithfully interpreting statutes enacted by congress .

this goal is grounded in the belief that the constitution makes the legislature the supreme lawmaker and that statutory interpretation should respect this legislative supremacy .

interpretive problems arise , however , when courts attempt to determine how congress meant to resolve the particular situation before the court .

the actual intent of the legislature that passed a given statute is usually unknowable with respect to the precise situation presented to the court .

accordingly , purposivists and textualists instead seek to construct an objective intent .

purposivists and textualists , however , disagree about the best way to determine this objective intent .

this disagreement is based in large part on distinct views of the institutional competence of the courts .

the concept of "institutional competence" assumes that each branch of government "has a special competence or expertise , and the key to good government is not just figuring out what is the best policy , but figuring out which institutions should be making which decisions and how all the institutions should interrelate. .

"[t]he rules of [statutory] interpretation allocate lawmaking power among the branches of government , and those rules should reflect and respect what , if anything , the constitution has to say about that allocation. .

consequently , because purposivists and textualists have different views of how judges can best act to advance the will of the legislature , they advocate different modes of interpretation and turn to different tools for evidence of congress's objective intent .

judges use a variety of tools to help them interpret statutes , most frequently relying on five types of interpretive tools: ordinary meaning , statutory context , canons of construction , legislative history , and evidence of the way a statute is implemented .

these tools often overlap .

for example , a judge might use evidence of an agency's implementation of a statute to support her own understanding of a word's ordinary meaning .

and basic principles about understanding statutory context are sometimes described as canons of construction .

some theories of statutory interpretation counsel that certain tools are generally disfavored ; for example , textualism teaches that judges should only rarely look to legislative history .

consequently , a judge's interpretive theory might influence which tools she uses .

different judges , then , might unearth different evidence about the meaning of a particular statute , and even if they find the same evidence , they might consider it in different ways .

however , in practice , judges will often draw on whatever tools provide useful evidence of the meaning of the statute before them .

the academic debate between purposivism and textualism is often framed in terms of the tools of interpretation that provoke the most debate .

broadly speaking , purposivists tend to advocate for the use of legislative history , while textualists are more likely to defend the canons of construction .

as a result , the conventional wisdom pits purposivism and legislative history against textualism and the canons of construction .

recent scholarship has focused on the legitimacy of these tools and what the use of these tools says about the theoretical distinctions between the two camps .

as discussed above , both purposivist and textualist judges seek to act as faithful agents of the legislature , although in their search for statutory meaning , they both seek an objective legislative intent , rather than an actual one .

there is broad consensus that a statute's text is primary , in that a court should start its interpretive task with the words of a statute and should also end there if the text is unambiguous .

but courts frequently disagree about what types of context are fairly deemed inherent in that text and about which interpretive tools may help discover the context that is necessary to understand the statute's meaning .

purposivists argue that judges , in attempting to effectuate a statute's purpose , should attempt to figure out what congress did , requiring a focus on legislative process .

in their view , legislative history promises to illuminate this process , shedding light on what congress sought to accomplish and how they went about doing that .

the canons , by contrast , are judicially created , and not necessarily rooted in actual legislative processes .

thus , many purposivists believe that "reliable legislative history" acts as a better constraint than the canons to ensure that a court's decision reflects "what congress had in mind," rather than a judge's own preferences .

conversely , textualists maintain that judges , in focusing on a statute's text , should seek to figure out what congress said , using the construct of ordinary meaning and drawing from the field of linguistics .

textualists doubt that judges have the capacity to determine a statute's purpose and , accordingly , seek to "develop effective rules of thumb to resolve the doubts that inevitably arise out of statutory language. .

the canons provide background rules for legislative drafting that are "traditional and hence anticipated. .

thus , even if the canons do not reflect congress's "actual" intent in a given case — and textualists doubt that such an intent is discoverable , if it even exists — textualists believe that the canons are nonetheless justified because they impose a greater constraint on a judge's discretion than does legislative history .

this theoretical disagreement , as reflected in the use of legislative history versus canons of construction , may persist .

however , a number of scholars have recently argued that this divide is not so stark as it appears — or , at least , that the choice to use legislative history or the canons may not neatly track judges' legal philosophies .

in one empirical study of the supreme court's decisions issued between 2006 and 2012 , the scholar anita krishnakumar concluded that "despite textualism's thirty - year - old campaign against legislative history  .

 .

 .

substantive canons have not displaced legislative history on the modern supreme court. .

she noted that while the use of legislative history had decreased since the era of the burger court , which ended in 1986 , this overall decline in legislative history use was not accompanied by an equivalent increase in the use of the substantive canons .

a distinct study from legal scholar nina mendelson of "the first ten years of the roberts court — october terms 2005 to 2014," showed that all of the justices "engaged very regularly" with both substantive and textual canons .

this research indicates that even the court's "conservative , textualist - leaning justices" are still referencing legislative history , and the court's more purposivist - leaning justices are employing the canons of construction .

another recent study surveyed federal appellate judges , asking them to describe their interpretive approaches and asking which tools of interpretation they use to decide cases .

the authors of that study concluded that none of the judges surveyed could be characterized as "extreme" textualists or "extreme" purposivists .

they found that all of the judges but one used legislative history , and all of the judges used the canons .

relying on this data , the authors argued that the assumption "that purposivist judges use legislative history , while textualist judges use canons  .

 .

 .

should be put to rest. .

legal scholarship has also called for the refinement of the tools described in this report .

some of the most prominent recent challenges from academia have asked whether the tools described above achieve the goals set for them — whether judges' conceptions of ordinary meaning in fact align with how people usually use language , whether the canons of construction reflect how congress actually drafts statutes , and whether judges' use of legislative history reflects a proper understanding of how a bill is passed .

using empirical data , scholars have raised questions about whether judges can — or should — alter the way in which they use these tools to better adapt their interpretations to actual legislative intent .

when judges explore a word's "ordinary meaning," they frequently revert to their own understandings of how they would use that word , in the context of the dispute before them .

as a consequence , legal scholars have argued that the ordinary meaning construct is not as constraining as its defenders claim .

perhaps to defend against such charges , judges have cited dictionaries and other books as evidence of a word's ordinary meaning .

but these books arguably provide evidence only that a word can be used to mean a certain thing , and do not necessarily prove conclusively that the suggested meaning is "ordinary," in the sense that it is commonly used in a specific context .

that is , dictionaries demonstrate "the outer boundaries of appropriate usage," and any given dictionary might be more or less complete in distinguishing a term's "core meaning" from its "periphery. .

some scholars — and judges — have turned to corpus linguistics as a source of concrete data for determining the most common meanings of statutory phrases .

"corpus linguistics" uses large "collections of naturally occurring language called corpora" to study "language function and use. .

courts can use these corpora to gather empirical evidence of "the common usage of a given term in a given context. .

for example , in muscarello v. united states , the supreme court searched "computerized newspaper databases" to find sentences in which the disputed statutory terms appeared .

at issue in that case was whether criminal defendants had "carrie[d]" a firearm by transporting it in a vehicle .

the court's search revealed that "many , perhaps more than one third" of the results were "sentences used to convey the meaning at issue here , i.e .

 , the carrying of guns in a car. .

for the majority of the court , this provided solid evidence that this connotation of "carry" — to refer to a person carrying a gun in a car — was an "ordinary" use of the word .

courts have also used an even more linguistically oriented database: the corpus of contemporary american english ( coca ) , "the largest freely - available corpus of english. .

advocates drew evidence from coca in arguments before the supreme court in the 2011 case of fcc v. at&t , and some have argued that this linguistic evidence ultimately influenced the court's opinion in that case .

one state supreme court recently drew evidence from coca to determine the meaning of the word "information. .

at issue was a statute that prohibited using "information" derived from certain statements of law enforcement officers against them in criminal proceedings , and the question before the court was whether the operative word should be interpreted to refer only to truthful information .

the court concluded that the word "information" did not exclude false statements , noting that "empirical data from the coca" showed that "[i]n common usage , 'information' is regularly used in conjunction with adjectives suggesting it may be both true and false. .

however , some have called for judges , who are not professional linguists , to be cautious in using these databases .

others have argued that using corpus linguistics may run contrary to standard judicial concerns about affording litigants notice .

these notice concerns are enshrined in the ordinary meaning inquiry: by asking how an ordinary person would understand the statute , judges seek to ensure that this ordinary person had notice of the laws governing their conduct .

using corpus linguistics to determine how frequently newspapers or other periodicals have used a term in a certain way does not necessarily align with the understanding of the ordinary person , and can thus create notice concerns .

additionally , the databases themselves may have certain limitations that mean a particular meaning is absent from the corpus even though it is in fact a usual meaning of the word .

even those who generally defend the use of corpora note that they cannot definitely resolve the normative question of whether a particular meaning is "ordinary" in the context of the particular statute at issue .

other scholars have challenged various judicial assumptions about how congress drafts statutes by conducting empirical studies of legislative drafting .

as previously noted , most judges today try to act as faithful agents of the legislature when they interpret statutes , and they justify the interpretive tools they use along those terms .

some view canons as imitating the way congress uses language and goes about achieving its policy goals .

likewise , others defend legislative history as revealing congress's methods and purposes .

arguably then , if these tools do not reflect congress's actual drafting practices , they are subject to attack on the basis that they do not help judges to act as congress's faithful agents .

the most influential of recent studies on these issues was conducted by the scholars abbe gluck and lisa schultz bressman , who surveyed 137 congressional staffers , mostly "committee counsels with drafting responsibility. .

they asked whether these drafters were aware of various judicial doctrines of statutory interpretation and whether the drafters actually complied with those doctrines .

their findings demonstrated a wide range of awareness and use of the various semantic and substantive canons .

for instance , the authors found that legislative drafters were largely unaware of the canon of constitutional avoidance as a judicial presumption — but also discovered that the concept underlying the canon did in fact influence drafters , suggesting that the assumption that "congress tries to legislate within constitutional bounds" is an accurate one .

by contrast , the majority of staffers did know the canon against surplusage by name , but stated that this assumption is "rarely" accurate because drafters often "intentionally err on the side of redundancy. .

gluck and bressman also asked these legislative drafters about many of the judicial assumptions underlying both the use and nonuse of legislative history .

their findings suggested that in contrast to some of the academic arguments against legislative history , both members and their staff valued legislative history and believed that it "was an important tool for legislative drafters and courts alike. .

further , they found that drafters believed that legislative history was a "tool that limited — rather than expanded — judicial discretion. .

the staffers also confirmed the judicial consensus that committee reports are generally the most reliable form of legislative history .

however , some have pointed out that gluck and bressman's study may not provide a complete view of the federal lawmaking process — and indeed , the authors themselves recognized many of the limitations in their study .

as previously discussed , many judges , predominantly textualists , doubt whether courts are competent to understand the complicated processes that go into federal lawmaking .

it remains to be seen whether these new empirical data will influence the way judges use well - established interpretive tools such as ordinary meaning , canons , and legislative history .

in theory , both purposivism and textualism seek the most objectively reasonable meaning of a statute , rather than attempting to discern congress's actual intent with respect to the question before the court .

purposivists ask what a reasonable legislator would have been trying to achieve by enacting this statute , while textualists ask what a reasonable english - speaker would have been trying to convey .

by design , these theories are already removed from congress's "actual intent. .

accordingly , judges might conclude that evidence of actual practice , whether it is evidence from linguistic corpora of common usage , or evidence from congressional staffers of legislative drafting practices , is irrelevant .

but , as the reform - minded scholars have pointed out , if the way judges use various tools to construct statutory meaning is contrary to how congress generally uses words or goes about achieving its policy goals , then using these tools undermines judges' claims that they are acting as congress's faithful agents .

indeed , as noted above , judges have already begun to use linguistic corpora , as a source of empirical data , to refine the ways that they seek ordinary meaning .

similarly , judges have cited gluck and bressman's study to support the proposition that courts should give special weight to committee reports because of the evidence that committee staffers view them as reliable sources of legislative purpose .

other judges , including justice elena kagan , have cited gluck and bressman's study to reject application of the canon against surplusage .

in response to the new scholarship on statutory interpretation , one prominent textualist judge has suggested that courts should "shed" any semantic canons that do not in fact "reflect the meaning that people , including members of congress , ordinarily intend to communicate with their choice of words. .

therefore , it is possible that further scholarship about actual legislative processes , and particularly legislative drafting practices , could affect the way that some judges read statutes .

these studies may also reveal a need for congress to learn more about how courts interpret statutes so that it can draft according to the prevailing interpretive conventions .

however , as other scholars have pointed out , there are a number of other factors driving the federal drafting process , and it might not be feasible for congress to make certain changes solely to cater to the courts .

nonetheless , because courts act as the arbiters of statutory meaning and necessarily shape the way a statute is implemented , congress may be able to eliminate at least some misunderstandings by legislating with judges in mind .

a continued dialogue between the courts and congress can help ensure that laws are applied consistently with the intentions of the drafters .

this appendix draws from two different works to present an exemplary list of the canons of construction .

the two works take different approaches to compiling the canons , and sometimes disagree on what counts as a legitimate canon of construction .

in their book reading law: the interpretation of legal texts , justice antonin scalia and bryan garner took an "unapologetically normative" approach to this task , collecting only those canons that they deemed valid under their approach to textualism .

by contrast , a casebook authored by law professor william eskridge and others took a more descriptive approach , compiling the canons "invoked by" the supreme court from 1986 to 2014 .

this appendix does not intend to stake out a position in any ongoing debates about the validity of the canons , and where feasible , notes disagreement among the authors .

some editorial choices were made in the process of combining and reproducing the authors' lists .

these edits include some generalization and consolidation of canons .

the list also omits a number of canons that are too specific or otherwise outside the scope of this report , which aims to provide a general overview of how courts interpret statutes .

the appendix likewise excludes canons that seem to represent substantive legal principles rather than assumptions about how to read statutes .

this appendix names and briefly describes each canon , citing either or both of the two lists and applicable cases as appropriate .

in many cases , the canon includes both the general rule and any relevant exceptions , in accord with the modern understanding that the application of a canon is highly context - dependent .

the list distinguishes semantic canons from substantive canons , but does not further group the canons .

the canons are listed in alphabetical order .

semantic canons 1. .

artificial - person canon ": "the word person includes corporations and other entities , but not the sovereign. .

2 .

casus omissus : a matter not covered by a statute should be treated as intentionally omitted ( casus omissus pro omisso habendus est ) .

3. .

conjunctive / disjunctive canon ": "and" usually "joins a conjunctive list," combining items , while "or" usually joins "a disjunctive list," denoting alternatives .

4 .

ejusdem generis : a general term that follows an enumerated list of more specific terms should be interpreted to cover only "matters similar to those specified. .

5 .

expresio unius : "the expression of one thing implies the exclusion of others ( expressio unius est exclusio alterius ) . .

this canon is strongest "when the items expressed are members of an 'associated group or series,' justifying the inference that items not mentioned were excluded by deliberate choice , not inadvertence. .

6. .

gender / number canon ": usually , "the masculine includes the feminine ( and vice versa ) and the singular includes the plural ( and vice versa ) . .

7. .

general / specific canon ": where two laws conflict , "the specific governs the general ( generalia specialibus non derogant ) . .

that is , "a precisely drawn , detailed statute pre - empts more general remedies," and conversely , "a statute dealing with a narrow , precise , and specific subject is not submerged by a later enacted statute covering a more generalized spectrum. .

8. .

general - terms canon ": "general terms are to be given their general meaning ( generalia verba sunt generaliter intelligenda ) . .

9 .

grammar canon : statutes "follow accepted standards of grammar. .

10. .

harmonious - reading canon ": "the provisions of a text should be interpreted in a way that renders them compatible , not contradictory. .

11. .

irreconcilability canon ": "if a text contains truly irreconcilable provisions at the same level of generality , and they have been simultaneously adopted , neither provision should be given effect. .

12 .

legislative history canons : "[c]lear evidence of congressional intent" gathered from legislative history "may illuminate ambiguous text. .

the most "authoritative source for finding the legislature's intent lies in the committee reports on the bill. .

floor statements , especially those made by a bill's sponsors prior to its passage , may be relevant , but should be used cautiously .

"[t]he views of a subsequent congress form a hazardous basis for inferring the intent of an earlier one. .

13. .

mandatory / permissive canon ": "shall" is usually mandatory and imposes a duty ; "may" usually grants discretion .

14. .

nearest - reasonable - referent canon ": "when the syntax involves something other than a parallel series of nouns or verbs , a prepositive or postpositive modifier normally applies only to the nearest reasonable referent. .

15 .

noscitur a sociis : "associated words bear on one another's meaning  .

 .

 .

. .

16 .

ordinary meaning canon : words should be given "their ordinary , everyday meanings," unless "congress has provided a specific definition" or "the context indicates that they bear a technical sense. .

17 .

plain meaning rule and absurdity doctrine : "follow the plain meaning of the statutory text , except when a textual plain meaning requires an absurd result or suggests a scrivener's error. .

18. .

predicate - act canon ": "the law has long recognized that the '[a]uthorization of an act also authorizes a necessary predicate act.' .

19. .

prefatory - materials " and " titles - and - headings " canons : preambles , purpose clauses , recitals , titles , and headings are all "permissible indicators of meaning," though they generally will not be dispositive .

20 .

presumption of consistent usage : "generally , identical words used in different parts of the same statute are  .

 .

 .

presumed to have the same meaning. .

conversely , "a material variation in terms suggests a variation in meaning. .

21. .

presumption of nonexclusive ' include ' ": "[t]he term 'including' is not one of all - embracing definition , but connotes simply an illustrative application of the general principle. .

22. .

presumption of validity ": "an interpretation that validates outweighs one that invalidates ( ut res magis valeat quam pereat ) . .

stated another way , courts should construe statutes to have effect .

23. .

proviso canon ": "a proviso," or "a clause that introduces a condition," traditionally by using the word "provided," "conditions the principal matter that it qualifies — almost always the matter immediately preceding. .

24 .

punctuation canon : statutes "follow accepted punctuation standards," and "[p]unctuation is a permissible indicator of meaning. .

25 .

purposive construction : "[i]nterpret ambiguous statutes so as best to carry out their statutory purposes. .

26 .

reddendo singula singulis : "[w]ords and provisions are referred to their appropriate objects  .

 .

 .

. .

27 .

rule against surplusage : courts should "give effect , if possible , to every clause and word of a statute" so that "no clause is rendered 'superfluous , void , or insignificant.' .

28 .

rule of the last antecedent : "[a] limiting clause or phrase  .

 .

 .

should ordinarily be read as modifying only the noun or phrase that it immediately follows  .

 .

 .

. .

29. .

scope - of - subparts canon ": "material within an indented subpart relates only to that subpart ; material contained in unindented text relates to all the following or preceding indented subparts. .

30 .

series - qualifier canon : "'when there is a straightforward , parallel construction that involves all nouns or verbs in a series,' a modifier at the end of the list 'normally applies to the entire series.' .

31. .

subordinating / superordinating canon ": "subordinating language ( signaled by subject to ) or superordinating language ( signaled by notwithstanding or despite ) merely shows which provision prevails in the event of a clash — but does not necessarily denote a clash of provisions. .

32. .

unintelligibility canon ": "[a] statute must be capable of construction and interpretation ; otherwise it will be inoperative and void. .

33. .

whole - text canon ": courts "do not  .

 .

 .

construe statutory phrases in isolation ; [they] read statutes as a whole. .

substantive canons 1 .

canon of constitutional avoidance : "[w]here an otherwise acceptable construction of a statute would raise serious constitutional problems , the court will construe the statute to avoid such problems unless such construction is plainly contrary to the intent of congress. .

2. .

dog that didn ' t bark " presumption : a "prior legal rule should be retained if no one in legislative deliberations even mentioned the rule or discussed any changes in the rule. .

3 .

federalism canons : courts will generally require a clear statement before finding that a federal statute "alter[s] the federal - state balance. .

thus , for example , courts require congress to speak with "unmistakeable clarity" in order to "abrogate state sovereign immunity. .

4 .

in pari materia : "[s]tatutes addressing the same subject matter generally should be read 'as if they were one law.' .

5. .

mens rea canon ": courts should "presume that a criminal statute derived from the common law carries with it the requirement of a culpable mental state — even if no such limitation appears in the text — unless it is clear that the legislature intended to impose strict liability. .

in the context of civil liability , "willfulness  .

 .

 .

cover[s] not only knowing violations of a standard , but reckless ones as well. .

6 .

nondelegation doctrine : courts should presume that "congress does not delegate authority without sufficient guidelines. .

7. .

penalty / illegality canon ": "[a] statute that penalizes an act makes it unlawful .

 .

 .

. .

8. .

pending - action canon ": "when statutory law is altered during the pendency of a lawsuit , the courts at every level must apply the new law unless doing so would violate the presumption against retroactivity. .

9 .

presumption against extraterritoriality : courts should presume , "absent a clear statement from congress , that federal statutes do not apply outside the united states. .

10. .

presumption against hiding elephants in mouseholes ": "congress  .

 .

 .

does not alter the fundamental details of a regulatory scheme in vague terms or ancillary provisions — it does not , one might say , hide elephants in mouseholes. .

11 .

presumption against implied repeals : "[r]epeals by implication are not favored. .

12 .

presumption against implied right of action : courts should not imply a private remedy "unless  .

 .

 .

congressional intent [to create a private remedy] can be inferred from the language of the statute , the statutory structure , or some other source. .

without such intent , "a cause of action does not exist. .

13 .

presumption against retroactive legislation : "[c]ourts read laws as prospective in application unless congress has unambiguously instructed retroactivity. .

14 .

presumption against waiver of sovereign immunity : a waiver of sovereign immunity "cannot be implied but must be unequivocally expressed. .

15 .

presumption for retaining the common law : "'[w]hen a statute covers an issue previously governed by the common law,' [courts] must presume that 'congress intended to retain the substance of the common law.' .

16 .

presumptions in favor of judicial process : courts sometimes require clear statements from congress in order to bar judicial review of certain claims .

17. .

presumption of continuity ": "congress does not create discontinuities in legal rights and obligations without some clear statement. .

18 .

presumption of legislative acquiescence : "[a] long adhered to administrative interpretation dating from the legislative enactment , with no subsequent change having been made in the statute involved , raises a presumption of legislative acquiescence  .

 .

 .

. .

this also applies to judicial interpretations of the statute .

if congress reenacts a statute without any change , it incorporates any settled judicial constructions of the statute "so broad and unquestioned that [a court] must presume congress knew of and endorsed it . .

however , "[o]rdinarily , .

 .

 .

courts are slow to attribute significance to the failure of congress to act on particular legislation. .

19 .

presumption of narrow construction of exceptions : "an exception to a 'general statement of policy' is 'usually read  .

 .

 .

narrowly in order to preserve the primary operation of the provision.' .

20. .

presumption of purposive amendment ": courts should assume that congress intends any statutory "amendment to have real and substantial effect. .

21. .

repeal - of - repealer canon ": "the repeal or expiration of a repealing statute does not reinstate the original statute. .

22. .

repealability canon ": "[o]ne legislature is competent to repeal any act which a former legislature was competent to pass ; and  .

 .

 .

one legislature cannot abridge the powers of a succeeding legislature. .

23 .

rule of lenity : "ambiguity in a statute defining a crime or imposing a penalty should be resolved in the defendant's favor. .

