apprenticeship is a workforce development strategy that trains a worker for a specific occupation using a structured combination of paid on - the - job training and related instruction .

increased costs for higher education and possible mismatches between worker skills and employer needs have led to increased congressional interest in alternative workforce development strategies such as apprenticeship .

compared to some other developed nations , utilization of apprenticeship in the united states is relatively low .

some commentators have interpreted the relative dearth of apprenticeship programs in the united states as an opportunity for large - scale expansion .

others have suggested that other nations' labor market institutions and employers are more accommodating to apprenticeship models and prospects for domestic growth may be limited .

historically , the primary federal mechanism in the united states for supporting apprenticeships has been registering individual programs that comply with federally directed standards ( "registered apprenticeships" ) .

registration is carried out by the department of labor ( dol ) or a dol - approved state agency .

in recent years , dol has supported expanded use of apprenticeship through a series of competitive grants to states and other intermediaries .

this report discusses federal efforts related to apprenticeship .

it begins by describing the long - established federal role in certifying apprenticeships programs through the registered apprenticeship system .

it then discusses more recent federal efforts to support apprenticeship expansion .

the appendix of the report discusses federal funding streams that focus on other human capital development strategies but can support apprenticeship in certain circumstances .

the national apprenticeship act of 1937 directs dol to "formulate and promote the furtherance of labor standards necessary to safeguard the welfare of apprentices. .

dol has carried out these provisions by developing a system in which dol or a dol - recognized state apprenticeship agency registers individual programs as meeting federal and / or state standards .

registration agencies also issue certificates of completion to apprentices who complete a registered program .

the national apprenticeship act is relatively concise , and the registered apprenticeship system has been established and developed predominantly through regulations and non - regulatory guidance .

the agency within dol that carries out the national apprenticeship act is the office of apprenticeship ; the office's chief official is the administrator .

registration of an apprenticeship program does not entitle an apprenticeship sponsor ( typically an employer , although it can also be a labor union , industry group .

or other eligible entity ) to direct financial support from the federal government .

registration can make it easier for an apprenticeship program to operate within the eligibility rules of some federal programs and systems .

for example , registered apprenticeship programs are approvable for gi bill support , and are automatically eligible training providers for federal workforce funds .

it is very likely , however , that at least some federally registered programs do not receive any federal funds .

in the federal context , "apprenticeship" has been typically synonymous with registered apprenticeship programs .

programs that may have a strategy or format similar to apprenticeship but are not registered are not typically considered apprenticeships by the federal government , though they may be considered on - the - job training under federal education and workforce programs .

unless specified otherwise , when this report refers to apprenticeship , it is referring to registered apprenticeship .

to register an apprenticeship program , the apprenticeship sponsor must submit an application to the applicable registration body ( either dol or an saa ) .

the application must include a description of the program and how it complies with standards established in regulation .

apprenticeship sponsors have several options for assistance in developing their programs and corresponding registration applications .

sponsors can seek assistance directly from the registration agencies or from an intermediary such as an industry group .

 table 1 presents participation in registered apprenticeships from fy2013 through fy2017 .

the "national total" column includes all registered apprenticeship programs .

the "military apprenticeship program" column is members of the armed forces in the usmap ; these participants are included in the national totals .

the table includes counts of active , new , and completer apprentices .

readers should not use the data in the table to calculate annual completion percentages .

the multiyear nature of most programs means that most new apprentices would not complete a program until a subsequent fiscal year .

further , new apprentices who discontinue a program within the probationary period may be included in table 1 but would not be counted in the eventual calculation of the completion rate .

while total participation is available for registered apprenticeships nationwide , some data are limited to programs that are registered with dol ( not state apprenticeship agencies ) .

table 2 is limited to federally registered apprentices and presents industries with the most apprentices in fy2017 .

about 68% of active apprentices were in the construction industry .

the data in the table exclude apprentices in the usmap and apprenticeships registered by state approving agencies .

while registered apprenticeship has historically been a primarily private sector initiative with federal oversight , there have been several efforts in recent years to expand the federal role and support apprenticeship more directly .

these efforts have included competitive grants that supported varied approaches to expanding apprenticeship and a 2017 executive order that proposed modifying the registration process and directed federal departments to increase promotion of apprenticeship .

in recent years , the federal government has supplemented its registration and technical support efforts with competitive grants supported by multiple funding streams .

in each of the past three fiscal years , congress has appropriated funds to dol "to expand opportunities relating to apprenticeship programs registered under the national apprenticeship act ... through grants , cooperative agreements , contracts , and other arrangements. .

appropriations were $90 million in fy2016 , $95 million in fy2017 , and $145 million in fy2018 .

examples of the efforts competitive grants funded through these appropriations have supported include the following: state expansion grants .

these grants to state agencies were awarded in november 2016 and were designed to help state agencies develop and implement strategies to support the expansion of apprenticeship as a workforce development strategy .

the grants were supported by funds appropriated in the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

there were 37 successful grantees , and grants totaled $50.5 million .

national industry and national equity partner grants .

these grants were awarded to nongoverment organizations in september 2016 to engage in efforts to expand apprenticeship in certain industries and among certain underrepresented populations .

the grants were supported by funds appropriated in the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

there were 14 grantees , and grants totaled $20.4 million .

when sponsoring high - skill immigrants under h - 1b visas , employers pay a fee that is subsequently allocated to dol to support training programs .

the department has some flexibility in choosing the exact activities that are supported by these funds .

statute specifies that the funding must support training in "high growth industries and economic sectors. .

in recent years , appropriations laws have further specified that the funds must be used for grants intended to support training in occupations and industries for which employers are using h - 1b visas to hire foreign workers .

dol has used this funding stream to support a variety of grants .

in 2015 , it used $175 million of the h - 1b training funds for "american apprenticeship initiative grants. .

these grants were awarded to partnerships of public and private entities to create new apprenticeship programs and expand existing programs .

the trump administration expressed interest in using these funds to support apprenticeship - oriented activities in a 2017 executive order .

as of this writing , however , the administration had not solicited any apprenticeship - related grants supported by this funding stream .

in june 2017 , president trump issued executive order ( eo ) 13801 .

the eo emphasized the promotion of apprenticeship as an employer - driven workforce development strategy that may come at a lower cost than traditional higher education .

the eo directed the secretary of labor to "consider proposing regulations" that "reflect an assessment of whether" to modify the registration process to increase the role of nongovernment entities .

the eo specified that the current approving agencies may retain their current role in finalizing the registration of apprenticeship programs , but programs that have been recognized by a qualified third party may qualify for "expedited and streamlined" registration .

the eo encouraged specified federal agencies to promote apprenticeship as a workforce development strategy .

the eo directed the secretary of labor to establish a task force on apprenticeship to identify strategies and proposals to promote apprenticeship and submit a report to the president .

the eo specifies that dol shall use funding to promote apprenticeships , "subject to available appropriations and consistent with applicable law. .

the only specific funding stream mentioned in the eo is the aforementioned funding dol receives each year from h - 1b immigration visa fees .

it is unclear if or how other funding streams will support the objectives of the eo .

in november 2016 , the department of commerce issued an agency - commissioned report that discussed apprenticeship from a business perspective and provided detailed case studies of 13 existing programs .

the case studies included firms in health care , information technology , and several industrial fields .

the study acknowledged that firms included may not be representative of all firms that have started or considered apprenticeship programs .

still , the report may offer some useful "on the ground" perspectives on how employers develop and implement apprenticeship programs .

several themes emerged throughout the report: employer investments in apprentices are substantial .

the report found that "not considering start - up costs , the most expensive program in our sample of firms cost $250,000 per apprentice ; the least less than $25,000. .

the variation was at least partially attributable to differences in program lengths: the longest program was four years , and the shortest was one year .

all companies reported that the major cost for their program was apprentice wages .

other costs included program start - up , tuition and materials for related instruction , staff time , and overhead .

companies in the sample were generally satisfied with the results of their programs .

the report found that "the companies in our sample were unanimous in their support of apprenticeships. .

it also noted that the "poaching" of apprentices by other employers was not a major issue for apprenticeship sponsors .

the report further noted that some firms reduced the cost risks of poaching by developing their apprenticeship programs in consortia with similar employers .

at least some p rograms were very competitive .

not all programs in the study described the number of applicants relative to the number of apprentices , but the programs that did were selective , with sponsors selecting approximately 10% to 15% of applicants for an apprenticeship .

in addition to the activities at the department of labor's office of apprenticeship , there are other federal funding streams that can directly support apprenticeship or individual apprentices .

these funding streams most frequently support other means of human capital development , but they can also support apprenticeship in some circumstances .

this section highlights federal funding streams in which the administering departments have issued guidance on how to utilize funds for apprenticeship .

it is likely that there are other federal funding streams that could support apprenticeship in certain circumstances .

workforce funding through the workforce innovation and opportunity act the workforce innovation and opportunity act ( wioa ) authorizes formula grants to state workforce agencies to support job training and career services .

wioa funding is administered at the state and local levels by workforce development boards ( wdbs ) , which are partnerships of local employers , training providers , and other workforce stakeholders .

state and local wdbs have autonomy to support workforce development through a variety of activities .

statute and guidance have specified a number of ways in which wdbs can use wioa funds to support apprenticeship .

for example , the on - the - job training provisions of wioa allow wdbs to reimburse apprenticeship sponsors for a portion of wages paid to apprentices .

the training provisions of wioa allow funds to be used for expenses related to an apprenticeship program's related instruction .

in addition to potentially providing direct financial support for apprenticeship programs , wioa contains several administrative provisions that institutionally integrate local registered apprenticeship programs into state workforce systems .

wioa specifies that there must be a representative from a registered apprenticeship program on each state and local wdb .

these boards are responsible for recognizing local workforce programs that meet local needs and approving those programs for wioa funding .

registered apprenticeship programs are automatically eligible for wioa funding ; they do not need to be approved by a wdb .

gi bill and veterans education benefits individuals eligible for a gi bill , including former members of the armed forces , can typically use their benefits while pursuing an approved apprenticeship .

for example , veterans who use the post - 9 / 11 gi bill ( the most common education benefit for recent veterans ) while pursuing a registered apprenticeship program qualify for a housing allowance while participating in the apprenticeship .

the amount of the housing allowance varies by geographic location and other factors .

post - 9 / 11 gi bill participants in a registered apprenticeship program receive up to 100% of the housing allowance for the first six months of the program .

the allowance then declines 20 percentage points every six months until reaching 20% .

the declines in the housing allowance are intended to align approximately with scheduled wage increases in the apprenticeship program .

post - 9 / 11 gi bill participants pursuing apprenticeship more than half - time also receive a books and supplies stipend .

in cases where gi bill - eligible apprentices are required to pay for their related instruction , an apprentice may also be able to use his or her gi bill benefits to cover tuition and fees associated with related instruction .

federal student aid in some circumstances , individual apprentices may be able to access federal student aid ( fsa ) funds such as pell grants or subsidized student loans .

eligibility for fsa funds is largely contingent on whether the apprenticeship ( or a component of the apprenticeship , such as the related instruction component ) is an academic program that is eligible for federal student aid .

notably , registration of an apprenticeship program does not necessarily qualify it for federal student aid , and it is possible that there are apprenticeship programs that are not registered by a registration agency but are eligible for fsa funds .

apprenticeship programs ( or components thereof ) that are eligible for federal student aid must ( 1 ) lead to a degree , diploma , certificate , or other recognized credential ; ( 2 ) be provided by an eligible institution ; and ( 3 ) meet program length requirements in terms of credit hours or clock hours .

for need - based fsa , a student must also meet the financial criteria for a given program .

the fsa eligibility criteria can be applied separately to the on - the - job training and related instruction portions of an apprenticeship .

for example , the related instruction portion of a program may be eligible while the on - the - job training portion is not .

the on - the - job training portion of an apprenticeship program can be eligible for fsa if the on - the - job training portion of the program is for qualified credit from an fsa - eligible institution .

guidance specifies that there are no federal limits on the percentage of a qualified program that may consist of on - the - job training , so long as the training is provided by the institution of higher education .

using these criteria , on - the - job training that is either not for credit or is provided by an entity other than an eligible institution ( such as an employer ) would not qualify for fsa .

in limited cases , institutions may choose to use federal work study ( fws ) funding to cover a portion of an apprentice's wages during on - the - job training .

if an institution chooses to include apprenticeship employment as part of its fws program , selected eligible students may receive fws wages for employment in the apprenticeship , even if the apprenticeship is not part of the student's educational program .

