the electrical grid in the united states comprises all of the power plants generating electricity , together with the transmission and distribution lines and systems that bring power to end - use customers .

the "grid" also connects the many publicly and privately owned electric utility and power companies in different states and regions of the united states .

however , with changes in federal law , regulatory changes , and the aging of the electric power infrastructure as drivers , the grid is changing from a largely patchwork system built to serve the needs of individual electric utility companies to essentially a national interconnected system , accommodating massive transfers of electrical energy among regions of the united states .

the modernization of the grid to accommodate today's power flows , serve reliability needs , and meet future projected uses is leading to the incorporation of electronic intelligence capabilities for power control purposes and operations monitoring .

the "smart grid" is the name given to this evolving intelligent electric power network , with digital technologies increasingly replacing analog devices , thus enabling smart grid hardware and software functions .

the u.s. department of energy ( doe ) describes the smart grid as "an intelligent electricity grid — one that uses digital communications technology , information systems , and automation to detect and react to local changes in usage , improve system operating efficiency , and , in turn , reduce operating costs while maintaining high system reliability. .

the smart grid is viewed as a modernization of the nation's power grid by the edison electric institute ( eei ) , the trade association of the u.s. investor - owned utilities , which serve approximately 68% of u.s. electricity customers .

eei states that "[t]he modern grid will utilize telecommunications and information technology infrastructure to enhance the reliability and efficiency of the electric delivery system .

the smart grid will meet the growing electricity needs of our digital economy more effectively. .

smart grid technologies are seen as necessary to handle the more complex power flows on the modern grid .

the grid was originally designed by electric utilities to serve customers within the same state , and as shown in figure 1 , electricity flowed in one direction from power plants to customers .

over time , the grid expanded as utilities formed power pools to interconnect their transmission systems to share power generation resources .

in the closing decades of the last century , with the advent of competition in the electricity industry and power marketing and the development of regional transmission organizations serving multi - state areas , large regional power flows began to dominate transmission systems .

now , with increasing two - directional power flows ( as illustrated in figure 2 ) , the grid is being augmented with new technologies to manage an evolving system with many potential points for electricity generation , demand response , and energy storage .

doe summarizes smart grid technologies as being able to "monitor , protect , and automatically optimize the operation of its interconnected elements , including central and distributed generation ; transmission and distribution systems ; commercial and industrial users ; buildings ; energy storage ; electric vehicles ; and thermostats , appliances , and consumer devices. .

these technologies will include both new and redesigned technologies , such as phasor measurement units and advanced meters , which are expected to increase electric system reliability , flexibility , and grid resiliency .

within the delivery portion of the electric grid , smart grid technology is enabling sizable improvements in distribution and transmission automation .

emerging technologies on the distribution grid ( whether digital communications , sensors , control systems , digital "smart" meters , distributed energy resources , greater customer engagement , etc. ) .

present both technical and policy challenges and opportunities for the delivery of energy services .

according to doe , there are likely to be many other opportunities to infuse advanced technology into key operating elements of the grid , and some of these technologies are described in table 1 .

in 2014 , doe issued a report assessing the status of smart grid deployment , concluding that the adoption of smart grid technologies ( i.e. , digital sensing , communications , and control technologies ) was accelerating but at varying rates "depending largely on decision - making at utility , state , and local levels. .

doe noted that the nation's electricity system is in the midst of "potentially transformative change," with challenges for smart grid deployment remaining with respect to the incorporation of grid - connected renewable and distributed energy sources and adaptability to current and future consumer - oriented applications .

a study by the rand corporation discussed hurdles to smart grid adoption , noting that cost was among the primary barriers: our findings suggest that , although the benefits of the smart grid are likely positive on net when viewed from a societal standpoint , several barriers to adoption ( i.e. , costs ) can reduce the size of the overall benefits and create both winners and losers across households and other consumers .

technical solutions at the transmission and distribution levels ( such as the increased ability to monitor the system for problems and incorporate intermittent renewable energy sources ) can provide some benefits to both utilities and customers ( through passed through savings ) , and the efficiency benefits associated with real - time pricing and demand response enabled by smart - grid technologies can be significant .

estimating costs for smart grid systems can be difficult given that digital technologies are constantly evolving and must be designed or augmented for cybersecurity .

that said , two recent estimates illustrate a range of costs for building the smart grid .

in 2011 , the electric power research institute ( epri ) estimated that $338 billion to $476 billion over a 20-year period would be required for a "fully functioning smart grid. .

the estimate includes preliminary amounts of $82 billion to $90 billion for transmission systems and substations , $232 billion to $339 billion for distribution systems , and $24 billion to $46 billion for consumer systems .

previously , the brattle group had estimated in 2008 that the electric utility industry "will need to make a total infrastructure investment of $1.5 trillion to $2.0 trillion by 2030" in its "realistically achievable potential" ( rap ) efficiency base case scenario .

as part of that investment , brattle identified $880 billion in transmission and distribution system modernization to integrate renewable energy and continue the installation of the smart grid .

electric utility infrastructure mostly consists of the power plants generating electricity and the transmission and distribution lines and other equipment delivering electricity to customers .

electricity infrastructure equipment generally has a long lifespan , and modernization is an ongoing process .

as of 2014 , there were more than 3,300 electricity providers — comprised of 2,012 p ublicly - owned utilities ( pous ) , 187 i nvestor - owned utilities ( ious ) , 876 c o - operative electric utilities ( co - ops ) , 218 power marketers , and nine federal power agencies ( fpas ) — serving almost 148 million customers .

ious had about 52% of electric industry electricity sales in 2014 , followed by power marketers with 20% , pous with 15% , co - ops with 11% , and fpas with 1% .

most electricity infrastructure is financed by private sector investment and is built by ious , pous , and co - ops .

the cost of capital can vary according to several factors , including by type of electricity provider .

most electric utilities appear to view smart grid systems positively , even with the added concerns for cybersecurity .

cost of operations could be reduced and system resiliency improved by further integration of automated switches and sensors , even considering the cost of a more cybersecure environment .

but with the potentially high costs of a formal transition , some see smart grid deployment continuing much the same as it has , with a gradual modernization of the system as older components are replaced .

the potential for the smart grid to enable change may be most visibly exemplified in the potential to further integrate variable renewable resources at a lower cost .

a wider deployment of a "fully functional" smart grid could see the renewable generation in one state or region supporting energy needs in another state or region .

it is likely that all of the drivers and technologies — from microgrids , energy efficiency , smart appliances , and zero - net energy homes to electric vehicles ( evs ) and energy storage — could see more effective deployment at lower cost from an integrated smart grid approach .

modernization of the grid has been accomplished to various degrees as new digital systems replace old analog components .

attempts to introduce some components of the smart grid have been deemed successful ( eg , the deployment of synchrophasors providing real - time information on system power conditions and the replacement of old inverters on solar photovoltaic systems with smart inverters capable of disconnecting from the grid during times of power interruption ) .

but introduction of other components have been problematic .

smart meters have run into cost and performance issues and resistance to the technology ( generally from concerns of some customers over potential health impacts of radio wave emissions ) .

this section discusses some of the major concerns expressed about smart grid adoption .

while other potential issues exist , most electric utilities appear to view the intelligence and communications capabilities of smart grid systems positively with regard to the potential benefits of smart grid adoption discussed earlier in this report .

in the 115 th congress , the "distributed energy demonstration act of 2017" ( s. 1874 ) , introduced in september 2017 , would direct the secretary of energy to establish demonstration grant programs related to the smart grid and distributed energy resource technologies that are likely dependent on its deployment .

these technologies include energy generation technologies , demand response and energy efficiency resources , evs and associated supply equipment and systems , and aggregations and integrated control systems , including virtual power plants , microgrids , and networks of microgrid cells .

federal matching funds would be provided for qualifying smart grid investments .

s. 1874 would support the continued deployment of smart grid technologies but modify certain conditions of sgig grants to ensure various consumer benefits .

in the 114 th congress , the "north american energy security and infrastructure act of 2015" ( h.r .

8 ) was passed by the house in december 2015 .

the legislation included provisions to capitalize on the enabling nature of the smart grid for new energy efficient technologies .

the bill would have required doe to develop an energy security plan and to report on smart meter security concerns .

further , the bill would have directed the federal trade commission to consider energy guide labels on new products to state that the product features smart grid capability .

the use and value of that feature would depend upon the smart grid capability of the utility system in which the product is installed and the active utilization of that feature by the customer .

using the product's smart grid capability on such a system could reduce the product's annual operation costs .

