many public transportation agencies across the united states are losing riders .

while ridership nationally has risen about 3% over the past decade , that increase is due largely to strong gains in the new york area , which accounts for about 40% of all u.s. transit riders .

patronage has fallen in many of the other top 50 transit markets .

this downward trend , despite significant investments in light rail , streetcar , and bus rapid transit lines in many communities , has led to warnings that transit service in the united states is in crisis .

some of the factors contributing to the ridership decline , such as low gasoline prices and service problems at particular transit systems , may be transitory , but others , such as the growing popularity of telework and the rise of ridesourcing companies such as uber and lyft , may be longer lasting .

technological changes on the horizon , such as autonomous highway vehicles , might revolutionize transportation mobility , but whether this will increase or decrease transit ridership is by no means clear .

the federal government supports public transportation by distributing general funding for capital and operating expenses , mainly by formula , and by providing grants for major capital projects on a discretionary basis .

this report discusses the implications of recent trends in transit ridership for future federal policy .

according to data from the american public transportation association , annual public transportation ridership nationally declined by 3% between 2014 and 2016 .

preliminary figures show a further decline in 2017 .

however , the longer - term trend shows a small to moderate increase in ridership ( figure 1 ) .

the modest increase in national ridership over the past decade is due mainly to an increase of more than 20% in the new york city region .

that region , which includes parts of new york , new jersey , and connecticut , accounts for about 40% of national transit ridership .

if the new york region is excluded from the data , national transit ridership decreased by 7% over the past 10 years .

ridership was lower in 2016 than it was in 2006 in a number of major urban areas , including los angeles , washington , dc , miami , and atlanta , according to data from the federal transit administration ( fta ) ( figure 2 ) .

over the same period , smaller urban areas were almost equally split between those gaining and those losing ridership ( figure 3 ) .

a separate analysis of fta data from june 2014 through june 2017 found that among the 41 urban areas with populations of 1 million or more , los angeles accounted for 23% of ridership losses .

new york , which saw ridership declines in 2016 and 2017 after several years of increases , accounted for 14% of national ridership losses during that period , followed by washington , dc ( 11% ) , chicago ( 8% ) , miami ( 6% ) , philadelphia ( 5% ) , and boston ( 4% ) .

six of the 41 areas gained ridership over this period .

nationally , buses were the main transit mode in 2016 , providing slightly more than half of all trips in that year .

bus ridership declined between 2006 and 2016 , but this was offset by higher growth in rail ridership , particularly in the new york region .

transit rail includes subways , light rail and streetcars , and commuter rail .

if new york is excluded , buses provided about twice as many public transportation trips as rail services .

without new york , the decline in bus ridership is about the same between 2006 and 2016 , but the increase in rail ridership is less pronounced ( figure 4 ) .

in many places , rail ridership has grown because of the opening of new rail systems and lines .

these new rail lines , however , have not necessarily boosted transit ridership overall .

new rail service can be detrimental to an existing bus network as service overall is realigned and resources are shifted toward operating and maintaining the new rail lines .

moreover , the building of new rail systems , often in search of wealthier discretionary riders , can be to the detriment of lower - income , bus - dependent populations in areas not served by the new lines .

the effect sometimes has been to turn bus riders into rail passengers with little net gain in transit patronage , and at increased cost .

some have suggested that the restructuring of bus routes in response to the opening of new rail lines , along with an increase in bus fares , has contributed to lower ridership in los angeles .

there is no comprehensive explanation for the overall decline in ridership outside of new york .

national trends in public transportation ridership are not necessarily reflected at the local level ; thus , different areas may have different reasons for growth or decline .

probably the two most relevant factors in the current context are the attractiveness of other transportation options and transit service supply issues .

in the short to medium term , roughly 10 to 20 years , transit demand is likely to be determined by population growth and the public commitment to supplying transit .

ridership is likely to increase and decrease as gas prices rise and fall , and as other factors make driving more or less attractive .

these include the extent , duration , and intensity of highway congestion ; the price of parking ; and the implementation of fuel taxes , tolls , and mileage - based user fees .

however , the most important factors are likely to be the attractiveness of public transportation in terms of fares , speed , reliability , and coverage .

for this , public transportation providers will rely heavily on federal , state , and local funding .

success will depend , to some extent , on how much of this funding goes to service improvements .

service improvements can be made by changes that are not necessarily dependent on funding increases .

some transit agencies have recently sought to reconfigure antiquated bus routes to better serve current demand , despite local political pressure to protect the status quo .

in some instances , this involves increasing bus frequency with fewer stops on less circuitous routes .

it can also involve making bus travel faster by designing streets with dedicated bus lanes and priority for buses at traffic signals and by using technology to enable riders to pay their fares before boarding .

according to the census bureau , the u.s. resident population is expected to increase by about 26 million in the next 10 years ( an 8% increase ) and about 48 million in the next 20 years ( a 15% increase ) .

southern and western cities such as atlanta , dallas , houston , and phoenix are likely to move up the rankings of the largest urban areas over the coming years , but the fastest - growing urban areas are likely to be small and medium - sized places in the south and west where transit use is relatively low .

there is some evidence that in larger metropolitan areas major employers are seeking out locations that are well served by transit , but the general trend remains job dispersion across suburbs with low employment density .

the combination of relatively low - density residential growth and low - density employment growth may limit the extent to which population growth brings higher transit ridership .

although ridesourcing seems likely to depress overall demand for transit , that outcome is not a foregone conclusion .

ridesourcing companies appear to be subsidizing their service , such that the total amount paid by riders from 2012 through the first half of 2016 may have been only 60% of the cost of providing the service .

if the cost of ridesourced trips were to increase to at least a breakeven proposition , ridesourcing may become a less attractive alternative to public transportation .

while some transit agencies have begun cooperating with ridesourcing companies to provide the first mile / last mile of a transit trip , decisions about transit service supply made on the assumption that these types of service will always be available at the current price might cause problems in the future .

the introduction of driverless vehicle technology is perhaps the biggest unknown , but potentially the most disruptive factor for future public transportation ridership .

estimates of when fully autonomous vehicles will be in use in urban environments vary wildly from a few years to a few decades .

based on the introduction of past vehicle technology , it is likely that even if fully autonomous vehicles are available in a few years , it will take decades for them to become ubiquitous .

fleets of driverless taxis that can be hailed with a smartphone could potentially offer service much more cheaply than taxis and ridesourcing do today , as labor , which makes up about half of the cost of such a trip , would no longer be a significant factor .

autonomous vehicles may provide a new option for those currently unable to drive , such as children , the elderly , and the disabled .

widespread deployment of autonomous vehicles and driverless taxis , therefore , could lead to a greater number of vehicle trips and a decline in traditional transit ridership .

although autonomous vehicles may use road space more efficiently and cause fewer crashes than human - driven vehicles , it is possible that their widespread use would increase traffic congestion in the largest cities , thereby creating a need for some form of shared - ride service .

traditional transit buses may be able to adopt the same driverless technology to cut costs , but in many places this is likely to be on - demand service provided by small buses , vans , and other types of "microtransit. .

some microtransit pilot projects along these lines , with drivers , are being run by transit agencies in los angeles ; austin , tx ; kansas city , mo ; santa clara county , ca ; and the alameda - contra costa transit district near san francisco .

ridesourcing companies are experimenting with shared - ride services as well .

because road space is severely limited in the largest and most dense cities , rail transit service will likely remain important in those places .

autonomous vehicles may even provide a relatively cheap and easy way to access rail service .

however , in general , autonomous vehicles will significantly reduce the costs of traveling by automobile , shifting demand to road from rail .

it is possible that travel time will become less of a concern to motorists , as fully autonomous vehicles will allow riders to engage in other activities while traveling , such as working , eating , and sleeping .

consequently , autonomous vehicles could make it more attractive , at least in transportation terms , to live in low - density places that are distant from other activity centers .

transit , particularly rail transit , is unlikely to thrive in such places .

the federal government is involved in the provision of public transportation in two main ways .

first , it provides about 18% , on average , of the capital and operating funds spent by public transportation agencies throughout the country .

fares and other revenues make up about 26% , local funding about 34% , and state funding about 22% .

second , through the capital investment grant ( cig ) program ( also known as the new starts program ) , the federal government plays a significant role in the building of new transit rail and bus rapid transit systems and the extension and expansion of existing systems .

the future of public transportation ridership has implications for both general funding and cig program funding .

national transit ridership is somewhat dependent on the level of federal funding .

less federal funding would likely lead to less total spending on public transportation , at least for a time as state and local governments adjust , and thus would likely lead to less service and lower ridership .

conversely , more federal outlays in the short term would likely provide for ridership at a higher level than it otherwise would be , unless they result in state and local governments cutting back on their own spending for transit purposes .

currently , more than three - quarters of federal public transportation funding is distributed by a set of formulas that are tenuously related to ridership .

for example , about 6% of funding under the urbanized area formula program is distributed on the basis of passenger miles through what are known as "incentive tiers" ( 49 u.s.c .

ยง5336 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( b ) and 49 u.s.c .

ยง5336 ( c ) ( 2 ) ) .

an alternative approach might tie federal funding to changes in ridership , such as the number of revenue passengers , or to productivity , such as the average number of passengers per bus - mile .

such an approach would provide transit agencies an incentive to improve their performance while allowing them to innovate by redesigning their bus networks , introducing technology to speed up boarding , or adjusting service levels .

a possible downside is that encouraging transit agencies to focus exclusively on ridership may discourage them from serving isolated areas with transit - dependent populations .

although small transit agencies frequently receive federal operating assistance , most transit operators in urbanized areas with populations above 200,000 or with more than 100 buses can use federal funds only for capital expenses or maintenance .

greater federal support for transit operations could increase the quantity of transit service offered by local transit agencies , potentially expanding ridership .

there are three main issues with federal operating support: its effects on service , productivity , and asset condition .

research on the rapid expansion of operating support in the 1970s generally concluded that it allowed transit agencies to maintain a higher level of transit service than would have prevailed without it , but that such support also caused productivity to decline .

much of the decline was related to the increased supply - side cost of providing service , particularly in wages and fringe benefits .

some productivity decline comes from the problem of providing service in places with less demand , a problem that might be mitigated with a focus on incentives funding .

the effects of operating support on asset condition are much less clear .

it is possible that greater flexibility in the use of federal funding for operating expenses may be associated with a more rapid decline in the condition of capital assets , as some transit agencies focus on pressing day - to - day needs rather than asset renewal .

however , existing flexibility to use capital funds for maintenance may help agencies to preserve equipment and facilities .

uncertainty about the introduction of autonomous vehicles has increased the difficulty of forecasting the ridership of rail systems that are designed to operate for many decades .

it is imaginable that autonomous vehicles could be widely used to shuttle passengers to and from rail transit stations in areas with low residential or employment density , potentially increasing demand for rail transit .

however , it is also imaginable that autonomous vehicles could make it more attractive for people living or working in high - density areas to travel considerable distances by car and without parking concerns , reducing demand for rail transit .

which outcome occurs may depend , in part , on whether state and local governments seek to restrain use of autonomous vehicles through road user charges or other measures .

this uncertainty poses challenges for transit systems considering long - term capital investments and for the federal programs that fund such investments .

the main federal program supporting capital expenditures by transit agencies , the cig program , was originally developed to fund construction of new rail transit and commuter rail projects , but in recent years a growing proportion of its outlays have gone for bus rapid transit projects .

a key policy issue is whether future federal funding should focus on buses , which last about 10 years and can be redeployed as demand changes , rather than on rail systems that last 30 years or more and are inflexible but are far more efficient at transporting large numbers of passengers in dense corridors .

if demand for traditional transit service declines , there may be demand for other types of shared - ride service .

in that case , there may be pressure to shift public subsidies from traditional transit services , such as buses , to on - demand shared autonomous vehicle services , whether operated publicly or privately .

this could mitigate the congestion and emissions of individually owned autonomous vehicles .

it might be possible to subsidize autonomous vehicle services for particular groups with limited mobility , such as disabled , elderly , and low - income populations , reducing the need for distinct transit services , such as paratransit , which tend to be expensive to provide .

while federal funding of on - demand shared - ride service provided publicly is not necessarily prohibited , it could raise issues of competition with private providers , access by disadvantaged groups , and the provision of operating support .

federal support of privately operated shared - mobility services is currently permissible in certain limited circumstances .

it might make sense to broaden the circumstances where federal funds can be used to support these types of services .

another possibility would be to allow tax - subsidized commuter benefits to cover on - demand shared autonomous vehicle services .

the cig program provides funding to support the construction of new fixed - guideway transit systems and to add to existing systems .

funding is also permitted for investments in existing fixed - guideway systems that increase the capacity of a corridor by at least 10% .

fixed - guideway services include transit rail , bus rapid transit , and ferry systems .

funding for the program is authorized from the general fund of the u.s. treasury .

the cig program has not been without controversy .

fta contends the program "is needed because it allows transit agencies to undertake major capital projects that would otherwise be infeasible for local governments and transit agencies to finance alone. .

supporters insist that growing demand for cig funds is evidence of its success .

critics , however , have contended that cig funding encourages communities to build expensive fixed - guideway infrastructure rather than invest lesser sums in improving bus service .

no comprehensive benefit - cost studies of completed cig projects have been conducted to evaluate the cig program as federal policy .

research has shown that some rail transit lines built at great cost with federal support have low ridership , but there are significant differences in benefit / cost ratios among systems .

according to one study , two of the systems with the largest net benefits include the subway systems in san francisco and new york city , while the rail system in buffalo and those operated by new jersey transit in newark , jersey city , and trenton have some of the largest net costs .

if the full promise of autonomous vehicles is realized , the benefits of rail in all but the largest and most dense cities are likely to decline dramatically .

in this situation , one policy option would be to eliminate the cig program and redirect the funding through the formula programs , possibly using formulas that have been changed to encourage ridership .

another option would be to redirect cig funding from building rail and perhaps even bus rapid transit in relatively small and dispersed urban areas to the large and dense cities where rail transit currently carries very large numbers of riders , such as new york , chicago , and washington , dc .

with new funds to refurbish old infrastructure and to add new capacity in congested areas , it might be possible to substantially increase national transit ridership in the short to medium term .

the cost of car ownership and use is low in the united states compared with most other highly developed countries , a contributing factor for the major differences in transit use .

for example , according to the federal highway administration , the average tax per gallon on gasoline in this country was $0.43 in december 2014 , including federal and state taxes , compared with $2.22 in japan , $4.19 in germany , and $4.83 in italy .

highway user fees , including fuels tax , tolls , and vehicle registration fees , cover about 60% of the cost of highway infrastructure in 2012 , with the other 40% coming from , among other things , general funds , property taxes , and bond issuance .

as a share of highway expenditures , user fees have generally declined over the past decade .

additionally , many economists note that there are external costs of driving , such as congestion , air pollution , and publicly borne costs of crashes .

raising user fees on automobiles would make transit comparatively more attractive .

many fees , such as vehicle registration fees and parking charges , are controlled at the state and local level .

options at the federal level include raising the federal fuels tax , implementing a mileage - based user charge at a level above today's fuels tax , and encouraging greater use of tolling , including congestion pricing .

