this report provides an overview of the federal crop insurance program .

since its inception in 1938 , the program has evolved from an ancillary program with low participation to a central pillar of federal support for agriculture .

as the program has grown — in types of insurance policies , breadth of crops covered , and millions of acres enrolled — so has the cost of the program to the federal government .

from 2007 to 2016 , the total net cost of the federal crop insurance program was about $72 billion , of which $43 billion ( 60% ) was of direct benefit to producers , $28 billion ( 39% ) went to private insurers , and $754 million ( 1% ) went to the risk management agency ( rma ) within the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

the " role of crop insurance in the farm bill " section compares the cost of the federal crop insurance program with other titles in the 2014 farm bill and recounts that previous farm bills have modified the program .

several bills , including the house agriculture committee's agriculture and nutrition act of 2018 ( h.r .

2 ) , have proposed changes to the federal crop insurance program .

the " background " section of this report discusses the federal government's entrance into the crop insurance market , outlines the inception and growth of the federal crop insurance program , and examines the federal crop insurance program's uncertain effect on supplemental disaster programs .

the " participation , policy types , and restrictions " section describes the federal crop insurance portfolio — market penetration , crops and livestock covered , the primary policy types , the distribution of claim payments across primary crops , and conservation - related requirements .

the " program operation and finances " section explains the relationship between the entities operating the program , how the program is funded , and the accounting of program costs .

this report does not analyze specific legislative proposals .

it also does not address the intricacies of the standard reinsurance agreement , the details of how the federal crop insurance corporation ( fcic ) and rma share authority for the program , mandatory spending under the federal crop insurance act ( 7 u.s.c .

§1501 et seq. ) .

that is not characterized as a "direct cost" by rma , or issues relating to improper payments , fraud , and congressional oversight of the program .

from 2007 to 2016 , the federal crop insurance title had the second - largest outlays in the farm bill after nutrition .

the total net cost of the program during those years was about $72 billion .

for fy2018 through fy2027 , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) projects that crop insurance will continue to be the second - largest farm bill outlay after nutrition , averaging about $7.7 billion a year , assuming current law remains in effect ( figure 1 ) .

the federal crop insurance program is permanently authorized ( 7 u.s.c .

§1501 et seq. ) .

and receives mandatory funding .

as such , it would continue to operate in the event that congress does not enact a new farm bill , although farm bills have been vehicles for modifying the program in the past .

as the expiration of the 2014 farm bill draws nearer , congress may debate proposals to modify the federal crop insurance program in considering the next farm bill .

since the agricultural act of 2014 ( "2014 farm bill," p.l .

113-79 ) , the federal crop insurance program has become a central agricultural support program , with comparable or larger outlays than either commodity price and income support programs ( eg , agricultural risk coverage , price loss coverage , and marketing assistance loans ) or conservation programs ( eg , environmental quality incentives program , conservation stewardship program , and conservation reserve program ) .

the federal crop insurance program is operated through public and private entities and is funded by both taxpayers and producers .

the federal crop insurance program is a central part of federal support for agriculture .

given the program's significant cost and share of usda program outlays , it is a frequent target for budgetary savings .

multiple bills introduced in the 115 th congress would modify the main financial components of the program — premium subsidies , the division of underwriting gains and losses between fcic and aips , and a&o and cat lae paid to aips .

as with any large program , especially those with private sector involvement , congressional oversight has a significant role in ensuring that the federal crop insurance program meets its intended policy goals and operates efficiently .

appendix a .

cost of federal crop insurance to the government appendix b .

crop insurance policy types and cycle the top three policies by liability in crop year 2017 were ( 1 ) revenue protection , ( 2 ) actual production history ( aph ) , and ( 3 ) yield protection ( yp ) .

together these three policies accounted for approximately 88% of total liabilities in the federal crop insurance program .

individual - yield policy type: aph , yp , and others individual yield policies insure an individual producer's historical yield at a specific price , which rma sets every spring prior to planting based on projected market prices .

rma offers two main types of yield policies: aph policies and yp policies .

they are similar but use different methodologies to determine projected prices .

both aph and yp policies use a producer's historical yield guarantee , the aph .

rma determines a producer's aph using records submitted by the producer .

with a few exceptions , rma requires a minimum of four years of records and will accept records for up to 10 years .

acceptable records include sale receipts and storage records .

for most crops , the aph is a simple average of the historical yields .

if producers do not have four years of records , rma substitutes a transition or "t yield" for the missing years .

t yields are based on the 10-year average county yield .

growers with no records are assigned 65% of the t yield as their aph yield .

if producers provide acceptable records for less than four years , they can receive between 80% and 100% of the t yield for the missing years depending on how many years they provide .

for aph policies , rma determines the projected price using a variety of tools depending on the crop .

for yp policies , rma determines the projected price from commodity exchanges using the methodology published in the applicable commodity exchange price provisions ( cepps ) .

for corn and soybeans , the projected price is the average chicago mercantile exchange ( cme , formerly chicago board of trade ) daily price in february for the december - futures contract of the same year for corn and the november - futures contract for soybeans ( figure b - 1 ) .

for both aph and yp policies , producers select coverage levels between 50% and 75% ( up to 85% in some areas ) of their aph yields and between 55% and 100% of the projected prices .

indemnities are triggered only if actual yields fall below the yield guarantee .

the higher the coverage level , the lower the premium subsidy rate .

rma offers cat coverage to individual producers at 50% of the aph yield and 55% of the projected price for an administrative fee of $300 per crop per county .

yield and price guarantees equal the selected coverage levels times the aph yield and projected price , respectively .

an indemnity is triggered only if actual yields fall below the yield guarantee .

indemnities equal the difference between the yield guarantee and the actual yield times the price guarantee times the number of acres insured .

individual - revenue policy type: revenue protection and others rma offers several revenue policies .

the individual revenue protection policy ( rp ) is the most prevalent revenue product .

rp policies insure against loss of revenue ( equal to production times price ) .

these policies use an individual producer's aph yield and the higher of either a "projected price" or "harvest price" ( as defined by the applicable cepps ) to set a revenue guarantee .

in the case of corn and soybeans , the projected price is the average cme daily price in february for the december - futures contract of the same year for corn and the november - futures contract for soybeans ( figure b - 2 ) .

the harvest price is the average cme daily price in october for the december - futures contract for corn of the same year and the november - futures contract for soybeans .

for rp policies , indemnities are triggered if an individual producer's "actual" revenue is lower than the revenue guarantee .

the revenue guarantee is the product of the aph yield guarantee and the projected or harvest price ( whichever is higher ) , times the level of guarantee selected ( between 65% and 85% ) .

"actual" revenue is the product of the producer's actual yield and the harvest price .

it does not use the actual price the producer receives for the crop .

rma does not offer cat coverage for rp policies .

the default option for rp described above takes the higher of the projected price or harvest price .

rma also offers a less expensive variation of this policy called rp with harvest price exclusion , which uses only the projected price .

other policies in addition to individual revenue and yield policies , the federal crop insurance program offers several other types of policies , such as whole - farm revenue protection and margin insurance products .

these policies made up about 11.8% of liabilities in the federal crop insurance book in crop year 2017 .

federal crop insurance cycle federal crop insurance policies follow a cycle that differs from policies in other sectors .

unlike many other insurance sectors that charge premiums upfront , federal crop insurance premiums are billed toward the end the insurance cycle ( figure b - 3 ) .

appendix c. list of approved insurance providers appendix d. rate of return on premiu .

