in general , pension plans are a form of deferred compensation: workers do not receive income when it is earned but rather receive that income in the future .

the internal revenue code ( irc ) provides tax advantages to certain deferred compensation schemes: rather than including such compensation in taxable income when it is earned , the compensation is included in taxable income when it is received by the individual ( presumably , in retirement ) .

pension plans may be classified according to whether they are ( 1 ) defined benefit ( db ) or defined contribution ( dc ) plans and ( 2 ) sponsored by one or more than one employer .

with db plans , participants receive regular monthly benefit payments in retirement ( which some refer to as a "traditional" pension ) .

with dc plans , of which the 401 ( k ) plan is the most common , participants have individual accounts that are the basis of income in retirement .

the plans that are the subject of this report are db plans .

pension plans are also classified by whether they are sponsored by one employer ( single - employer plans ) or by more than one employer ( multiemployer and multiple employer plans ) .

multiemployer pension plans are sponsored by more than one employer ( often , though not required to be , in the same industry ) and maintained as part of a collective bargaining agreement .

multiple employer plans are sponsored by more than one employer but are not maintained as part of collective bargaining agreements .

the plans that are the subject of this report are multiemployer plans .

multiemployer db pensions are of current concern to congress because approximately 10% to 15% of participants are in plans that may become insolvent .

when a multiemployer pension plan becomes insolvent , the pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) provides financial assistance to the plan so the plan can continue to pay benefits up to the pbgc guaranteed amount .

with plans that receive pbgc financial assistance , there is a statutory maximum benefit that the plan can provide , currently equal to $12,870 per year for an individual with 30 years of service in the plan .

the guarantee is not adjusted for changes in the cost of living .

using 2013 data , pbgc estimated that 79% of participants in multiemployer plans that were receiving financial assistance receive their full benefit ( eg , their benefits were below the pbgc maximum guarantee ) .

among participants in plans that were terminated and likely to need financial assistance in the future , 49% of participants have a benefit below the pbgc maximum guarantee , and 51% have a benefit larger than the pbgc maximum guarantee .

among ongoing plans ( neither receiving pbgc financial assistance nor terminated and expected to receive financial assistance ) , the average benefit is almost twice as large as the average benefit in terminated plans .

this suggests that a larger percentage of participants in plans that receive pbgc financial assistance in the future are likely to see benefit reductions as a result of the pbgc maximum guarantee level .

pbgc estimates that in the future it will not have sufficient resources from which to provide financial assistance for insolvent plans to pay benefits at the pbgc guarantee level .

most participants would receive less than $2,000 per year because pbgc would be able to provide annual financial assistance equal only to its annual premium revenue , which was $291 million in fy2017 .

there is no obligation on the part of the federal government to provide financial assistance to pbgc , although some policymakers have stated that some form of federal assistance to pbgc might be necessary to ensure that participants' benefits are not reduced to a fraction of their promised benefits .

crs analyzed public - use form 5500 data from the department of labor ( dol ) for the 2015 plan year , the most recent year for which complete data are available .

most private - sector pension plans are required to annually report to the internal revenue service ( irs ) , dol , and pbgc information about the plan , such as the number of participants , financial information , and the companies that provide services to the plan .

in addition to form 5500 , pension plans are generally required to file additional information in specific schedules .

for example , most multiemployer db plans are required to file schedule mb , which contains information specific to multiemployer db plans , such as the zone status of the plan ( described below ) .

each pension plan's form 5500 and required schedules are available by search on dol's website .

the public - use form 5500 data included 1,363 plans that indicated they were multiemployer db pension plans for the 2015 plan year .

these plans had 10.8 million participants .

the analyzed data in this report consider only multiemployer db pension plans that filed schedule mb for the 2015 plan year .

not all multiemployer db pension plans file schedule mb .

for example , some plans that received pbgc financial assistance or had experienced a withdrawal of all employers in the plan ( but which were still paying benefits to retired participants ) did not file schedule mb in 2015 .

in the public - use form 5500 data , 1,267 plans with 10.7 million participants filed schedule mb in 2015 .

among participants in these plans that filed schedule mb in 2015 about 38.3% were active participants ( working and accruing benefits in a plan ) ; about 28.5% were retired participants ( currently receiving benefits from a plan ) ; about 27.5% were separated , vested participants ( not accruing benefits from a plan , but owed benefits and will receive them at eligibility age ) ; and about 5.7% were deceased participants whose beneficiaries are receiving or are entitled to receive benefits .

in 2015 , multiemployer db plans that filed schedule mb had $477.7 billion in assets and owed participants $1,038.0 billion in benefits , resulting in total underfunding of $560.3 billion .

the value for liabilities used in this report is the current liability value ( also called the rpa '94 [for retirement protection act of 1994] , passed as part of the uruguay round agreements act [ p.l .

103-465 ] ) on schedule mb .

plans report two values of liabilities: the actuarial value and the rpa '94 liability .

the main difference is the value of the discount rate that is used to value plan liabilities .

the actuarial valuation of liabilities typically discounts them using the expected return on assets .

the rpa '94 valuation of liabilities discounts them using a lower rate , based on interest rates on 30-year treasury securities .

the rpa '94 valuation method results in a higher valuation of plan liabilities compared to the actuarial valuation method .

among plans that filed schedule mb in 2015 , the median rpa '94 rate was 3.51% , and the median rate used to calculate the actuarial value of liabilities was 7.5% .

the discount rate used by pbgc is based on a survey of insurance annuity prices and is closer to the rpa '94 rate .

for example , the pbgc for discounting multiemployer plan liabilities in 2014 ( the most recent year available ) was 3.54% .

among the 1,267 multiemployer plans in 2015 that submitted schedule mb , 1,246 were underfunded ( owed more in future benefits than had in current assets ) , 17 plans were overfunded ( had more in assets than owed in future benefits ) , and 4 plans did not report any assets or liabilities .

some employers participate in more than one multiemployer db pension plan , and the insolvency of one plan in which a particular employer participates could have implications for the other plans in which that employer also participates .

for example , an employer that leaves a multiemployer plan generally has to pay withdrawal liability , which is the employer's share of unfunded benefits in that plan .

an employer that withdraws from a plan may be required to acknowledge the withdrawal liability in its financial statements , potentially affecting the employer's access to credit and its financial health .

other multiemployer plans to which an employer is a large contributor could be affected if that employer is forced to withdraw from those plans because of financial difficulties .

schedule r , part v , line 13 of form 5500 requires multiemployer db plans to list employers that contribute more than 5% of that plan's total contributions ( referred to in this report as "5% contributors" ) .

employer contributions listed in form 5500 include ( 1 ) regular employer contributions ( for employers with active participants in the plan ) and ( 2 ) employer withdrawal liability ( for employers that have withdrawn from the plan ) .

for the purposes of calculating the 5% threshold , it is unclear whether plans should include withdrawal liability in the calculations .

pbgc indicated that its staff's view was that withdrawal liability should not be included in the calculations and that other agencies were considering the issue in possible revisions to form 5500 .

in addition to the employer's name , the form lists each employer's employer identification number ( ein ) and dollar amount contributed .

of the 1,363 multiemployer plans , 1,163 plans indicated that they had at least one 5% contributor in 2015 .

among plans with at least one 5% contributor , the median number of 5% contributors was four .

table 5 lists employers whose contributions as 5% contributors totaled $25 million or more in 2015 .

note that an employer's total contributions to all of the multiemployer plans to which it contributed could have been larger than the amount listed in table 5 if the employer contributed to additional plans , but whose contributions to those other plans were less than 5% of a plan's total contributions .

the united parcel service ( ups ) is the largest 5% contributor in terms of the dollar amount of contributions as a 5% contributor .

a number of grocery chains contributed at least $25 million as 5% contributors: kroger , stop and shop , safeway , and albertsons are among the 10 largest 5% contributors ( as ranked by contributions as 5% contributors ) .

 table 6 lists the 5% contributors in the 12 largest multiemployer db plans that are in critical and declining status ( ranked by the amount of total contributions to the plan for the 2015 plan year ) and the number of plans in which each employer is a 5% contributor .

table 6 also lists the amount of the employer's contributions , the total number of contributing employers to the plan , the total amount of contributions to the plan , and the amount of contributions from 5% contributors as a percentage of total plan contributions .

total plan contributions include both required employer contributions and withdrawal liability , although plans might not include withdrawal liability payments when determining 5% contributors .

