the farm bill is omnibus , multi - year legislation that governs an array of agricultural and food programs .

it is typically reauthorized about every five years .

the current 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) contains 12 titles that address commodity program payments , farm credit , trade , agricultural conservation , research , rural development , energy , and foreign and domestic food programs , among others .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) implements the majority of the farm bill programs .

this report focuses on commodity program payments authorized by title i of the 2014 farm bill .

the authority for usda to operate farm commodity support programs comes from three permanent laws , as amended: the agricultural adjustment act of 1938 ( p.l .

75-430 ) , the agricultural act of 1949 ( p.l .

81-439 ) , and the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) charter act of 1948 ( p.l .

80-806 ) .

congress typically amends these laws through multi - year omnibus farm bills to address current market conditions , budget constraints , and related issues and concerns .

the most recent omnibus farm bill is the agricultural act of 2014 , referred to as the "2014 farm bill," which president barack obama signed into law on february 7 , 2014 .

many current farm bill provisions expire on september 30 , 2018 .

when the 2014 farm bill expires , farm programs would revert to the permanent laws mentioned above for the majority of crops eligible for commodity support programs — "program" or "covered" crops .

under permanent law , covered commodity support was available at levels much higher than they are now , and many of the currently supported commodities might not be eligible for coverage .

reverting to permanent law leads to results incompatible with global trading rules and federal budgetary policies — and could disrupt markets for food and feed — so public pressure tends to build at the end of one farm bill to enact another .

the two principal authorizing committees of u.s. farm policy — the house committee on agriculture and the senate committee on agriculture , nutrition , and forestry — have both stated the importance of addressing the farm bill and have held numerous hearings in anticipation of preparing successor legislation to the 2014 farm bill .

this report focuses on three principal support programs in title i of the 2014 farm bill: the price loss coverage ( plc ) , agriculture risk coverage ( arc ) , and marketing assistance loan ( mal ) programs .

affected commodities include corn , soybeans , wheat , rice , cotton , peanuts , oats , barley , grain sorghum , pulse crops ( dry peas , lentils , small chickpeas , and large chickpeas ) , and other oilseeds ( including sunflower seed , rapeseed , canola , safflower , flaxseed , mustard seed , crambe , and sesame seed ) .

in addition , this report discusses potential issues for congress — including expiration of the farm bill and the adjusted gross income eligibility threshold for commodity program payments — and presents a selection of legislation introduced in the 115 th congress that could impact the farm commodity program payments under title i .

dairy , livestock , tree crops , and sugar producers have separate programs within title i that are outside the scope of this report .

federal support for a limited number of basic agricultural commodities , such as wheat and cotton , began in the 1930s .

during the dust bowl and the great depression , farm household incomes were low relative to their urban counterparts due largely to weak commodity prices resulting from prolonged weakness in consumer demand .

the early federal farm support measures are intended to be temporary , but the principle of providing federal support for farm incomes continues to this day .

the federal government supported farm prices through their initial focus on supply control and management of commodity stockpiles .

supply controls were prominent for decades but waned after the 1980s and in 1996 were replaced with fixed , direct income support payments to producers of major field crops irrespective of market prices .

the 2014 farm bill repealed these direct payments but continues payments to producers of a broad array of "covered crops" when prices are low relative to statutory price support levels or when compared with historical crop revenue .

proponents of farm commodity programs argue that federal involvement in the sector is needed to stabilize farm incomes by shifting some of the risks inherent in farming from individual producers to the federal government .

these risks could potentially include market price instability and crop failure .

proponents see the goal of farm policy as maintaining the economic health of the nation's farm sector so as to facilitate adequate domestic supplies of food , feed , and fiber and to allow u.s. agriculture to fully exploit its comparative advantage in producing high - quality , affordable agricultural products for the global market .

critics argue that farm commodity programs waste taxpayer dollars , distort production of certain crops , capitalize benefits to the owners of the resources , encourage concentration of production , and place smaller - scale domestic producers and farmers in foreign countries that lack government support at a comparative disadvantage .

the 2014 farm bill eliminated several 2008 farm bill commodity support payment programs ( including direct and counter - cyclical payments , and the average crop revenue election program ) and introduced two new programs: plc and arc .

the new programs allow producers to participate during the 2014-2018 crop years .

no fees are associated with program participation ; however , signup is necessary .

following the introduction of new commodity support programs in the 2014 farm bill , a number of issues have emerged around these programs that could factor into congressional consideration of the next farm bill .

moreover , congress may consider how these programs perform during a period of lower crop prices and reduced farm income .

other issues around commodity support programs that have come up in the past — such as payment limits and income eligibility limits — may continue to be of interest for some members and to various stakeholders .

several of these issues are summarized below , along with selected legislative proposals that address commodity support programs .

farm commodity programs have evolved over time via successive farm bills that update and supersede prior policies .

however , a set of non - expiring provisions remain in statute and are known as "permanent law. .

these provisions were enacted primarily in the agriculture adjustment act of 1938 and the agricultural act of 1949 , as amended by subsequent farm bills .

many of the programs authorized by the 2014 farm bill will expire in 2018 unless congress provides for an extension or reauthorizes them .

without congressional action , farm commodity program payments would revert to permanently authorized legislation from the 1930s and 1940s .

the commodity support provisions of the 1938 and 1949 permanent laws are commonly viewed as being radically different from current policy — and inconsistent with today's farming practices , marketing system , and international trade agreements — while also being potentially costly to the federal government .

having these permanent laws as the legislative default has in the past tended to bring focus to efforts to reauthorize the farm bill .

the upcoming farm bill discussions may address arc , plc , and mal payments .

a number of bills introduced in the 115 th congress address various aspects of farm commodity programs , several of which would affect payments to producers .

a selection of these bills , along with a brief description of how they would impact commodity support programs , is in table 4 .

an issue that received substantial attention in the 2014 farm bill is the treatment of cotton under title i .

beginning with the 2014 farm bill , cotton was no longer a covered commodity and thus not eligible for plc or arc payments .

cotton has two co - products , the lint ( fiber ) and the seed .

cottonseed is separated from the lint at the gin and transported to a cottonseed crushing mill or fed directly to cattle .

once crushed , the oil can be used as a table - ready food product , while the meal is typically fed to livestock and poultry .

cottonseed is distinct from "seed cotton," which is un - ginned upland cotton that includes both lint and seed .

the 2014 farm bill lowered the mal loan rate incrementally in an attempt to resolve a long - running trade dispute with brazil .

in addition , the 2014 farm bill created stax , as well as two temporary payment programs — cotton transition assistance payments and cotton ginning cost - share payments .

subsequent to the enactment of the 2014 farm bill , the national cotton council ( ncc ) , along with other farm advocacy groups , requested that seed cotton be made eligible for commodity support program payments .

ncc considered this a "critically needed policy to restore eligibility for cotton in the title i arc and plc programs of the farm bill. .

others claimed that the seed cotton designation as a covered commodity was unnecessary and would likely revive the wto dispute with brazil .

in the bba , signed into law on february 9 , 2018 , congress included a provision that specified "seed cotton" as a covered commodity , thus making it eligible for the plc and arc programs beginning with the 2018 crop year .

however , even after the enactment of the bba , there are still claims that this seed cotton provision will likely revive a future wto dispute .

since the enactment of the 2014 farm bill , the data used to calculate the arc - co payments have become a matter of concern for producers and commodity groups .

these stakeholders have specifically identified disparities with crop county yield data underlying the arc - co payment calculations .

two bills introduced in the 115 th congress — s. 1259 and s. 1998 — seek to address these data concerns about yield .

survey data of crop yields collected by usda's national agricultural statistics service ( nass ) assist in the arc - co payment calculations .

a nass requirement for estimating a county yield is that it must receive at least 30 producer survey responses in a given county or that the survey responses represent at least 25% of a county's harvested acreage for the crop in question .

otherwise , nass bases the county yield on crop insurance yield data from usda's risk management agency .

on may 5 , 2017 , senator john thune introduced the "commodity program improvement act of 2017" ( s. 1259 ) , which would base arc - co payments on the payment rate in the county where the acres are located .

because each county has a different arc - co payment rate , some producers with multi - county farms contend that their current arc - co payments do not reflect the correct county - level payment calculation .

on october 24 , 2017 , senator heidi heitkamp introduced the "arc - co improvement act" ( s. 1998 ) , which would forgo nass survey data in favor of federal crop insurance data when making yield calculations for arc - co payments .

eight farm commodity advocacy groups have announced their support for senator heitkamp's proposal , including , the american soybean association .

to be eligible for most farm payments , a person must be "actively engaged" in farming .

the 2014 farm bill generally defines actively engaged as making a significant contribution of ( 1 ) capital , equipment , or land and ( 2 ) personal labor or active personal management .

also , profits are to be commensurate with the level of contributions , and contributions must be at risk .

legal entities can be actively engaged if members collectively contribute personal labor or active personal management .

special fsa classifications allow landowners to be considered actively engaged if they receive income based on the farm's operating results without providing labor or management .

the 2014 farm bill instructed usda to write regulations that define significant contribution of active personal management to more clearly and objectively implement existing law .

usda issued these regulations on december 16 , 2015 .

the regulation applied starting with the 2015 crop year .

the regulation specifically exempted entities comprised solely of lineal family members .

looking to the upcoming debate over the next farm bill , the national sustainable agriculture coalition has advocated for further tightening the definition of actively engaged , particularly as concerns large farm operations .

on the other hand , the american farm bureau federation — the largest farm organization in the united states — and some other advocacy groups have proposed modifications to the definition of actively engaged for purposes of payment limit eligibility .

these proposed changes would more broadly define family by including non - lineal family members such as first or second cousins .

the cumulative benefits across certain farm programs are subject to specific annual payment limits that can be received by an individual or legal entity .

much attention in recent farm bills has focused on the annual payment limits for title i commodity programs .

payment limits were first included in the 1970 farm bill ( p.l .

91-524 ) but have evolved substantially since that initial effort .

the 2014 farm bill sets an annual cap of $125,000 per person on the total payments under the plc , arc , and mal programs .

the limit applies to the total from all covered commodities except peanuts , which has its own separate limit of $125,000 .

all limits may be doubled if the producer has a spouse .

proposals to alter payment limits have been advanced by some members of congress and are also included in the president's fy2019 budget .

for example , a bill introduced by representative earl blumenauer , the "food and farm act" ( h.r .

4425 ) , would eliminate the $125,000 payment limit and the separate payment limit for peanuts and would also eliminate the two largest commodity support programs — arc and plc .

in addition , the president's fy2019 budget also proposes to eliminate peanut payments .

another issue that could come up for debate is the agi limit on eligibility for commodity program benefits .

the president's fy2019 budget proposes lowering the agi cap for eligibility for commodity program payments to $500,000 from $900,000 .

several large farm groups and commodity associations are opposed to lowering the agi limit to qualify for farm program benefits .

the agi for an individual producer — or a farm entity — is determined by averaging the agi declared on federal tax forms for the three tax years prior to the most recent tax year .

limits on eligibility based on income were first introduced in 2002 .

the 2002 , 2008 , and 2014 farm bills have each addressed the agi limit using a different approach: the 2002 farm bill established that producers with an agi exceeding $2.5 million were not eligible for certain program benefits .

the 2008 farm bill established separate agi limits for farm income ( $750,000 ) and off - farm income ( $500,000 ) .

the 2014 farm bill re - established the agi limit as a single limit on all income ( on - farm and off - farm ) of $900,000 ( three - year average ) or double that amount for married couples filing separate tax returns .

a producer with an agi in excess of $900,000 is not eligible for benefits under arc - co , arc - ic , plc , or mal .

