antipoverty interventions that provide resources to local communities , based on the characteristics of those communities , have been of interest to congress .

one such policy , dubbed the "10-20-30 provision," was implemented in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) .

title i , section 105 of arra required the secretary of agriculture to allocate at least 10% of funds provided in that act from three rural development program accounts to persistent poverty counties ; that is , to counties that have had poverty rates of 20% or more for the past 30 years , as measured by the 1980 , 1990 , and 2000 decennial censuses .

one notable characteristic of this provision is that it did not increase spending for the rural development programs addressed in arra , but rather targeted existing funds differently .

given congress's interest both in addressing poverty and being mindful about levels of federal spending , the past four congresses included 10-20-30 language in multiple appropriations bills , some of which were enacted into law .

however , the original language used in arra could not be used verbatim , because the data source used by arra to define persistent poverty — the decennial census — stopped collecting income information .

as a consequence , the appropriations bills varied slightly in their definitions of "persistent poverty counties" as it was applied to various programs and departments , sometimes even within different sections of the same bill , if the bill included language on different programs .

in turn , because the definitions of "persistent poverty" differed , so did the lists of counties identified as persistently poor and subject to the 10-20-30 provision .

the bills included legislation for rural development , public works and economic development , technological innovation , and brownfields site assessment and remediation .

most recently , in the 116 th congress , much of the language used in these previous bills was included in p.l .

116-6 ( consolidated appropriations act , 2019 ) .

this report discusses how data source selection , and the rounding of poverty estimates , can affect the list of counties identified as persistently poor .

after briefly explaining why targeting funds to persistent poverty counties might be of interest , this report explores how "persistent poverty" is defined and measured , and how different interpretations of the definition and different data source selections could yield different lists of counties identified as persistently poor .

this report does not compare the 10-20-30 provision's advantages and disadvantages against other policy options , nor does it examine the range of programs or policy goals for which the 10-20-30 provision might be an appropriate policy tool .

research has suggested that areas for which the poverty rate ( the percentage of the population that is below poverty ) reaches 20% experience systemic problems that are more acute than in lower - poverty areas .

the poverty rate of 20% as a critical point has been discussed in academic literature as relevant for examining social characteristics of high - poverty versus low - poverty areas .

for instance , property values in high - poverty areas do not yield as high a return on investment as in low - poverty areas , and that low return provides a financial disincentive for property owners to spend money on maintaining and improving property .

the ill effects of high poverty rates have been documented both for urban and rural areas .

therefore , policy interventions at the community level , and not only at the individual or family level , have been and may continue to be of interest to congress .

persistent poverty counties are counties that have had poverty rates of 20% or greater for at least 30 years .

the county poverty rates for 1999 and previous years are measured using decennial census data , and for more recent years , either the small area income and poverty estimates ( saipe ) or the american community survey ( acs ) .

the data sources used , and the level of precision of rounding for the poverty rate , affects the list of counties identified as persistent poverty counties , as will be described below .

the list of persistent poverty counties below ( table 2 ) is based on data from the 1990 census , census 2000 , and the 2017 saipe estimates , and included counties with poverty rates of 19.5% or greater ( that is , counties with poverty rates that were at least 20% with rounding applied to the whole number ) .

these same counties are mapped in figure 1 .

decennial census of population and housing , "long form" poverty estimates are computed using data from household surveys , which are based on a sample of households .

in order to obtain meaningful estimates for any geographic area , the sample has to include enough responses from that area so that selecting a different sample of households from that area would not likely result in a dramatically different estimate .

if estimates for smaller geographic areas are desired , a larger sample size is needed .

a national - level survey , for instance , could produce reliable estimates for the united states without obtaining any responses from many counties , particularly counties with small populations .

in order to produce estimates for all 3,143 county areas in the nation , however , not only are responses needed from every county , but those responses have to be plentiful enough from each county so that the estimates are meaningful ( i.e. , their margins of error are not unhelpfully wide ) .

before the mid - 1990s , the only data source with a sample size large enough to provide meaningful estimates at the county level ( and for other small geographic areas ) was the decennial census .

the other household surveys available prior to that time did not have a sample size large enough to produce meaningful estimates for small areas such as counties .

income questions were asked on the census long form , which was sent to one - sixth of all u.s. households ; the rest received the census short form , which did not ask about income .

while technically still a sample , one - sixth of all households was a large enough sample to provide poverty estimates for every county in the nation , and even for smaller areas such as small towns .

the long form was discontinued after census 2000 , and therefore poverty data are no longer available from the decennial census .

beginning in the mid - 1990s , however , two additional data sources were developed to ensure that poverty estimates for small areas such as counties would still be available: the american community survey ( acs ) , and the small area income and poverty estimates program ( saipe ) .

american community survey ( acs ) the acs replaced the decennial census long form .

it was developed to accommodate the needs of local government officials and other stakeholders who needed detailed information on small communities on a more frequent basis than once every 10 years .

to that end , the acs questionnaire was designed to reflect the same topics asked in the census long form .

in order to produce meaningful estimates for small communities , however , the acs needs to collect a number of responses comparable to what was collected in the decennial census .

in order to collect that many responses while providing information more currently than once every 10 years , the acs collects information from respondents continuously , in every month , as opposed to at one time of the year , and responses over time are pooled to provide estimates at varying geographic levels .

to obtain estimates for geographic areas of 65,000 or more persons , one year's worth of responses are pooled — these are the acs one - year estimates .

for the smallest geographic levels , which include the complete set of u.s. counties , five years of monthly responses are needed: these are the acs five - year estimates .

even though data collection is ongoing , the publication of the data takes place only once every year , both for the one - year estimates and the estimates that represent the previous five - year span .

small area income and poverty estimates ( saipe ) the saipe program was developed in the 1990s in order to provide state and local government officials with poverty estimates for local areas in between the decennial census years .

in the improving america's schools act of 1994 ( iasa , p.l .

103-382 ) , which amended the elementary and secondary education act of 1965 ( esea ) , congress recognized that providing funding for children in disadvantaged communities created a need for poverty data for those communities that were more current than the once - a - decade census .

in the iasa , congress provided for the development and evaluation of the saipe program for its use in title i - a funding allocations .

saipe estimates are model - based , meaning they use a mathematical procedure to compute estimates using both survey data ( acs one - year data ) and administrative data ( from tax returns and numbers of participants in the supplemental nutrition assistance program , or snap ) .

the modeling procedure produces estimates with less variability than estimates computed from survey data alone , especially for counties with small populations .

guidance from the u.s. census bureau , "which data source to use" the cps asec provides the most timely and accurate national data on income and is the source of official national poverty estimates , hence it is the preferred source for national analysis .

because of its large sample size , the acs is preferred for subnational data on income and poverty by detailed demographic characteristics .

the census bureau recommends using the acs for 1-year estimates of income and poverty at the state level .

users looking for consistent , state - level trends before 2006 should use cps asec 2-year averages .

for substate areas , like counties , users should consider their specific needs when picking the appropriate data source .

the saipe program produces overall poverty and household income 1-year estimates with standard errors usually smaller than direct survey estimates .

users looking to compare estimates of the number and percentage of people in poverty for counties or school districts or the median household income for counties should use saipe , especially if the population is less than 65,000 .

users who need other characteristics such as poverty among hispanics or median earnings , should use the acs , where and when available .

the sipp is the only census bureau source of longitudinal poverty data .

it provides national estimates and since the 2004 panel , provides reliable state - level estimates for select states .

as sipp collects monthly income over 3 or 4 year panels , it is also a source of poverty estimates for time periods more or less than one year , including monthly poverty rates .

table a - 1 below reproduces the census bureau's recommendations , summarized for various geographic levels .

