the first responder network authority ( firstnet ) is a federal agency created by congress in the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-96 ) — to oversee the building , deployment , and operation of a new nationwide public safety broadband network .

in p.l .

112-96 ( the act ) , congress created firstnet as an independent authority , within the national telecommunications and information administrations ( ntia ) , under the department of commerce .

firstnet is governed by a board comprised of federal , private sector , and public safety representatives , which reviews and approves the major decisions of the agency .

congress authorized $7 billion be allocated out of revenues from spectrum auctions that were authorized in the act .

many in congress recognized that $7 billion would not be enough to deploy a nationwide network for public safety .

as a result , congress authorized firstnet to enter into a public - private partnership to leverage commercial infrastructure and services , in exchange for access to firstnet assets , including $7 billion in funding and 20 megahertz ( mhz ) of spectrum .

the act is complex .

it requires the establishment of a new federal agency and the appointment of a board of directors .

it requires the development and deployment of a new nationwide broadband network for public safety users .

the act requires the auction of spectrum to fund firstnet — a complex and lengthy process that concluded in 2015 .

the act requires firstnet to build the network to industry standards , and the development of technical requirements , some of which were still under development by the international standards development organization , 3gpp .

further , the act requires consultation with public safety users ; governors ; and federal , state , local , tribal , and territorial entities to coordinate the deployment of the network .

each mandated task took time but was used to inform a request for proposal ( rfp ) which was released in january 2016 , and awarded in march 2017 .

in march 2017 , firstnet awarded the contract to build the network to at&t .

in may 2017 , at&t offered public safety agencies priority and preemption services on its nationwide network to attract users to the network .

in september , firstnet / at&t released state plans detailing the initial ( five - year ) deployment of the network in the state .

by january 2018 , all states and territories had opted in to the network ( i.e. , allowed at&t to deploy the network in their state ) .

at&t is deploying the core network , and plans to deploy the radio access network ( eg , cell site equipment , antennas ) in each state .

at&t is also recruiting users to the network to ensure adoption targets are met .

firstnet plans to oversee the network deployment , ensuring: network elements are completed on time , integrated , and interoperable ; public safety needs , including coverage , resiliency , and security are met ; development and testing of mission critical voice capabilities and devices remain on schedule ; user fees and devices are affordable ; and that users subscribe to the network , so the network will be self - sustaining .

in 2017 , congress conducted oversight hearings on firstnet .

some members questioned firstnet , at&t , and state representatives on state plans , the opt - in / opt - out process , factors affecting opt - in / opt - out decisions , and critical aspects of the firstnet / at&t network , including coverage ( rural and non - rural ) ; the security , reliability and redundancy of the firstnet network ; features available on the network ; site hardening ( eg , strengthening and protecting critical infrastructure from disasters ) ; and cost .

these issues were also raised by states during the review of their state plans , and may indicate issues affecting public safety agencies' decisions to use the firstnet network , which is essential to its long - term sustainability .

the act requires that the network be self - sustaining through user fees , but it does not require public safety agencies to subscribe to the network .

congress may provide oversight of firstnet to ensure that the network is being deployed as required in the act and as intended by congress .

congress may also monitor the deployment to ensure that firstnet / at&t are meeting public safety needs and providing features and services that will attract users to the network .

users are needed to ensure that the network will be self - sustaining , as required in the act , and to achieve the intent of the law — to provide a single , interoperable network that public safety agencies can use to communicate and coordinate during disasters .

in providing oversight , congress may consider the following issues .

to ensure the $6.5 billion federal funding and 20 mhz of public safety spectrum provided for this project is used to benefit public safety , congress can monitor the deployment and use of the network over time .

congress may continue oversight of the firstnet network to better understand the deployment and critical aspects of the network ; to ensure that the network is being deployed as intended by congress ; and to ensure that public safety users are subscribing to the network , which is needed to support current operations and future improvements to the network .

congress may include public safety stakeholders in hearings on firstnet , to ensure that public safety needs ( eg , coverage , resiliency , security ) are met and that the network is available , affordable , and sustainable for all users .

congress may inquire about firstnet's staffing to ensure firstnet has adequate staff to manage the contract , oversee the deployment , and assist users , as recommended by the gao .

lastly , congress and public safety have long recognized that technology is not the sole driver of an effective response .

congress may seek to encourage state and local agencies to integrate firstnet capabilities into response plans , protocols , training , and exercises , to ensure that public safety agencies are ready to leverage firstnet technologies when the next emergency strikes .

appendix a .

related issues in the act 9-1-1 improvements the act authorized $115 million for a grant program to upgrade public safety answering points ( psaps ) to ng911 capabilities .

the ng911 grant program is to provide financial assistance to psaps to help fund the establishment of ip - based backbone networks , the application layer software infrastructure needed to interconnect a multitude of response organizations , trainers , call - takers and first responders .

ntia and nhtsa finalized a management plan to jointly administer the grant and submitted that plan to congress in january 2017 .

in september 2017 , the ntia and nhtsa released draft program requirements in the federal register , seeking comment on the grant .

this $115 million grant is to enable some psaps to upgrade their networks , but not all psaps are to receive funding .

congress can monitor the grant terms and formulas , to ensure that funding is used wisely , and that underserved psaps are encouraged to apply .

congress may seek to ensure that firstnet and the 911 community engage early , before the deployment of the band 14 network , to ensure that 911 needs are considered in the earliest stages of network planning and deployment .

congress can encourage firstnet / at&t to work in tandem with the 911 community to ensure that upgrades planned for both systems are coordinated , and to ensure that psaps can be integrated into the firstnet network , as encouraged in the act .

spectrum relocation: t - band in the same act that created firstnet , congress directed the fcc to reallocate the spectrum in the 470-512 mhz band ( also known as the t - band spectrum ) from public safety to commercial use .

this spectrum is currently used by 925 public safety licensees in eleven metropolitan areas , for land mobile radio ( voice ) communications .

the act requires that , within nine years of enactment ( i.e. , by february 22 , 2021 ) , the fcc must reallocate the t - band public safety spectrum and begin the auction process .

two years after the bidding is complete ( ~2023 ) , relocation of t - band public safety entities is required to be completed .

ntia is required to use the proceeds from the bidding process to make grants to cover relocation costs of those public safety entities from the t - band spectrum .

public safety advocates believe that congress saw two options for t - band operators: relocate those agencies to other frequencies in the area ; or , migrate those agencies to the firstnet network , once it is operational .

public safety agencies operating on the t - band argue that there are no frequencies available in the area , which is why they were operating on the t - band originally .

in 2013 , npstc conducted a study of spectrum and options available to t - band licensees .

the study confirmed probable shortages in several regions , and significant shortages in the five largest urban areas .

further , npstc estimated the cost of transition at approximately $5.9 billion , and raised questions as to whether the auction , as it is structured , would be able to attract bidders .

in october 2014 , the fcc offered the 700 mhz narrowband reserve channels for general licensing and afforded t - band public safety licensees priority access to these channels in the t - band areas .

npstc issued a t - band update report in may 2016 , concluding: "although these 24 additional 700 mhz band channels are certainly beneficial , the number of additional channels pales in comparison to the t - band channels in use that would need to be relocated to alternative spectrum , especially in the top five t - band areas. .

the second option for t - band operators suggests agencies could migrate to the firstnet network .

public safety agencies have argued that this is not a viable option , because firstnet will not offer mission - critical voice at first launch , which would negatively affect response in those regions .

at a november 1 , 2017 hearing of the house committee on energy and commerce , subcommittee on communications and technology , congress emphasized that it does not want to disrupt critical communications capabilities or lose mission critical voice capabilities during the deployment of the firstnet network .

firstnet reported that the standards process for mcptt is proceeding , and it is eager to provide mcptt to firstnet primary users .

however , the critical factor is time .

at its june 2017 board meeting , firstnet staff presented board members with a roadmap that includes an update on the standards development process .

firstnet provided a commitment to support mcptt across the nationwide network by 2019 , which brings t - band agencies closer to the statutory deadline for relocation ( ~2023 ) and does not leave a lot of time to transition systems and train people .

the agencies affected by this issue are all located in large population centers .

the systems affected by this policy are public safety systems , protecting the life and property in these regions , including the lives of first responders .

congress may consult with affected jurisdictions / agencies to understand the impact of t - band migration on public safety communications , and to consult with the fcc on relocation options and timelines .

appendix b .

related legislation don't break up the t - band act ( h.r .

5085 ) section 6103 of p.l .

112-96 requires public safety agencies to "give back" their t - band spectrum by 2023 .

the t - band ( 470-512 mhz ) is used by public safety agencies in 11 metropolitan regions , for public safety communications .

public safety agencies have argued that there is not sufficient or comparable spectrum for them to migrate , and that the migration would disrupt public safety communications in these populous regions .

in february 2018 , representatives engel , zeldin , and king of new york introduced the don't break up the t - band act of 2018 which calls for the repeal of section 6103 of p.l .

112-96 .

internet of things cybersecurity improvement act of 2017 ( s. 1691 ) in august 2017 , senators warner , garner , wyden , and daines introduced the internet of things ( iot ) act which provides minimum cybersecurity standards for internet - connected devices purchased by federal agencies .

this act would direct the office of management and budget ( omb ) director to work with the dod , general services administration ( gsa ) , department of commerce , and dhs to issue guidelines for executive agencies to include certain language in contracts for the acquisition of internet - connected devices .

this bill would require contractors to certify that hardware , software , or firmware does not have any known vulnerabilities or security defects , to protect federal it systems .

"under the terms of the bill , vendors who supply the u.s. government with iot devices would have to ensure that their devices are patchable , do not include hard - coded passwords that can't be changed , and are free of known security vulnerabilities , among other basic requirements. .

the bill also would require executive agencies to inventory all internet - connected devices in use by the agency , and to create standards for purchases to protect federal systems from malicious attacks .

firstnet and at&t are already discussing the potential intersection of iot and public safety ( eg , location data from third - party sources , sensors to monitor infrastructure , video systems to increase situational awareness ) .

ng911 act ( s. 2061 ) in march 2017 , senators nelson and klobuchar introduced the ng911 act which would accelerate the deployment of ng911 services .

the ng911 bill would expand a federal grant program to support ng911 improvements .

the bill would support standards - based purchases and promote interoperability with firstnet .

further , the bill would expand the definition of ng911 to include multiple technologies and multiple means of contacting 9-1-1 ( eg , call , text ) .

this act would also require nist to prepare a report on ng911 cyber vulnerabilities , the fcc to prepare a report to determine whether agencies are following 9-1-1 best practices , and the gao to prepare a report on psap resiliency and how that can be improved .

