liberia is a small west african country of about 4.7 million people .

its government continues to pursue a transition toward a national policy agenda focused on alleviation of poverty , which is widespread , long - term growth and development , and the reconstruction of infrastructure and public service institutions devastated by two civil wars ( 1989-1997 and 1999-2003 ) .

the country is also continuing to overcome the economic effects of a devastating outbreak of the contagious and often fatal ebola virus disease ( 2014-2016 ) , which spurred a sharp decrease in economic growth rates and a 1.6% contraction of the economy in 2016 .

liberia , a constitutional republic with a bicameral national legislature , recently completed a political transition following presidential and house of representatives elections in october 2017 and a subsequent presidential runoff election .

the latter was won by george weah , of the coalition for democratic change ( cdc ) .

weah , a former internationally famed professional soccer player , was inaugurated on january 22 , 2018 , becoming liberia's 25 th president and its second post - war head of state .

he succeeded two - term president ellen johnson sirleaf , who was term - limited .

the election was of particular local political significance given liberia's history of presidential dominance and its winner - take - all political culture and history of undemocratic governmental transitions — and as it brought about liberia's first electoral transfer of state executive power since 1944 .

at stake in the election were the substantial reforms and development successes that liberia has achieved since 2003 , along with the many economic , social , and governance challenges — including corruption and accountability for war - time human rights violations — that the country continues to face .

also at issue was the preservation of gains resulting from more than $5 billion dollars in u.s. post - war investments in development , security , and humanitarian welfare , and considerable aid from other donors .

such support — along with significant in - flows of mostly commodity - focused foreign investment — helped contribute to a rapid expansion of liberia's economy prior to the ebola outbreak , which spurred a sharp decrease in economic growth rates and a 1.6% contraction of the economy in 2016 .

the trump administration issued a statement lauding "the people of liberia on the successful conclusion of the presidential runoff election" of 2017 , calling the electoral process "a major milestone for liberia's democracy," and congratulating weah on his victory .

it commended liberia's national elections commission ( nec ) "for administering an orderly election process" and other key institutions that had played key roles in ensuring a "peaceful and transparent contest. .

it also stated that the "united states is deeply committed to our longstanding relationship with liberia and its people" and would "continue to support the success of this historic democratic transition and the peace and prosperity of liberia. .

liberia continues to face substantial economic challenges .

joblessness is reportedly high , although hard data are lacking , and technical skills and training are limited , as are cross - sectoral integration and value - added processing of commodities like timber , rubber , and ores .

economic growth has been uneven nationally and artificially boosted by aid inflows .

according to the world bank , the robustness of liberia's economic recovery from a drop in the prices of key commodity exports and the residual effects of the ebola crisis "will depend on the effective diversification of the economy , development of strong institutions , and a smooth political transition. .

before the ebola outbreak , then - president sirleaf's most notable successes were arguably economic , although extreme poverty has remained widespread and the country continues to face many deep - set development challenges .

nominal gross domestic product ( gdp ) grew steadily , from $585 million in 2004 , the first year after the second war , to just over $2 billion in recent years ( 2014-2017 ) .

according to the international monetary fund ( imf ) , real gdp growth then dropped sharply , due largely to the ebola outbreak , from 8.8% in 2013 , the year before the outbreak , to 0.7% in 2014 and 0.01% in 2015 .

it then contracted by 1.6% in 2016 before recovering somewhat in 2017 , to 2.5% .

gdp per capita , at $729 in 2017 , remains low , even though it has grown from $224 , where it stood when sirleaf took office .

liberia's pre - epidemic growth rested , in part , on large inflows of development aid premised on donor confidence in sirleaf ; on her government's negotiation of multiple natural resource - focused foreign direct investment ( fdi ) deals ; and , to a lesser extent , on public investment in the agricultural sector .

the sirleaf administration reported having negotiated multi - year deals worth an aggregate potential $16 billion over a period of up to 25 years , although current fdi stocks total less than half of this amount .

fdi has centered on concession deals in mining , with a focus on iron ore and gold , and agro - forestry ( eg , rubber and palm oil ) .

some oil discoveries have also been made but may be developed only gradually , as dictated by market conditions .

allocation of rights to these discoveries have been the subject of considerable recent controversy involving alleged corruption in relation to the allocation of an offshore oil block later purchased by the u.s. firm exxon .

the u.s. state department reports that investment has been hindered by a "weak regulatory environment , corruption , lack of transparency , poor physical infrastructure , and low private sector capacity. .

liberia ranked 172 nd out of 190 countries in the world bank's 2018 ease of doing business report .

in addition to the aid that has played such a crucial in post - war rebuilding of critical infrastructure and social services , notably education and health , liberia received roughly $4.6 billion in international debt forgiveness in 2010 , after several years of negotiations .

the sirleaf government also earned positive economic policy performance marks from the international financial institutions ( ifis ) .

in part as a result , liberia receives substantial ifi loans , grants , and policy advice , as well as u.n. technical agency assistance .

as of late 2017 , the world bank was funding 14 projects in liberia worth nearly $598 million , in addition to aid under bank regional programs .

road , water , and power infrastructure construction has been a key focus of gradual but continuing success , although liberia continues to face large unmet infrastructure needs .

agriculture provided about 36% of gdp in 2017 and has been a key target of government development policy in recent years ; it is a primary contributor to non - extractive production and livelihoods , along with micro - enterprise activity .

like the sirleaf administration , the current government appears likely to prioritize agricultural development , which has been a major focus of u.s. support under the feed the future global food security initiative .

the trump administration has indicated that the united states remains committed to the long - standing and close u.s. - liberian bilateral relationship and to ongoing efforts to help consolidate democracy , peace , and economic growth in liberia , as previously discussed .

ongoing u.s. - liberia cooperation centers largely on continuing post - ebola health system strengthening and general socioeconomic development .

congress , which sirleaf addressed in a 2006 joint session , has shown continuing interest in liberia's post - war development and has held hearings on its development , stability , and democratization trajectories , most recently in september 2017 , in advance of the elections .

congress has also fostered bilateral relations with the liberian legislature through the house democracy partnership ( hdp ) program .

launched in 2006 , the program has focused on the development of liberian parliamentary staff and research capacities , largely through peer - to - peer visits and exchanges .

a u.s. - liberia partnership dialogue launched in 2013 has focused on enhancing bilateral diplomatic and development cooperation , with a focus on agriculture and food security ; energy and power infrastructure ; and human development .

the most recent dialogue meeting was held in early 2017 .

liberian immigration to the united states also plays a role in bilateral relations .

according to the u.s. census , 88,090 persons of liberian birth lived in the united states in 2016 and while relatively small , this population has drawn some congressional attention .

liberia is at peace , as are its neighbors , and — in a departure from much of its history — the country confronts no major internal or external security threats .

liberia faces many profound development and economic challenges , however , and a failure to successfully address them — in particular by increasing job growth , diversifying the economy , and addressing the needs of liberia's large , often disenfranchised youth population — could generate political grievances .

there are also many localized sources of potential unrest , including mob violence attributable to lack of trust in the police and justice systems , competition over land and other resources , and anger over corruption .

weah appears to be enjoying a political honeymoon , but its duration may be limited , given the pressing nature of the challenges the country faces .

his success is likely to depend on his ability to prove — both to liberia's citizens and to the international community — that he can govern competently , transparently , and accountably .

still , while he inherits many problems from the sirleaf administration , he is also the beneficiary of extensive and ongoing donor - backed development and capacity - building assistance , including from the united states , initiated under sirleaf .

the prior government also proposed a range of reform legislation and policies that were not enacted or implemented that the new government may be able to adapt and pursue .

for the time being , the united states appears set to continue to support liberia's current development trajectory , albeit with assistance allocations lower than those provided during recent past years .

