in 1976 , president ford signed into law the toxic substances control act ( tsca ) , which requires the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) to identify and regulate chemicals in u.s. commerce that present an "unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment" or an imminent hazard .

in proposing the legislative framework for tsca , the council on environmental quality ( ceq ) of president nixon's administration highlighted concerns with risks from metals ( eg , lead , cadmium , mercury , and vanadium ) , metal compounds , and synthetic organic chemicals ( eg , polychlorinated biphenyls , nitrilotriacetic acid , orthonitrochlorobenzene ) .

ceq noted that pollution control and consumer or occupational safety statutes in effect at the time limited the federal government to controlling pollution at the end of the chemical lifecycle or restricting chemicals that have specific uses ( eg , pesticides , food ) .

since 1976 , congress has added five other titles to tsca to address specific chemical concerns .

the original 1976 act is referred to as title i , which is the focus of this report .

none of the additional titles made amendments to the core chemical evaluation and regulatory program under title i and therefore are not discussed in this report .

to determine which chemicals warrant regulation under tsca , epa has required chemical manufacturers and processors to report information on chemicals being manufactured or processed in the united states to the agency .

for certain chemicals that epa determined not to have adequate information to evaluate risks , the agency has required chemical manufacturers and processors to develop new information necessary to evaluate risks .

based on the evaluation of information available to the agency , epa has restricted few chemicals reported to have been in commerce prior to 1976 .

for chemicals introduced into commerce after 1976 , epa established a program to identify which of those chemicals warranted regulation and has taken regulatory action on a subset of such chemicals .

however , over time as epa administered tsca , environmental and public health organizations questioned whether the agency had sufficient information to evaluate risks from chemicals and whether the agency could demonstrate that the risks of a chemical met the threshold for regulating a chemical .

to address these issues and others , multiple proposals to amend tsca were introduced beginning in the 109 th congress through the 114 th congress .

on june 22 , 2016 , president obama signed into law the frank r. lautenberg chemical safety for the 21 st century act ( p.l .

114-182 ) , which amended tsca .

p.l .

114-182 broadly amended the information gathering , chemical evaluation , and regulation authorities of tsca and also provided additional procedures and standards for confidential treatment or disclosure of information submitted to epa under tsca .

to supplement funding provided for tsca implementation , p.l .

114-182 expanded epa authority to collect fees from chemical manufacturers and processors to partially defray the costs of conducting risk evaluations .

with these amendments to tsca , epa implementation of the statute is ongoing , and , to date , no additional chemicals reported to have been in commerce before 1976 have been regulated , though the agency continues to gather information on , and evaluate risks for , a wide variety of chemicals .

as congress debated whether to expand epa authority to regulate chemicals under tsca leading up to the enactment of p.l .

114-182 , federal preemption of state requirements became a key issue .

as enacted in 1976 , tsca preempted state and local requirements for specific chemicals for which epa has required the development of new information or taken regulatory action under the act .

in the years between the original enactment of tsca in 1976 and the enactment of p.l .

114-182 in 2016 , some states and localities enacted their own laws or promulgated regulations pertaining to chemicals .

states and localities took regulatory action in response to concerns regarding the risks of commercial chemicals and the absence of federal regulatory action .

the chemical industry and associated entities ( eg , retailers ) expressed concern over regulatory requirements that differed from one state to another .

p.l .

114-182 established additional conditions in which tsca requirements would or would not preempt state chemical regulatory requirements .

the following sections of the report summarize the major authorities of tsca and cover the following topics: 1. the overall scope and applicability of authorities under tsca ; 2. the information gathering authorities ; 3. the confidentiality and disclosure of information submitted to epa under the act ; 4. the framework for prioritizing chemicals for evaluation , evaluating risks , and regulating those chemicals that present unreasonable or imminent risks ; 5. the applicability of the act to chemical imports ; 6. the requirements for chemical export notification ; 7. the process in filing citizen petitions and bringing citizen suits ; 8. the enforcement of the act ; 9. the federal and state roles under the act ; and 10. the resources to administer the act .

this report summarizes selected statutory provisions of tsca but does not discuss agency regulations and guidance that may provide more detailed direction for conducting risk evaluation and selecting regulatory options to prevent unreasonable risks of specific chemicals .

the scope of chemicals covered by tsca is broad , but to prevent redundancy with other federal pollution control and public health laws , congress excluded groups of chemicals already covered under such laws from the information gathering and regulatory authorities of tsca .

congress excluded groups from the reach of tsca through the statutory definition of "chemical substance," which broadly includes substances that have a particular molecular identity but excludes pesticides ; tobacco and tobacco products ; certain radioactive materials ; firearms ( including pistols and revolvers ) , shells , cartridges , and their components ; food ( including poultry , meat , and eggs ) , food additives ( including food contact substances ) , drugs , cosmetics , and medical devices ; and mixtures .

although the definition of a chemical substance excludes mixtures , multiple tsca provisions apply to mixtures , which the act generally defines as combinations of chemical substances not resulting from a chemical reaction .

references hereinafter to "chemicals" in the report collectively refer to chemical substances and mixtures .

provisions that apply specifically to chemical substances or mixtures are noted accordingly .

generally , mixtures are subject to requirements under tsca if requirements that pertain to the constituent chemical substances of a mixture are not adequate in evaluating or controlling risks .

additionally , as a practical matter , articles ( i.e. , manufactured items ) that contain chemical substances subject to tsca may be regulated by the act to the extent that the chemical substance presents an unreasonable risk or meets other criteria .

under tsca , epa relies on scientific and technical information regarding chemicals to evaluate risks and determine if regulation is warranted .

this information may be obtained through various recordkeeping and reporting requirements under the act .

tsca directs epa to require chemical manufacturers , processors , and distributors to report information that relates to existing chemicals , new chemical substances , and significant new uses of chemical substances .

if information available to epa is insufficient to evaluate risks of a chemical and the agency has a need for additional information , tsca authorizes epa to require the development of new information regarding that chemical .

information that epa obtains from chemical manufacturers and processors may contain material that , if disclosed , would harm commercial interests , so tsca provides protection from disclosure of submitted information if the submitter can justify that the information meets certain criteria .

determining which chemicals epa should select to evaluate risks has been a long - standing issue given finite resources to evaluate chemicals already in commerce and new chemical substances .

epa evaluation of a chemical is intended to synthesize information to inform the agency's decisionmaking on whether the regulatory threshold is met to restrict that chemical .

tsca establishes a framework for epa to prioritize which chemicals to evaluate for risks and directs epa to take expedited actions for specific chemicals: polychlorinated biphenyls ; certain persistent , bioaccumulative , and toxic chemical substances ; imminently hazardous chemicals ; chemicals that present significant risks ; and new chemical substances and significant new uses of chemical substances .

like many other environmental statutes , tsca establishes a process to resolve citizen petitions and citizen suits that challenge epa implementation of the act .

under section 21 , any person may petition epa to issue , amend , or repeal certain tsca rules or orders .

epa must either grant or deny a citizen petition within 90 days after the filing of the petition .

petition denials are judicially reviewable .

under section 20 , any person may sue epa to compel it to perform a nondiscretionary duty or may sue any other person ( including government entities ) alleged to be in violation of certain types of tsca rules or orders .

section 20 generally requires the plaintiff of the suit to have given 60 days' notice of the claims to the administrator and the alleged violator prior to filing the suit .

however , citizen suits are not available if epa or the department of justice is already "diligently prosecuting" the alleged violator to require compliance with the act's requirements , though a citizen who has given notice may intervene in the ongoing enforcement proceeding as a matter of right .

if a citizen suit is successful , the court may require the violator to take actions to correct a violation and may impose civil penalties on the violator .

tsca section 19 governs many aspects of judicial review of various epa actions .

in general , section 19 requires that petitions for judicial review of most rules and orders under tsca , and civil actions challenging low - priority designations , be filed within 60 days after epa takes final action .

section 19 gives exclusive jurisdiction to the federal courts of appeals .

for civil actions challenging low - priority designations , jurisdiction is limited specifically to the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit .

review is presumptively limited to the administrative record .

the standard of review for most epa rules and orders under tsca is that "the court shall hold unlawful and set aside such rule [or order] if the court finds that the rule [or order] is not supported by substantial evidence" in the record rather than the usual and more deferential "arbitrary or capricious" standard under apa .

several other tsca provisions ( sections 11 , 15 , 16 , and 17 ) also relate to enforcement of the act .

to enforce tsca rules , orders , and consent agreements , the act provides inspection and administrative subpoena authority to epa and provides epa with administrative and judicial mechanisms to restrain violations and apply civil or criminal penalties to violators .

administrative civil penalties are capped and further limited if a state enforces for the same violation under its own law .

section 22 authorizes the president through epa to waive compliance with any tsca requirement for national defense purposes .

tsca includes provisions intended to protect employees of regulated entities from retaliation for taking part in a proceeding under the act or from potential effects on employment because of economic costs of the act .

section 23 authorizes the department of labor to investigate alleged retaliations and provides the department with administrative and judicial mechanisms to resolve such allegations .

section 24 directs epa to investigate allegations of potential effects on employment resulting from a tsca requirement and to prepare recommendations based on the investigation .

to avoid potential conflict between federal requirements under tsca and state requirements or restrictions on chemicals , tsca provides circumstances in which a federal requirement for a specific chemical under the act would preempt state requirements that apply to the same chemical unless exempted or waived .

on the other hand , tsca does not preempt states from requiring the development of new information or regulating a chemical for which epa has not taken action under tsca .

additionally , tsca authorizes grants to states that take action against unreasonable risk associated with a chemical that epa is unable or not likely to address .

for example , epa may award a grant to a state to conduct inspections on behalf of the agency .

resource and staffing levels available to epa to evaluate chemicals may affect the pace and thoroughness of evaluations and , in turn , whether chemicals are regulated under tsca .

although the authorization of appropriations to carry out tsca expired after fy1983 , congress has continued to fund the statute's activities through annual discretionary appropriations .

as originally enacted , tsca section 26 ( b ) authorized epa to collect fees from chemical manufacturers and processors for submissions of new information required by the agency or pmns or snuns .

the fee receipts were treated as miscellaneous receipts subject to the miscellaneous receipts act and not directly used to implement tsca .

p.l .

114-182 amended tsca section 26 ( b ) to authorize the collection of fees from certain types of information submissions if appropriations for a related epa "program project" are at least as much as that appropriated in fy2014 .

fee collections are limited to 25% of epa's annual costs of administering tsca activities but are not to exceed $25 million per year .

collected fees are to be deposited into the "tsca service fee fund" in the u.s. treasury and are made available to epa subject to the annual discretionary appropriations process to partially defray the costs of conducting chemical risk evaluations .

this authority to collect fees expires june 2026 .

section 26 ( m ) also requires epa to periodically report to congress estimates on its capacity to complete the required number of chemical risk evaluations , including those requested by chemical manufacturers , and promulgate rules to regulate chemicals that present unreasonable risks .

tsca establishes a framework for epa to obtain information on a vast and growing body of commercial chemicals to assess risks to human health and the environment .

tsca authorizes epa to regulate any stage of the lifecycle of a chemical through rulemaking if the agency were to find unreasonable risk .

the framework applies to a wide variety of chemicals and directs epa to consider , when evaluating the risk of chemicals , different chemical characteristics , intended uses , exposure scenarios , and potential health effects associated with exposure .

due to limited staffing and resources to implement tsca , epa generally focuses on chemicals that are more likely to present greater risks than others .

however , until epa completes a systematic risk evaluation , the agency generally cannot regulate a chemical .

a risk evaluation involves characterizing potential health effects from exposure to a chemical and the likely exposure scenarios based on the use of a chemical .

whether epa has sufficient information to evaluate the risks of a chemical depends in part on whether that information is already available to the agency or whether the agency has authority under tsca to require the development of new information by manufacturers or processors .

various environmental and public health organizations and the chemical industry have differing perspectives on what types of information are necessary for epa to evaluate the risks of a chemical .

the scientific understanding of the risks of a chemical is generally not static .

more studies may be conducted to better understand the risks of a chemical .

some studies may suggest that a chemical presents more risk than previously thought , while other studies may suggest the opposite view .

ultimately , risk assessors must exercise professional judgment in characterizing the body of scientific information with regard to the risks a chemical may present .

even if epa were to find that a chemical presents unreasonable risks that warrant regulatory control , the agency would be required to consider costs and other factors when selecting the appropriate regulatory requirement , potentially leading to disagreements regarding cost analyses and priorities .

furthermore , even if stakeholders concurred with epa's assessment of risks , there may be different perspectives on whether the regulatory requirement selected by epa adequately addresses the identified unreasonable risk and meets the statutory requirements .

disagreements may be resolved in litigation .

ultimately , the pace in which epa can evaluate chemicals and promulgate regulations for chemicals that present unreasonable risks under tsca depends on resources , staffing , and the availability of relevant scientific and technical information about chemicals .

even then , epa authority to regulate a chemical depends on existing regulations promulgated under other statutes .

