the aggregate student loan debt owed by borrowers in the united states has increased markedly over time .

according to the u.s. department of education ( ed ) , "[a]verage tuition prices have more than doubled at u.s. colleges and universities over the past three decades , and over this time period a growing proportion of students borrowed money to finance their postsecondary education. .

per ed's federal student aid data center , the total amount of outstanding federal student loan debt is estimated to exceed $1.37 trillion at the end of the 2017 fiscal year .

as overall student loan indebtedness has increased , many borrowers have found themselves unable to repay their student loans .

statistics published by ed suggest that many borrowers face an average educational debt burden that exceeds the "manageable percentage of income that a borrower can" realistically "be expected to devote to loan payment" while still providing for the basic needs of himself and his household .

declaring bankruptcy is one means by which an individual may potentially obtain relief from a student loan that he cannot repay .

however , for public policy reasons , the bankruptcy code limits the circumstances in which a debtor may discharge — that is , obtain relief from — a student loan through the bankruptcy system .

unlike many other types of consumer debts , which are generally freely dischargeable in bankruptcy , student loans are dischargeable only if the debtor proves that repaying the debt "would impose an undue hardship on the debtor and the debtor's dependents. .

by requiring the debtor to demonstrate an undue hardship in order to discharge a student loan , congress attempted to balance the goal of providing debtors in dire financial straits with a "fresh start" against the countervailing goals "of preventing abuse of the student loan program" and "protect[ing] student loan programs and their participants. .

however , as this report explains , courts have reached divergent conclusions regarding exactly what an "undue hardship" entails .

more broadly , some members of congress , courts , scholars , and other commentators have debated whether to amend the bankruptcy code to change the way that student loans are treated in bankruptcy in order to better balance these competing policy objectives .

whereas some support the law in its current form , there are presently several bills pending in the 115 th congress that , if enacted , would modify the treatment of student loans in bankruptcy .

this report provides a comprehensive overview of the various legal issues related to whether — and under what circumstances — a debtor may discharge a student loan in bankruptcy .

the report begins by providing general background on bankruptcy law and the principles governing the discharge of outstanding debt .

in so doing , the report explains how and why the bankruptcy code generally makes student loans nondischargeable absent an "undue hardship. .

the report then describes the variou s legal standards that courts have applied when determining whether a particular debtor is entitled to an undue hardship discharge .

the report closes by describing various potential considerations for congress , including ways in which congress could alter the bankruptcy code's current treatment of student loans .

declaring bankruptcy is a means by which individuals may potentially obtain relief from debts that they are unable to pay .

according to the u.s. supreme court , one of the "central purposes" of the bankruptcy system "is to provide a procedure by which certain insolvent debtors can reorder their affairs , make peace with their creditors , and enjoy 'a new opportunity in life with a clear field for future effort , unhampered by the pressure and discouragement of preexisting debt.' .

the bankruptcy code implements this "fresh start" principle by "forgiv[ing] [the debtor's] existing debt" and "restor[ing] the debtor to economic productivity" in exchange for the debtor giving up either a subset of his assets or a portion of his future income .

an individual may seek bankruptcy relief by filing a document known as a bankruptcy "petition" in a federal bankruptcy court — a specialized court authorized to resolve certain bankruptcy - related matters .

if the debtor complies with certain requirements of the bankruptcy code , the bankruptcy court may grant the debtor a "discharge" — that is , relief from many of the debtor's outstanding debts .

"in essence , this discharge means that a debtor will no longer face responsibility for" many debts that arose prior to the date upon which he filed bankruptcy , "even if the debtor has not repaid the debt in full during the bankruptcy. .

although many types of consumer debts are freely dischargeable in bankruptcy , some categories of debts are categorically or presumptively nondischargeable .

for example , whereas "medical debt is generally dischargeable in bankruptcy," a debt "for a domestic support obligation" or a debt "for death or personal injury" resulting from drunk driving is generally nondischargeable .

"congress has decided" that , with respect to the latter types of debts , "public policy considerations override the need to provide the debtor with a fresh start. .

under current law , student loans are among the types of debts that congress has opted to make presumptively nondischargeable in bankruptcy .

section 523 ( a ) ( 8 ) of the bankruptcy code provides that , absent an "undue hardship" — an exception that is discussed in more detail below — a debtor who files bankruptcy may not discharge any debt for "an educational benefit overpayment or loan made , insured , or guaranteed by a governmental unit , or made under any program funded in whole or in part by a governmental unit or nonprofit institution" ; "an obligation to repay funds received as an educational benefit , scholarship , or stipend" ; or "any other educational loan that is a qualified education loan , as defined in [the internal revenue code] , incurred by a debtor who is an individual. .

as the supreme court has explained , section 523 ( a ) ( 8 ) is "self - executing" ; the discharge that a debtor generally receives at the conclusion of his bankruptcy case will usually "not include a student loan debt" unless "the debtor affirmatively secures a hardship determination" in the manner described in the following section of this report .

thus , in many bankruptcy cases , student loans "pass through the bankruptcy process unaffected," such that the debtor will "emerge from bankruptcy with the continued obligation to repay his or her student loans. .

however , notwithstanding the foregoing , section 523 ( a ) ( 8 ) as currently written allows a debtor to discharge a student loan if "excepting such debt from discharge .

 .

 .

would impose an undue hardship on the debtor and the debtor's dependents. .

in order to discharge a student loan on undue hardship grounds , the debtor must initiate a separate complaint against the creditor holding the student loan debt .

the debtor must then prove by a preponderance of the evidence that repaying the student loan would impose an undue hardship on him .

for many years , student loans were generally freely dischargeable in bankruptcy .

starting in the 1970s , however , congress enacted a series of statutes that made it progressively more difficult for debtors to discharge student loans .

in order to explain the "undue hardship" standard , the policies underlying it , and potential ways in which congress could alter the way student loans are currently treated in bankruptcy , this report first addresses why congress enacted section 523 ( a ) ( 8 ) and how congress has amended section 523 ( a ) ( 8 ) over time .

the bankruptcy code does not define "undue hardship," and the legislative history of section 523 does not precisely specify how courts should determine whether a debtor qualifies for an undue hardship discharge .

the task of interpreting this statutory term has consequently fallen to the federal judiciary .

however , the u.s. supreme court has not yet directly opined on the meaning of "undue hardship," and the court recently denied certiorari in a case that presented the court with the opportunity to further interpret that term .

in the absence of a controlling interpretation of section 523 ( a ) ( 8 ) from the supreme court , the lower courts have devised several different legal standards for determining whether declining to discharge a student loan would amount to an "undue hardship. .

the two most common standards are described below .

some commentators maintain that the doctrinal splits described above are not consequential as a practical matter .

relatedly , given that at least one member of the congress that enacted section 523 ( a ) ( 8 ) believed that bankruptcy judges should be granted sufficient freedom "to determine in each case what is truly hardship , rather than define it" in a potentially restrictive manner , the fact that different courts have reached varying conclusions when presented with a specific petition may in fact be consistent with congressional intent .

more broadly , some studies have suggested that debtors who truly need an undue hardship discharge of their student loans are generally able to obtain one under the existing legal regime .

if congress agrees with these assessments , then it may leave the current treatment of student loans in bankruptcy unchanged .

others , however , contend that congress should enact legislation to either clarify or modify the undue hardship standard or otherwise change the way student loans are treated in bankruptcy .

if congress seeks to modify the existing legal framework for discharging student loans in bankruptcy , it has several options available to it .

first , congress could codify a definition of "undue hardship" in the text of the bankruptcy code itself .

as noted above , the bankruptcy code does not define the term "undue hardship," and to date the supreme court has not supplied a controlling judicial definition of that phrase .

for that reason , some commentators argue that neither the text nor the legislative history of section 523 ( a ) ( 8 ) provides litigants and courts with sufficient guidance regarding how to properly apply the "undue hardship" standard .

according to some courts and scholars , this lack of interpretive guidance has led courts to apply section 523 ( a ) ( 8 ) in an inconsistent , nonuniform fashion , such that whether any given debtor receives an undue hardship discharge depends more on the identity of the judge deciding the case and the debtor's geographic location than on the debtor's personal and financial circumstances .

for instance , one commentator has opined that the "ambiguous contours" of the undue hardship standards have created rampant inconsistency .

judges define the standard differently , they impose different conceptual tests on debtors , and when undue hardship is found , relief is often dependent upon judicial philosophy rather than the merits of the case .

in the end , similarly - situated debtors ( and creditors ) are treated differently based on the courts in which they find themselves , leaving an irony where inconsistency is the most consistent aspect of the standard's application .

several commentators have therefore advocated codifying a definition of "undue hardship" in the bankruptcy code itself , which would allow congress to explicitly specify which legal standards courts should use when determining whether debtors may discharge their student loans .

defining "undue hardship" would also allow congress to resolve one or more of the aforementioned doctrinal splits that currently exist in the federal courts , such as whether undue hardship determinations should be governed by the brunner test , the totality - of - the - circumstances test , or some other legal standard ; whether a debtor seeking an undue hardship discharge may tithe a portion of her income that might otherwise go toward repaying her student loans to a religious institution ; whether a debtor must demonstrate "exceptional circumstances" or a "certainty of hopelessness" in order to obtain an undue hardship discharge ; whether a debtor seeking an undue hardship discharge on the grounds of a medical disability must introduce corroborating medical evidence ; whether the bankruptcy code authorizes the partial discharge of a student loan ; whether , and to what extent , a debtor's eligibility for and participation in an idr plan affects the debtor's eligibility for an undue hardship discharge ; whether a cosigner of a student loan who does not directly obtain an educational benefit from the loan must demonstrate an undue hardship in order to discharge his own obligation for the loan in his own bankruptcy case ; and whether courts should consider the value of the education that the loan financed when evaluating whether the debtor is entitled to an undue hardship discharge .

advocates of supplying a textual definition of "undue hardship" argue that congressional guidance would engender greater doctrinal consistency and uniformity .

others , however , question whether "a congressional definition of undue hardship" would "give judges adequate guidance so that disparities in interpretation .

 .

 .

do not occur. .

given that each debtor's personal and financial circumstances may be unique , some have expressed concern that cabining the term "undue hardship" to "an 'inflexible dictionary definition' would defeat the discretionary interpretation of the facts in each case. .

to that end , at least one member of the congress that enacted section 523 ( a ) ( 8 ) in 1978 appeared to agree that bankruptcy judges should be granted sufficient freedom "to determine in each case what is truly hardship , rather than define it" in a potentially restrictive manner .

legislation may not be the only means of altering the meaning of "undue hardship" under section 523 ( a ) ( 8 ) .

on february 21 , 2018 , the u.s. department of education ( ed ) requested public comment on factors to be considered in evaluating undue hardship claims asserted by student loan borrowers in .

 .

 .

bankruptcy cases , the weight to be given to such factors , whether the existence of two tests for evaluation of undue hardship claims [ ( namely , the brunner test and the totality - of - the - circumstances test ) ] results in inequities among borrowers seeking undue hardship discharge .

ed will then consider "how all of these , and potentially additional , considerations should weigh into whether an undue hardship claim should be conceded by the loan holder. .

congress could also consider making the undue hardship standard easier for debtors to satisfy .

on one hand , some commentators maintain that debtors who truly need an undue hardship discharge are generally able to receive one under the existing legal standards .

others , by contrast , believe it is currently too difficult for debtors experiencing severe financial stress to discharge their student loans in bankruptcy , and that congress should therefore amend section 523 ( a ) ( 8 ) to make the standard for discharging a student loan less demanding .

if congress decides to make the undue hardship standard more lenient , it could do so in several ways .

for instance , some have advocated eliminating the second prong of the brunner test , so that a debtor seeking an undue hardship discharge would not need to prove that his inability to repay his loans will likely persist into the future .

alternatively , congress could eliminate the requirement imposed by most courts that the debtor demonstrate a "certainty of hopelessness" and "exceptional circumstances" in order to discharge a student loan .

congress may also consider whether the brunner test — which first originated in 1987 — is now outdated or obsolete in light of legislative , economic , and regulatory developments that have occurred in the past thirty years .

the bankruptcy code and the student loan market have undergone several significant changes since 1987 , including the development of loan repayment and forgiveness programs , including idr plans ; congress's aforementioned elimination of the temporal discharge option , pursuant to which a debtor could discharge certain student loans without demonstrating an undue hardship simply by waiting a sufficient number of years before filing bankruptcy ; congress's 2005 amendment to the bankruptcy code that made private education loans presumptively nondischargeable like their federal counterparts ; the precipitous increase in the magnitude of debt carried by individual student loan borrowers , as well as total outstanding student loan debt in the united states overall ; and the increase in aggregate borrowing limits for certain types of federal loans .

some courts and commentators have therefore advocated updating the undue hardship standard to better reflect the current state of the bankruptcy system and the student loan market .

for instance , congress could amend section 523 ( a ) ( 8 ) to explicitly specify how a debtor's eligibility for and participation in an idr plan affect the debtor's ability to obtain bankruptcy relief .

some commentators , instead of proposing modifications to section 523 ( a ) ( 8 ) , have advocated repealing section 523 ( a ) ( 8 ) entirely and thereby making student loans freely dischargeable in bankruptcy .

to that end , several members of the 115 th congress have introduced bills that would completely repeal section 523 ( a ) ( 8 ) , including the discharge student loans in bankruptcy act of 2017 and the student loan borrowers' bill of rights act of 2017 .

rather than making all student loans freely dischargeable in bankruptcy , congress could also consider making private education loans freely dischargeable , while leaving federal student loans unaffected .

as noted above , whereas discharging a federal student loan will shift the cost of the debtor's default to american taxpayers , taxpayers generally do not directly "foot[] the bill for private loan defaults. .

nevertheless , congress amended section 523 ( a ) ( 8 ) in 2005 to make most private education loans presumptively nondischargeable like their federal counterparts .

a number of commentators have therefore advocated reverting to the pre - 2005 version of section 523 ( a ) ( 8 ) and thereby making private nonfederal student loans presumptively dischargeable without requiring the debtor to demonstrate an undue hardship .

several members of the 115 th congress have introduced bills that would make private education loans presumptively dischargeable in bankruptcy by repealing the 2005 amendments to section 523 ( a ) ( 8 ) , including the private student loan bankruptcy fairness act of 2017 and the fairness for struggling students act of 2017 .

as noted above , the pre - 1998 versions of section 523 ( a ) ( 8 ) allowed a debtor to discharge a student loan — even in the absence of an undue hardship — if the loan first became due a certain number of years before the debtor filed bankruptcy .

congress eliminated this "temporal discharge" option in 1998 , with the consequence that demonstrating an undue hardship is presently the only way a debtor may discharge a student loan in bankruptcy .

some commentators have advocated reinstating the temporal discharge option to allow debtors to discharge older student loans without proving an undue hardship .

these commentators argue that a student who waits several years after graduation to file for bankruptcy is less likely to be abusing the student loan program than a recent graduate who strategically declares bankruptcy immediately after obtaining his degree .

as discussed above , a debtor may generally not obtain a discharge of student loan debt without filing a separate full - fledged "lawsuit within the umbrella of the bankruptcy case. .

some commentators have described this procedure as "an expensive venture , dependent as it is on elaborate factual proof that many debtors , particularly some of the worst off , have no hope of funding. .

undue hardship litigation may be especially expensive in jurisdictions that require debtors to introduce corroborating medical evidence to demonstrate that they suffer from a medical condition that prevents them from paying their student loans .

if congress seeks to alter the procedures for obtaining an undue hardship discharge , it could consider "shift[ing] the burden of bringing" a suit to determine the dischargeability of a student loan "from the debtor to the creditor. .

for instance , one scholar has suggested that congress amend the bankruptcy code "to treat student loan debt obligations as presumptively dischargeable in bankruptcy unless the creditor can show a lack of good faith on the part of the debtor with respect to the obligation. .

the burden would then rest upon the creditor , rather than the debtor , to initiate a lawsuit to declare a student loan debt nondischargeable .

shifting the burden in this way would not be unprecedented , as creditors generally bear the burden to prove that debts other than student loans are nondischargeable pursuant to other subsections of section 523 ( a ) .

another potential procedural change that could reduce the financial burden of obtaining an undue hardship discharge would be to "provide for the payment of a debtor's attorney's fees where a creditor unsuccessfully challenges dischargeability without substantial justification. .

according to proponents of this approach , this amendment could potentially ( 1 ) "make representation by counsel more accessible to debtors in dischargeability actions by shifting the fee burden off debtors and onto the lender in actions where the challenge is not substantially justified" and ( 2 )  "protect debtors from overreaching or overaggressive litigation tactics by student loan lenders. .

authorizing fee - shifting in such circumstances would not be unprecedented either , as the bankruptcy code already provides for fee - shifting in some proceedings to determine the dischargeability of certain types of nonstudent loan debt .

some members of the 115 th congress have introduced legislation that would implement some of these proposed reforms .

the stopping abusive student loan collection practices in bankruptcy act of 2017 would allow a debtor who receives an undue hardship discharge to recover court costs and attorney's fees from the creditor if the creditor's opposition to the discharge was not substantially justified .

however , "because the federal government .

 .

 .

holds the vast majority of student loan debt," in many cases the creditor potentially subject to penalties under this bill would be the federal government .

