class action lawsuits — that is , lawsuits by representative parties on behalf of a group of similar plaintiffs that have aggregated their claims in a single action — are frequently in the forefront of debates over the american private law system .

according to the supreme court , class actions are the "most adventuresome" innovation in american law .

to some commentators , the class action device is the tool that "gives american workers and consumers the power and ability to level the playing field , even when facing the most powerful corporations in the world. .

to others , class actions are typically brought "to essentially shakedown a defendant — hurting businesses and the american economy. .

unsurprisingly then , class actions have been a frequent subject of debate in congress .

this report serves as a primer on class action law and analyzes areas that have been the focus of congressional discussions concerning class actions .

the report first discusses the broader public policy debate over class actions , including why class actions exist and what risks they pose to the american system of civil justice .

the report then details what a plaintiff is required to show under the federal rules of civil procedure in order to achieve class action "certification" — that is , in order to pursue an action on behalf of an entire class .

throughout , the report addresses the ways in which the supreme court and lower federal courts have attempted to balance the benefits of class actions against their potential drawbacks .

lastly , this report discusses key aspects of class action litigation that have been the focus of recent congressional legislative debates .

in particular , the report focuses on three areas which have been of particular concern: ( 1 ) the cohesiveness ( or lack thereof ) of the class ; ( 2 ) ascertainability and administrative feasibility of the class action ; and ( 3 ) divergent incentives and fees for class counsel compared with the benefits received by class members .

the main lens for considering these areas is the fairness in class action litigation and furthering asbestos claim transparency act of 2017 ( h.r .

985 ) , which passed the house of representatives in march 2017 .

accordingly , this report considers how h.r .

985 would modify existing law , along with other potential avenues for change .

the default rule in american litigation is that a lawsuit is conducted by , or on behalf of , the named parties only .

class actions , however , are an exception to this rule .

a class action is a procedure by which a large group of entities — that is , a "class" — may challenge a defendant's allegedly unlawful conduct in a single lawsuit , rather than through numerous , separate suits initiated by individual plaintiffs .

class actions have an ancient pedigree ; analogues to class actions "have been recognized in various forms since the earliest days of english law," and class actions have "been a fixture" of federal litigation in the united states "for over seventy - five years. .

under the modern version of the class action , a plaintiff ( known as the "class representative," the "named representative," or the "named plaintiff" ) may sue the defendant not only on his own behalf , but also on behalf of other entities ( the "class members" ) who are similarly situated to the class representative in order to resolve legal or factual questions that are common to the entire class .

to illustrate , if , for example , a large number of consumers all purchased a product that turned out to be defective , one of those consumers could potentially bring a single class action against the manufacturer on his own behalf as well as on behalf of all others who purchased the product , thereby eliminating the need for other plaintiffs to join that consumer's lawsuit or initiate their own separate lawsuits .

importantly , a class action differs from other forms of litigation involving large numbers of injured persons .

in ordinary multiparty litigation , everyone seeking relief from the defendant is a party to the lawsuit and directly participates in the litigation .

in a class action , by contrast , the class representative is "the only plaintiff[] actually named in the complaint" ; the class members are not formal parties to the lawsuit and typically do not directly guide the litigation .

the class representative therefore "acts on behalf of the entire class. .

the class members , by virtue of not being directly "present before the court," are often referred to as being "absent" from the litigation .

federal rule of civil procedure 23 governs the initiation and maintenance of class actions in federal court .

a class action will not bind absent class members unless and until the court presiding over the case "certifies" the proposed class action under rule 23 .

a court may not certify a class unless 1. the proposed class satisfies each of the four mandatory requirements established by rule 23 ( a ) ; 2. the proposed class action falls into at least one of the three categories of class actions established by rule 23 ( b ) ; and 3. the membership of the proposed class is "ascertainable. .

a reference chart illustrating the prerequisites for class certification is available in the appendix of this report .

a court's decision to grant or deny class certification "is often the defining moment" of a class action case .

on the one hand , a court's decision to deny class certification may effectively "sound the 'death knell' of the litigation on the part of the plaintiffs" "because the representative plaintiff's claim is too small to justify the expense of" initiating and litigating an individual suit .

on the other hand , a court's decision to grant class certification "may force a defendant to settle rather than incur the costs of defending a class action and run the risk of potentially ruinous liability," even if the class's claims have only a minimal chance of success .

because the decision to grant or deny certification is so momentous , the supreme court has repeatedly instructed federal courts to conduct a "rigorous analysis" confirming that the prerequisites of rule 23 are satisfied before certifying a class .

the "court 'must resolve all factual or legal disputes relevant to class certification , even if they overlap with the merits'" of the class members' claims against the defendant .

nonetheless , the supreme court has cautioned that "merits questions may" only "be considered to the extent .

 .

 .

that they are relevant to determining whether the rule 23 prerequisites for class certification are satisfied. .

the court must conduct the class certification analysis at "an early practicable time" after the commencement of the class action .

"the word 'practicable' imports some leeway in determining the timing of such a decision" by the court .

although "the issue of certification should generally be resolved prior to addressing the merits of the plaintiff's claims," there is no categorical rule prohibiting courts from ruling on case - dispositive motions before deciding whether to certify the proposed class .

"a party seeking class certification" bears the burden to "affirmatively demonstrate his compliance with" each of the requirements described below , and he must satisfy that burden "by a preponderance of the evidence. .

it is not sufficient to merely " plead compliance with the .

 .

 .

rule 23 requirements" ; the plaintiff must instead introduce " evidence that the putative class complies with rule 23. .

if a court determines that the class satisfies the requirements for certification , then rule 23 directs the court to issue a certification order that defines the class and appoints class counsel .

as explained later in this report , a court can certify "subclasses" with separate legal representation in a single action , and should do so where interests within the proposed class might diverge .

lastly , the court should then direct notice to the class members as required by rule 23 .

the notice required depends on the category under which the class which is certified .

the sections that follow analyze each of the requirements for class certification in detail .

"once certified , the class action can then proceed to discovery , pretrial , and trial. .

the members of the certified class who do not ( or cannot ) opt out of the class will generally be bound by any judgment ultimately rendered in the case with respect to the issues that have been certified .

because a certified class action potentially presents "opportunities for abuse as well as problems for courts and counsel in the management of cases .

 .

 .

a district court has both the duty and the broad authority to .

 .

 .

enter appropriate orders governing the conduct of counsel and parties," such as "orders that .

 .

 .

determine the course of proceedings or prescribe measures to prevent undue repetition or complication in presenting evidence or argument. .

significantly , however , "very few class actions are tried" ; most instead culminate in a settlement .

just as a final judgment entered in a certified class action that proceeds to trial generally binds the absent class members , a class action settlement typically binds absent class members who do not ( or cannot ) opt out of the class .

because "plaintiffs in a class action may release claims that were or could have been pled in exchange for settlement relief" ; a settlement agreement may thereby preclude class members from pursuing "claims not presented in the complaint" if those claims are "based on the identical factual predicate as that underlying the claims in the settled class action. .

because the settlement of a certified class action will bind absent class members , "the claims , issues , or defenses of a certified class may be settled , voluntarily dismissed , or compromised only with the court's approval," and "any class member may object to the" proposed settlement of a certified class action .

"the court may approve" the proposed settlement "only after a hearing and on finding that it is fair , reasonable , and adequate. .

"the burden is on the settlement proponents to persuade the court that the agreement is fair , reasonable , and adequate for the absent class members who are to be bound by the settlement. .

although different courts consider different factors when determining whether a proposed settlement is "fair , reasonable , and adequate," the following factors are particularly common: whether the class members favor or disfavor the proposed settlement ; the complexity , expense , and likely duration of the continued litigation that would occur if the court rejected the settlement ; the likelihood that the class would prevail if the case proceeded to a trial on the merits ; and the current stage of the litigation and the amount of discovery the parties have completed .

when evaluating a proposed class action settlement , the court must also determine whether "any attorneys' fees claimed as part of the settlement are reasonable" and whether "the settlement itself is reasonable in light of those fees. .

to make that determination , the court assesses whether the proposed award of attorney's fees is "unreasonably excessive in light of the results achieved" by the proposed settlement .

additionally , the court must evaluate whether the proposed settlement will actually benefit the class in some meaningful way .

the court must "be assured that the settlement secures an adequate advantage for the class in return for" absent class members giving up their "litigation rights against the defendants. .

so , for instance , a court may not approve a settlement that affords class counsel a substantial fee but gives the class nothing but effectively worthless injunctive relief .

as the foregoing discussion illustrates , the federal rules of civil procedure and the federal courts interpreting those rules have attempted to balance the interests inherent in the class action device .

if congress concludes that rule 23 and the judicial decisions interpreting it have properly struck that balance , it may leave the existing class action framework unchanged .

if , instead , congress wishes to modify the existing laws governing class actions to make them more or less favorable to plaintiffs , defendants , class members , or class counsel , congress has multiple options .

calls to modify the class action framework have primarily focused on three areas: ( 1 ) the cohesiveness ( or lack thereof ) of the class ; ( 2 ) ascertainability and the administrative feasibility of the class action ; and ( 3 ) divergent incentives and fees for class counsel compared with the benefits received by class members .

for instance , members of congress have introduced a variety of proposals to change the class action system in recent years , including modifying rule 23 , restricting the ability of private parties to waive class action treatment in financial adviser contracts , and proposing that certain classes would be presumed to meet the requirement of commonality .

most notably , on march 9 , 2017 , the house of representatives passed h.r .

985 , known as the fairness in class action litigation and furthering asbestos claim transparency act of 2017 ( ficala ) .

ficala represents possibly the most sweeping set of proposed modifications to the class action device that has been proposed in years , suggesting a host of changes to the operation of class actions in federal courts .

cohesiveness was the focus of the supreme court's attention in both amchem and wal - mart , discussed above .

in each of those cases , the court reversed the certification of the class action because , in one way or another , the class claims had severe differences which made class treatment inappropriate .

the court in wal - mart framed the lack of cohesiveness as being about commonality — the lack of a single common question which could resolve an issue "central to the validity of each one of the claims in one stroke. .

in amchem , this concern about cohesion centered on rule 23 ( b ) ( 3 ) 's predominance requirement: the number and importance of the disparate questions among the class members claims made class treatment inappropriate .

as noted above , however , there is no consistent approach in the lower courts with respect to cohesiveness on either commonality or predominance .

splits have arisen between the federal courts as to a number of questions , such as the importance of individualized damages to the predominance inquiry and the use of the issue class to segregate the common issues notwithstanding predominance for the claim as a whole .

some commentators and judges ( including some supreme court justices in dissent ) have argued that the courts have failed to strike the correct balance .

some have maintained that some courts have expanded class action certification beyond the bounds of what should be permissible particularly with respect to classes including both injured and uninjured parties , impermissibly broadening the traditional power of courts .

others disagree and argue that the courts have placed too much emphasis on cohesiveness at the expense of judicial efficiency , suggesting that the class action should be expanded further .

as passed by the house , ficala proposes to add several sections to title 28 of the u.s. code that would alter this area of class action law .

proposed 28 u.s.c .

§ 1716 would bar federal courts from certifying a class seeking monetary relief for personal injury or "economic loss" unless the plaintiff demonstrates that "each proposed class member suffered the same type and scope of injury as the named class representative. .

every certification order in federal court would have to contain a determination "based on a rigorous analysis of the evidence presented" that the plaintiff certified this requirement .

ficala does not define the phrase "type and scope of injury. .

ficala would also add 28 u.s.c .

§ 1720 , which would prohibit so - called "issue classes," by prohibiting a federal court from issuing "an order granting certification .

 .

 .

with respect to particular issues pursuant to rule 23 ( c ) ( 4 ) .

 .

 .

unless the entirety of the cause of action from which the particular issues arise satisfies all the class certification prerequisites" of rule 23 .

the committee report from the house judiciary committee ( the "committee report" ) confirms that these sections are driven by concerns over cohesiveness .

in particular , the committee report notes a goal of ensuring that "similarly injured people" are grouped in a single class action .

the alleged purpose is to prevent "uninjured class members" receiving money that could go to those with actual injuries , in order to create "classes in which those who are most injured receive the most compensation. .

the committee report cites wal - mart stores , inc. v. dukes as the source of the principle , particularly the supreme court's statement that "a class representative must be part of the class and possess the same interest and suffer the same injury as the class members. .

with respect to proposed section 1720 , the committee report suggests that the purpose of this provision is to codify the approach to issue classes announced by the fifth circuit in castano v. american tobacco co. , discussed above , that a "district court cannot manufacture predominance" by segregating the issues it wishes to certify into a separate predominance inquiry — rather , the court must evaluate predominance for the cause of action as a whole .

critics of ficala , including those cited in the committee report , have argued that far from protecting absent class members , these provisions would simply lead to fewer individuals being able to obtain relief through class litigation .

as these critics point out , the term "scope of injury" in proposed section 1716 is undefined .

furthermore , these critics argue that at the early stage of litigation when class certification is supposed to occur , the exact "scope" of an injury cannot be measured with any precision , and the proposed section would effectively require "a decision on the merits before trial and before appropriate class members can even be identified. .

because of this structure , ficala critics argue that uninjured class members , or class members with different injuries , are an inevitable component of class actions , as membership in a class has never equated to an "entitlement to damages. .

further , the critics argue that proposed section 1720 would particularly threaten certain types of civil rights class actions , which can be maintained only as to particular issues such as liability because , as demonstrated in cases like wal - mart v. dukes , individualized questions tend to predominate in such suits .

in some ways , the arguments above echo larger disputes .

on the one hand , a relatively broader view of cohesiveness enables courts to provide resolutions for injured class members where they might not otherwise exist .

for example , in nassau county strip search cases , the second circuit approved class treatment in a case involving an allegedly unconstitutional blanket strip search policy for nassau county misdemeanor detainees .

by approving class action treatment on the issues of whether the defendants had implemented the policy and whether they were liable for it , the court sidelined the individualized questions relating to whether some class members might have been appropriately searched .

nassau county serves as an example of a case where few of the class members would have had an incentive to seek redress individually for injury they had sustained — in this case , an allegedly unlawful strip search .

as such , supporters of relaxation of cohesiveness would likely argue that nassau county is indicative of why it is necessary to permit otherwise noncohesive classes to proceed and why the change proposed by section 1717 to issue classes would harm plaintiffs .

on the other hand , some commentators have argued that resolving the rights of absent class members without a strong element of cohesion threatens the constitutional values of individual rights and separation of powers .

according to these commentators , individual rights are threatened because noncohesive class actions undermine an individual's right to a "day in court. .

where large classes resolve questions on behalf of absent class members on the basis of an opt - out system , absent class members may be deprived of the individual autonomy rights and the right to control their own cases , a problem that is less severe when classes are highly cohesive .

further , these commentators argue that separation of powers is undermined because the proper role of the courts is to resolve claims that are in front of them — it is the role of legislatures to devise solutions to generalized problems affecting large swaths of society .

where a class action is certified and the class members are not truly cohesive , especially where the damages are small and class members are unlikely to receive a meaningful benefit , courts , in the view of these commentators , act more like legislatures or administrative agencies by disciplining corporations and handing out bounties to class counsel , rather than by redressing individual rights and handing out relief to injured persons .

the circuit split over ascertainability discussed above has likewise captured the attention of policymakers .

ficala would add section 1718 to title 28 of the u.s. code , which would forbid a federal court from granting certification of a class action without determining that there is "a reliable and administratively feasible mechanism" for determining whether putative class members fall within the class definition and for determining how to distribute to a substantial majority of class members any monetary relief secured .

this new provision would codify the approach currently in use within the third and eleventh circuits discussed above .

to support this provision , the ficala's committee report majority favorably cites a dissenting opinion by judge kayatta in the first circuit , stating that district courts should have to "identify a culling method to ensure that the class , by judgment , includes only members who were actually injured. .

in response , the dissenting members who signed the "dissenting views" portion of the committee report argue that the ascertainability requirement has been "rejected by most courts for good reason. .

the dissenters argue that the practical effect would be that many small claim consumer class actions would allow defendants to escape liability because the class is not ascertainable by this standard .

these statements echo the debate in the federal courts on ascertainability .

"defendants in class actions" have "invok[ed] the ascertainability requirement with increasing frequency" in recent years "in order to defeat class certification. .

some commentators have therefore called the ascertainability doctrine "one of the most contentious issues in class action litigation these days. .

supporters of a rigorous ascertainability requirement — such as that adopted by the third and eleventh circuits — maintain that requiring the proposed class representative to demonstrate an administratively feasible mechanism for determining whether putative class members fall within the class definition "serves several important policy objectives," such as eliminating administrative burdens "by insisting on the easy identification of class members" ; "protect[ing] absent class members by facilitating" notice to the class ; and "protect[ing] defendants by ensuring that those persons who will be bound by the final judgment are clearly identifiable. .

critics , by contrast , argue that a rigorous ascertainability requirement inappropriately "scuttle[s] small - claim class actions , especially consumer class actions involving low - priced items. .

in such cases , consumers typically "do not have documentary proof of purchases," but this , by itself , should , in the view of critics , not bar their ability to recover .

some commentators also claim that the existing class action framework results in a mismatch between the incentives of class members and those of class counsel , especially with respect to settlement .

the adequacy requirement of rule 23 ( a ) presently seeks to constrain the ability of counsel with conflicts or competence issues to represent the class , and rule 23 ( e ) requires the court to find that settlements are "fair , reasonable and adequate. .

however , the standards applied to these rules are largely court - made , and some have argued that they are inadequate to the task of protecting class members .

ficala would add two relevant provisions to the u.s. code .

the first , 28 u.s.c .

§ 1717 , would require class action complaints to state whether any proposed class representative "is a relative of , is a present or former employee of , is a present or former client of .

 .

 .

or has any contractual relationship .

 .

 .

with class counsel. .

further , this section would forbid a federal court from granting class certification to any proposed class action in which the class representative is a "relative or employee of class counsel. .

second , proposed 28 u.s.c .

§ 1718 ( 2 ) - ( 3 ) would forbid class counsel from collecting fees until "the distribution of any monetary recovery to class members has been completed" and would limit the fees that class counsel could obtain in cases involving monetary recovery to "a reasonable percentage of any payments directly distributed to and received by class members .

 .

 .

[not to] exceed the total amount of money directly distributed to and received by class members. .

proposed section 1717 would effectuate , at least relative to other provisions in ficala , a minor change in the law .

it would require additional disclosure of conflicts to the court and would codify the requirement , already accepted by many courts , that class counsel should not have certain conflicts of interest .

it would also largely codify the words of the seventh circuit in levitt v. southwest airlines co. : "our message to the class action bar is short and simple: when in doubt , disclose [potential conflicts]. .

proposed section 1718 , on the other hand , proposes significant limitations on the fees that class counsel would be able to obtain .

this provision would work a major change .

currently , rule 23 ( h ) provides that a court may award "reasonable" attorney's fees following a motion under federal rule of civil procedure 54 ( d ) ( 2 ) , which provides that the motion for fees must be made within 14 days after judgment .

class counsel is ordinarily entitled to fees only in cases involving either a common - fund created by the attorney's effort or in cases where substantive law provides for fee shifting .

case law states that a "reasonable" fee is determined by a number of factors , which include the benefits obtained by the class .

where the fee is based on a common fund created by the litigation , generally , a reasonable fee extends to a percentage of the fund that is created , including any unclaimed portion .

proposed section 1718 would change that rule , insofar as percentage recoveries would have to be based on only the recovered portion of the funds actually received , rather than the total fund including any unclaimed portion .

further , this section apparently ensures that class counsel cannot collect fees until monetary recovery has been completed .

this provision , if enacted , could raise issues in cases where fee awards would potentially be difficult to administer or in class actions where funds are created but the potential beneficiaries are unknown or their injuries are uncertain .

an example of such a case is the national football league's ( nfl's ) concussion settlement .

in that case , the court approved a settlement covering 20,000 retired nfl players , even though the injuries sustained by some of the claimants are not likely to become apparent for some time ( if ever ) , meaning the payment owed to those claimants is unknown .

the ficala provision prohibiting the collection of fees until recovery has been completed raises the question of whether attorneys in such a case would be effectively unable to receive payment from the fund , because it would likely never be known when the distribution to class members is completed .

a court may interpret the language in the section — "until the distribution of monetary recovery to class members" — in such cases to mean "until the fund is created," but this interpretation is not necessarily obvious .

the problem that these provisions seek to resolve is a mismatch between the incentives possessed by class counsel and class representatives , particularly with respect to settlements .

once the class is certified , class counsel and defendants could be united in the desire to obtain a quick settlement that resolves all of the claims and pays class counsel .

the defendant wants finality and class counsel wants its fees ; neither the defendant nor class counsel particularly has an incentive to care if absent class members , at the end of the day , receive any benefit from the funds that are being distributed on their behalf .

unlike in a traditional lawsuit where the client is an active participant , class members are usually absent and unavailable to check class counsel for the same reason that class actions are needed — class members often have a negligible individual stake in the recovery .

sponsors of ficala assert that consumer class members take the offered compensation in only .023 percent of cases and that class counsel nonetheless frequently obtains seemingly large fee awards .

it is this mismatch between the reward obtainable by the attorney and that which flows to his ostensible client which creates the problem .

critics of ficala , however , argue that this mismatch of incentives is an issue that courts have already recognized and attempted to curtail .

current law , as noted above , requires courts to scrutinize class action settlements for fairness to class members .

as the seventh circuit has explained , courts are aware that "[t]he structure of class actions under rule 23 of the federal rules gives class action lawyers an incentive to negotiate settlements that enrich themselves but give scant reward to class members. .

courts therefore attempt to ensure "that the settlement secures an adequate advantage for the class in return for" absent class members giving up their "litigation rights against the defendants. .

as the seventh circuit has colorfully explained , "a class settlement that results in fees for class counsel but yields no meaningful relief for the class 'is no better than a racket.' .

following this case law , courts have struck down the occasional settlement as unfair .

however , some commentators argue that district courts are too lenient and too inclined to approve unfair settlements that pay the attorneys but leave little to nothing for the class .

whether courts have struck the right balance on this question is an open debate , but there is no question that courts are aware of these issues and do scrutinize class action settlements for fairness .

