t his report provides an overview of the portion of department of defense ( dod ) research , development , testing , and evaluation ( rdt&e ) funding referred to as defense science and technology ( defense s&t ) .

it provides perspectives on the role of defense s&t in supporting u.s. defense capabilities , historical funding levels , recent funding trends , and approaches to determining how much the federal government should invest in defense s&t , particularly in basic research .

congress provides appropriations to dod for rdt&e activities conducted in support of its mission requirements .

dod's financial management regulation ( dod 7000.14-r ) provides a taxonomy for requesting , tracking , and accounting for federal investments in rdt&e based on the character of work performed .

dod budget justifications and congressional appropriations reports and explanatory statements typically employ this taxonomy , which consists of seven budget activity codes ( 6.1 through 6.7 ) and a description ( as shown in table 1 ) .

defense science and technology is a subset of dod rdt&e appropriations that includes funding for basic research ( 6.1 ) , applied research ( 6.2 ) , and advanced technology development ( 6.3 ) — the earliest stages of the rdt&e process .

dod defines these budget activities in the following manner: basic research [budget activity code 6.1] is systematic study directed toward greater knowledge or understanding of the fundamental aspects of phenomena and of observable facts without specific applications towards processes or products in mind .

it includes all scientific study and experimentation directed toward increasing fundamental knowledge and understanding in those fields of the physical , engineering , environmental , and life sciences related to long - term national security needs .

it is farsighted high payoff research that provides the basis for technological progress .

basic research may lead to: ( a ) subsequent applied research and advanced technology developments in defense - related technologies , and ( b ) new and improved military functional capabilities in areas such as communications , detection , tracking , surveillance , propulsion , mobility , guidance and control , navigation , energy conversion , materials and structures , and personnel support .

applied research [budget activity code 6.2] is systematic study to understand the means to meet a recognized and specific need .

it is a systematic expansion and application of knowledge to develop useful materials , devices , an d systems or methods .

it may be oriented , ultimately , toward the design , development , and improvement of prototypes and new processes to meet general mission area requirements .

applied research may translate promising basic research into solutions for broadly defined military needs , short of system development .

this type of effort may vary from systematic mission - directed research beyond that in budget activity 1 [basic research] to sophisticated breadboard hardware , study , programming and planning efforts that establish the initial feasibility and practicality of proposed solutions to technological challenges .

it includes studies , investigations , and non - system specific technology efforts .

the dominant characteristic is that applied research is directed toward general military needs with a view toward developing and evaluating the feasibility and practicality of proposed solutions and determining their parameters .

applied research precedes system specific technology investigations or development .

advanced technology development , [budget activity code 6.3] includes development of subsystems and components and efforts to integrate subsystems and components into system prototypes for field experiments and / or tests in a simulated environment .

budget activity 3 includes concept and technology demonstrations of components and subsystems or system models .

the models may be form , fit , and function prototypes or scaled models that serve the same demonstration purpose .

the results of this type of effort are proof of technological feasibility and assessment of subsystem and component operability and producibility rather than the development of hardware for service use .

projects in this category have a direct relevance to identified military needs .

advanced technology development demonstrates the general military utility or cost reduction potential of technology when applied to different types of military equipment or techniques….projects in this category do not necessarily lead to subsequent development or procurement phases , but should have the goal of moving out of science and technology ( s&t ) and into the acquisition process within the future years defense program ( fydp ) .

upon successful completion of projects that have military utility , the technology should be available for transition .

defense s&t is of particular interest and importance to congress due to its perceived value in supporting military competitive advantage .

defense s&t is also of interest to key stakeholders in the private sector and academia .

for example , advocates of strong and sustained defense s&t funding assert that this funding plays important and unique roles in the dod innovation system .

the scientific and technological insights that emerge from defense s&t funding — often referred to as the nation's "seed corn" — are seen by many as the critical body of knowledge available to dod and the industrial base for future defense technology development .

defense s&t supports both medium - term , evolutionary technologies and incremental innovation s to help improve existing products and systems ; and longer - term , revolutionary technologies to support u.s. technological dominance , deter conflict , and defeat adversaries .

these technologies — both evolutionary and revolutionary — are seen by most warfighters and policymakers as central to u.s. national security as well as to the lives of those serving in uniform in the medium and long term .

in contrast , most of the balance of dod rdt&e is focused on near - term applications .

budget activity 6.4 , advanced component development and prototypes , efforts are directed toward the evaluation of integrated technologies and prototype systems in realistic operating environments , not just in controlled laboratory environments .

funding in this budget activity seeks to expedite technology transition from the laboratory to operational use .

budget activity 6.5 , system development and demonstration , is engineering and manufacturing development tasks aimed at meeting validated requirements prior to full - rate production .

at this stage , prototype performance is near or at planned operational system levels .

budget activity 6.7 , operational systems development , is focused on development efforts to upgrade systems that have been fielded or have received approval for full rate production and anticipate production funding in the current or subsequent fiscal year .

budget activity 6.6 , rdt&e management support , includes management support for rdt&e efforts and funds to sustain and / or modernize the installations required for general research .

accordingly , ba 6.6 funding supports rdt&e activities in each of the other budget activities .

from fy2007 to fy2017 , defense s&t averaged 17.1% , approximately one - sixth , of total defense rdt&e ( ranging from 15% to 19% during these years ) .

historical funding levels and recent trends are discussed in more detail in the following section of this report .

according to the national academies' 2007 report rising above the gathering storm : keeping a technological edge over adversaries of the united states has long been a key component of our national security strategy .

us preeminence in science and technology is considered essential to achieving that goal .

the report further emphasizes the importance of dod basic research , asserting that the importance of dod basic research is illustrated by its products — in defense areas these include night vision ; stealth technology ; near - real - time delivery of battlefield information ; navigation , communication , and weather satellites ; and precision munitions .

dod investments in basic research are also considered vital to maintaining university research , the education of scientists and engineers , and the preservation of teaching capacity in key scientific and engineering fields .

proponents of these investments assert that it is essential to ensure steady funding to these fields to ensure stability for professors , researchers , and academic programs .

uneven funding patterns , some assert , can create uncertainty ( in positions , salary , equipment , and programs , for example ) that may drive out some of the best scientists and engineers and discourage the most capable students from pursuing degrees and research in these disciplines , resulting in adverse impacts on future innovation in fields key to national security .

some analysts express concern that , in times of tightly constrained budgets , defense s&t may be an easy target for budget cuts .

cuts to defense s&t might produce few short - term consequences to national defense , as the benefits of these investments tend to be realized in the medium to long term .

however , the neglect of these earlier - stage research and development activities could have serious medium - and long - term consequences , depriving the u.s. defense sector of the critical underpinnings necessary for maintaining technological superiority and global dominance in the future .

former under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics frank kendall noted the following: r&d is not a variable cost .

r&d drives our rate of modernization .

it has nothing to do with the size of the force structure .

so , when you cut r&d , you are cutting your ability to modernize on a certain time scale , period — no matter how big your force structure is ... [t]he investments we're making now in technology are going to give us the forces that we're going to have in the future .

the forces we have now came out of investments that were made , to some extent , in the 80s and 90s…if you give up the time it takes for lead time to get…a capability , you are not going to get that back .

alan r. shaffer , principal deputy , assistant secretary of defense for defense research and engineering , underscored this point , stating the following: if we don't do the research and development for a new system then the number of systems of that type we will have is zero .

it is not variable .

such cuts may also result in lasting damage to important segments of the u.s. r&d infrastructure — researchers , professors , academic programs , student interest , equipment , infrastructure , etc. — in defense - critical fields , even if funding were to be later restored .

such effects could not only diminish u.s. innovative capacity , but result in the transfer of knowledge and loss of people , capabilities , and leadership to other nations .

according to a 2012 defense science board report on dod basic research the dod basic research program has supported a large fraction of revolutionary research in the physical sciences .

without dod support , these u.s. - based research communities would find it more difficult to expand knowledge , collaborate , publish , and meet .

without adequate u.s. support , these centers of knowledge will drift to other countries .

while there is little direct opposition to defense s&t spending in its own right , there is intense competition for available dollars in the appropriations process .

this competition has been made more acute under congressionally enacted budget control provisions .

congressional acts establish and provide enforcement mechanisms for separate spending caps for defense and nondefense spending .

these independent budget caps essentially fence off certain funds from being used for defense purposes by those who would prioritize such defense spending over certain nondefense activities .

increases in the defense and nondefense budget caps for fy2018 and fy2019 included in the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-123 ) may ease the resource competition in these fiscal years , but not eliminate it .

with the spending caps has come greater competition for available dollars within the defense portion of the budget ( for example , between rdt&e and procurement ) , and among the various rdt&e budget activities and program elements ( for example , between defense s&t and the rest of the defense rdt&e budget activities ) .

with members of the u.s. armed forces currently engaged in combat and others facing potentially imminent threats in other locations around the world , some may believe it is appropriate to prioritize defense spending to support immediate operational needs and contingency preparations of the military over activities whose payoff is likely to be realized only in the longer term .

in addition , some have questioned the effectiveness of defense investments in r&d .

for example , a 2012 article published by the center for american progress ( cap ) , a public policy research and advocacy organization , notes that the technological superiority of the united states did not initially provide an effective defense for u.s. troops against low - tech improvised explosive devices ( ieds ) in iraq and afghanistan .

the article also asserts that many high - priced major weapons systems — such as president reagan's missile defense program — have failed to deliver on their promised capabilities due to scientific and engineering shortcomings .

further , the article notes that commercial technology development is now outstripping defense technology due to the "strength of capitalism" — including large markets , consumer demand , and competitive challenges — suggesting the potential benefits of pursuing a technology acquisition strategy based more heavily on off - the - shelf technologies or the repurposing of those technologies to meet defense needs .

the article treats basic research less harshly than other defense rdt&e activities , which cap describes as "the kind of boondoggle r&d spending the pentagon engages in at the applied and developmental level. .

defense s&t has grown substantially in current dollars ( unadjusted for changes in buying power ) over the past four decades , from $2.3 billion in fy1978 to $13.4 billion in fy2017 .

this growth is illustrated in figure 1 , which shows this growth by its component budget activities .

during the fy1978-fy2017 period , defense s&t grew at a compound annual growth rate ( cagr ) of 4.6% .

most of this growth occurred between fy1978 and fy2006 ( 6.4% cagr ) ; from fy2006 to fy2017 defense s&t grew at a pace of 0.1% cagr , though the period was punctuated by periods of growth and contraction .

the funding trends for each of the component budget activities ( 6.1-6.3 ) during the fy1978-fy2017 period were different .

b asic research ( 6.1 ) funding grew at 4.4% cagr from fy1978 to fy2017 , approximately the same pace as overall defense s&t funding ( 4.7% cagr ) , but the growth was steadier , with fewer periods of substantial decrease .

applied research ( 6.2 ) funding grew steadily from fy1978 to fy2017 , in general , but at a slightly slower rate ( 3.5% cagr ) than overall defense s&t and basic research funding .

similar to overall defense s&t , most of the growth in applied research occurred between fy1978 and fy2006 ( 4.8% cagr ) ; from fy2006 to fy2017 applied research grew at a slower pace of 0.3% cagr .

advanced t echnology d evelopment ( 6.3 ) funding experienced periods of growth and decline from fy1978 to fy2017 .

from fy1978 to fy1993 , advanced technology development grew at a rate of 14.4% cagr .

from fy1993 to fy1999 , funding declined at a rate of 3.0% cagr .

funding grew at a rate of 10.3% cagr from fy1999 to fy2006 , and then fell again from fy2006 to fy2013 at a rate of 4.9% cagr .

most recently , funding for advanced technology development has grown at a rate of 5.9% cagr from fy2013 to fy2017 .

figure 2 illustrates defense s&t by budget activity in constant fy2017 dollars .

this figure provides an illustration of defense s&t funding levels from fy1978 to fy2017 in terms of the purchasing power of these funds .

defense s&t grew by nearly 90% in constant dollars between fy1978 and fy2017 .

despite the increase , there were periods of decline .

between fy1993 and fy1999 , funding decreased at a rate of 4.0% cagr .

funding rebounded between fy1999 and fy2005 ( when defense s&t funding reached its peak in constant dollars for the fy1978-fy2017 period ) , growing by 7.1% cagr .

this growth period was followed by another period of decline through fy2013 ( 4.0% cagr ) .

from fy2013 to fy2017 , defense s&t grew at a rate of 3.5% cagr .

basic research funding grew , with some ups and downs , at a rate of 1.4% cagr , during the fy1978-fy2017 period .

from fy1993 to fy1998 , funding fell by nearly 30% , then recovered , surpassing its fy1993 level in fy2012 .

funding then rose an additional 1.4% between fy2012 and fy2017 .

applied research funding was essentially flat through fy1998 , then grew steadily through fy2005 ( 5.1% cagr ) and remained flat again through fy2007 .

funding fell by 24% from fy2007 to fy2013 , declining at a rate of 4.5% cagr .

funding recovered between fy2013 and fy2017 , rising by 13.4% , at a rate of 3.2% cagr .

the largest swings in defense s&t resulted from changes in the advanced t echnology d evelopment funding component .

advanced technology development funding nearly quadrupled in constant dollars from fy1978 to fy1993 .

from fy1993 through fy1999 , it fell by 25% , before rising again to its constant dollar peak in fy2005 .

between fy2005 and fy2013 , advanced technology development fell by 39% , and then recovered somewhat between fy2013 and fy2017 ( up 19% ) .

in fy2016 , dod spent an estimated $2.3 billion on basic research .

the following sections describe the composition of dod basic research funding by organizational component and the composition of performers of the research by organizational component .

through the authorization and appropriations processes , congress grapples with a wide variety of issues related to the magnitude , allocation , and strategic direction of dod rdt&e , defense s&t ( a subset of rdt&e ) , and basic research ( a subset of defense s&t ) .

these decisions play an important role in u.s. national security and economic strength , in the near term and longer term .

in practice , appropriations decisions are generally made about specific programs within the context of the available funding .

the levels of rdt&e , s&t , and basic research funding are the result of many decisions made during dod budget formulation and congressional appropriations , and in the end , are calculated on a post - facto basis .

nevertheless , an analysis of the kind that follows may be useful in assessing the big picture and in seeing funding trends in the context of a historical arc that may provide strategic insight and guidance .

among the ongoing questions lawmakers and policy analysts grapple with are the following: what is the appropriate funding level for defense s&t ? .

what is the appropriate funding level for dod basic research ? .

several approaches to addressing these questions are identified below , each with related data and analysis .

defense s&t investments are highly complex and can be parsed in many ways .

some of these are highlighted in this report .

other ways of parsing rdt&e funding — such as allocation by size of industrial performers — may also be important for assessing the balance in allocation of dod rdt&e resources to meet dod objectives .

among the many other factors that may affect the effectiveness of the performance of defense s&t are organizational structures and relationships ; management ; workforce recruitment , training , and retention ; and policies related to cooperative research and technology transfer .

defense s&t stakeholders have also asserted the importance of stability in funding streams .

as congress undertakes defense annual authorization and appropriations , it may wish to consider the issues raised in this report related to the magnitude and composition of funding for defense s&t in the overall context of dod rdt&e , as well as the other issues such as those identified above .

