the process by which lower federal court judges are nominated by the president and considered by the senate has , in recent decades , been of continuing interest to senators .

during recent senate debates over judicial nominations , differing perspectives have been expressed about the relative degree of success of a president's nominees in gaining senate confirmation , compared with nominees of other recent presidents .

senate debate has also concerned whether a president's judicial nominees , relative to the nominees of other recent presidents , encountered more difficulty or had to wait longer , before receiving consideration by the senate judiciary committee or up - or - down floor votes on confirmation .

of related concern to the senate have been the potential effects of delaying , or at other times rushing , the process by which judicial vacancies are filled .

this report provides information and analysis on several aspects of the judicial nomination and confirmation process during president donald trump's first year in office ( as well as during the first year of each of his three immediate predecessors — presidents barack obama , george w. bush , and bill clinton ) .

most of the statistics presented and discussed in this report were generated from an internal crs judicial nominations database .

other data sources , however , are noted where appropriate .

the statistics account only for nominations made to u.s. circuit court and u.s. district court judgeships .

article iii , section i of the constitution provides , in part , that the "judicial power of the united states , shall be vested in one supreme court , and in such inferior courts as the congress may from time to time ordain and establish. .

it further provides that justices on the supreme court and judges on lower courts established by congress under article iii have what effectively has come to mean life tenure ( i.e. , holding office "during good behaviour" ) .

along with the supreme court , the courts that constitute the article iii courts in the federal system are the u.s. circuit courts of appeals , the u.s. district courts , and the u.s. court of international trade .

as mentioned above , this report concerns nominations made by president trump and other recent presidents to the u.s. circuit courts of appeals and the u.s. district courts .

outside the scope of the report are the occasional nominations that these presidents made to territorial district courts and the nine - member u.s. court of international trade .

opportunities for a president to make circuit and district court appointments arise when judgeships are vacant or are scheduled to become vacant .

various factors influence the number of such opportunities a president will have during his tenure in office .

one such factor , at the start of a presidency , is the number of judicial vacancies already in existence ( i.e. , the judicial vacancies a president inherits when taking office ) .

the number of inherited vacancies , in turn , is influenced by various factors .

these include the frequency with which judicial departures occurred and new judgeships were statutorily created in the years or months immediately prior to a new presidency ; the extent to which the outgoing president , during this same period , made nominations to fill judicial vacancies ; and the rate at which the senate confirmed these nominations before the new president took office .

table 1 reports the number of u.s. circuit and district court vacancies that existed at the beginning of the first and second years of a presidency , as well as the corresponding percentage of authorized circuit and district court judgeships that were vacant at these times .

as shown by the table , the number of u.s. circuit court vacancies declined by 1 , from 17 to 16 , from the beginning of the first year to the beginning of the second year of the trump presidency .

the percentage of circuit court judgeships that were vacant at the beginning of president trump's first year in office was 9.5% , while the percentage vacant at the beginning of his second year was 8.9% .

the number of u.s. district court vacancies increased by 38 , from 86 to 124 , from the beginning of the first year to the beginning of the second year of the trump presidency .

the percentage of district court judgeships that were vacant at the beginning of president trump's first year in office was 12.8% , while the percentage vacant at the beginning of his second year was 18.4% .

 table 2 reports the number of individuals nominated to u.s. circuit and district court judgeships during president trump's first calendar year in office ( i.e. , from january 20 , 2017 , through december 31 , 2017 ) , and also reports the number and percentage of nominees confirmed during the same period .

the table also provides the same statistics for each of the first calendar years of his three immediate predecessors — presidents obama ( 2009 ) , bush ( 2001 ) , and clinton ( 1993 ) .

the demographic diversity of individuals nominated to u.s. circuit and district court judgeships during a president's first year in office has varied across recent presidencies .

note , though , that the numerical breakdown in the demographic characteristics of individuals a president nominates during his first year in office is not necessarily predictive of the final numerical breakdown in the characteristics of all the individuals he nominates during his entire term in office .

since 1953 , every presidential administration , except those of george w. bush and donald trump , has sought aba pre - nomination evaluations of its prospective u.s. circuit and district court nominees .

during the bush presidency , as well as during the current administration , the aba has provided post - nomination evaluations of nominees .

the aba's standing committee on the federal judiciary is responsible for evaluating all individuals nominated to u.s. circuit and district court judgeships .

the committee is comprised of 15 lawyers with varied professional experiences and backgrounds .

according to the aba , the evaluation by the committee focuses strictly on a candidate's professional qualifications — specifically , a candidate's integrity , professional competence , and judicial temperament — and does not take into account an individual's philosophy , political affiliation , or ideology .

note that some have , at times , disputed this characterization .

in evaluating integrity , the committee states that it "considers the prospective nominee's character and general reputation in the legal community , as well as the prospective nominee's industry and diligence. .

in evaluating professional competence , it assesses a prospective nominee's "intellectual capacity , judgment , writing and analytical abilities , knowledge of the law , and breadth of professional experience. .

and in evaluating judicial temperament the committee considers "the prospective nominee's compassion , decisiveness , open - mindedness , courtesy , patience , freedom from bias , and commitment to equal justice under the law. .

as stated above , the aba , at present , provides post - nomination evaluations of individuals nominated to u.s. circuit and district court judgeships .

at the conclusion of the evaluation process , each member of the aba committee rates the candidate as "well qualified," "qualified," or "not qualified" and independently conveys his or her rating to the chair .

if the candidate is found "not qualified" ( either unanimously or by a majority of the committee ) , the committee determined that the nominee does "not meet the committee's standards with respect to one or more of its evaluation criteria — integrity , professional competence , or judicial temperament. .

there are instances when the committee is not unanimous in its rating of a nominee .

when this happens , "the majority rating represents the committee's official rating of the prospective nominee. .

the statistics presented in figure 5 and figure 6 reflect the percentage and numerical breakdown of the committee's official ratings for individuals nominated during each president's first year in office ( whether that rating was unanimous or supported by a majority of the committee ) .

the evaluations of judicial candidates are provided by the aba on an advisory basis .

it is solely in a president's discretion as to how much weight to place on a judicial candidate's aba rating .

consequently , a "not qualified" aba rating of a judicial candidate in some instances may dissuade a president from nominating an individual , while in other instances the president may nominate regardless of the rating .

the evaluations submitted by the aba are similarly advisory when it comes to final senate action on judicial nominations .

 table 3 reports the average and median number of days that elapsed from nomination to confirmation for all u.s. circuit and district court nominees who were confirmed during a president's first year in office .

as shown by the table , the average number of days from nomination to confirmation for u.s. circuit and district court nominees confirmed during president trump's first year in office was 115 days .

the median number of days from nomination to confirmation was 109 days .

of the four presidents included in the table , president trump's first - year nominees had the second longest average and median number of days from nomination to confirmation ( president obama's nominees had the longest average and median — 137 and 130 days , respectively ) .

the average and median number of days from nomination to confirmation for president trump's first - year nominees represent a departure from the upward trend in the length of time first - year nominees waited to be confirmed during the previous three presidencies .

specifically , it is the first instance over the past several presidencies in which the average and median wait times from nomination to confirmation of a president's first - year nominees were both shorter than the average and median wait times of his immediate predecessor's first - year nominees .

the decline in the average and median wait times for president trump's first - year nominees ( relative to president obama's first - year nominees ) occurred , in part , as a result of the shorter time nominees waited on the executive calendar to be confirmed once reported by the senate judiciary committee .

for example , president trump's first - year nominees waited , on average , 34 days from committee report to confirmation ( with a median wait of 19 days ) .

in contrast , president obama's first - year nominees waited , on average , 60 days from committee report to confirmation ( with a median wait of 43 days ) .

table 4 reports , for nominees confirmed during a president's first year in office , the number of u.s. circuit and district court nominees who waited a specified period of time from nomination to confirmation .

for example , of the 12 u.s. circuit court nominees confirmed during president trump's first year in office , 6 were confirmed less than 100 days after being nominated ; 4 were confirmed between 100 and 149 days after being nominated ; 2 were confirmed between 150 and 200 days after being nominated ; and none waited more than 200 days to be confirmed .

as shown by table 4 , the first year of the trump presidency is the first time since 1993 ( the first year of the clinton presidency ) when at least half of a president's first - year circuit court nominees were confirmed within fewer than 100 days after being nominated .

one of president trump's circuit court nominees , james c. ho , was confirmed 59 days after being nominated .

another one of his circuit court nominees , amul r. thapar , was confirmed 65 days after being nominated .

these were the shortest wait times , since 1993 , from nomination to confirmation for any u.s. circuit court nominee confirmed during a president's first year in office .

president trump's u.s. district court nominees were distributed equally across three of the specified periods of time — two waited less than 100 days from nomination to confirmation ; two waited between 100 and 149 days ; and two waited 150 to 200 days .

as shown by the table , president trump was , of the four presidents , the sole president who had at least one - third of his district court nominees ( 2 of 6 ) wait 150 or more days from nomination to confirmation .

one of president trump's district court nominees , dabney l. friedrich , was confirmed 173 days after being nominated .

another of his district court nominees , scott l. palk , was confirmed 171 days after being nominated .

these were the longest wait times , since 2001 , from nomination to confirmation for any u.s. district court nominee confirmed during a president's first year in office .

floor consideration of u.s. circuit and district court nominations during the first year of the trump presidency frequently involved the use of the cloture process to reach senate confirmation .

additionally , the confirmation of nominees always occurred by roll call vote ( rather than by unanimous consent or voice vote ) and , for most circuit court nominations , was marked by a relatively high number of 'nay' votes among senators not belonging to the president's party .

in practice , senate floor consideration of u.s. circuit or district court nominations follows one of two procedural tracks .

historically , most of these nominations have reached confirmation under the terms of unanimous consent agreements .

on this procedural track , the senate by unanimous consent not only takes up nominations for floor consideration , but also arranges for them to either receive up - or - down confirmation votes or be confirmed simply by unanimous consent .

at other times , however , unanimous consent to reach confirmation may not always be attainable .

in these instances , the procedural track , for a nomination to move forward without unanimous consent , involves the senate , after taking up the nomination , voting on a cloture motion to bring floor debate to a close .

if the requisite majority under senate rules supports closing debate , an "up - or - down" confirmation vote on the nomination must be held after a limited period for consideration .

during the first year of the trump presidency , the cloture process ( rather than unanimous consent ) has been the primary means by which confirmation votes have been reached on u.s. circuit and district court nominations .

cloture was used for each of the 12 circuit court nominations that received a final up - or - down vote and for 5 of the 6 district court nominations that received a final vote .

in contrast , during the first years of the other three presidencies included in this report's analysis , the cloture process was used once to reach an up - or - down vote on a circuit or district court nomination .

the routine use of cloture to reach final votes on u.s. circuit and district court nominations also occurred recently during the obama presidency ( although , as discussed above , not during his first year in office ) .

for 13 months following the november 21 , 2013 , reinterpretation of rule xxii ( i.e. , during part of president obama's fifth year in office and most of his sixth year in office ) , votes on confirmation , including for uncontroversial judicial nominations , no longer were reached by unanimous consent , but instead by the cloture process .

overall , the cloture process was used a total of 85 times during this period of the obama presidency to reach up - or - down votes on u.s. circuit and district court nominations .

used primarily in the past to close debate on a relatively small number of nominations that did not enjoy wide bipartisan support , the cloture motion became , until the last day of the 113 th congress , the invariable procedural tool used to reach confirmation votes for circuit and district court nominations .

the senate may confirm nominations by unanimous consent , voice vote , or by recorded roll call vote .

when the question of whether to confirm a nomination is put to the senate , a roll call vote will be taken on the nomination if the senate has ordered "the yeas and nays. .

historically , the senate has confirmed most district and circuit court nominations by unanimous consent or by voice vote .

in recent decades , however , confirmations by roll call votes have become more common , and during the presidencies of george w. bush and barack obama , they were the most common way that the senate confirmed lower court nominations .

for the purposes of this report and the data reported below , any nominations that were confirmed by unanimous consent or confirmed by voice vote are included in the same category ( i.e. , the nominations were not approved by roll call vote ) .

of the four presidencies included in table 5 , the trump presidency is the only one in which all of a president's first - year circuit and district court nominees were confirmed by roll call vote .

specifically , as shown by the table , each of the 12 u.s. circuit court nominees and 6 u.s. district court nominees confirmed in 2017 were approved by roll call vote ( and none by voice vote or unanimous consent ) .

as was the case with president trump's first - year circuit court nominees , all of the circuit court nominees confirmed during each of the first years of the obama and george w. bush presidencies were confirmed by roll call vote .

in contrast to each of president trump's first - year district court nominees being confirmed by roll call vote , 4 of 9 of president obama's first - year district court nominees and 7 of 22 of president george w. bush's first - year district court nominees were confirmed by voice vote or unanimous consent .

each of the circuit and district court nominees confirmed during the first year of the clinton presidency were confirmed by voice vote or unanimous consent .

there are a number of institutional and political factors that may , in part , help to explain the more common occurrence , since the mid - 1990s , of roll call votes being used to confirm u.s. circuit and district court nominees ( including for many nominees considered uncontroversial ) .

some scholars , for example , have noted that as the confirmation process itself has become more contentious , senators might use roll call votes for many , if not all , nominations as a way to slow down the process or to indicate their concerns , more generally , with the judicial appointment process .

roll call votes might also provide senators who are motivated by ideological or policy considerations with a way to express their views about , or attempt to influence , the appointment process .

additionally , the use of roll call votes allows senators to go on record in support or opposition to a president's nominees .

such position - taking by senators might be important to constituents , political activists , and various interest groups .

 table 6 reports , for u.s. circuit and district court nominees who were confirmed by roll call vote during the first year of a presidency , the number of 'nay' votes his or her nomination received at the time of confirmation .

as shown by the table , 11 of 12 u.s. circuit court nominations that were approved by the senate during president trump's first year in office received more than 20 nay votes at the time of confirmation .

of these 11 nominations , the average number of nay votes was 43 ( the median number of nay votes was also 43 ) .

no other presidency included in the table had as many circuit court nominees who were opposed by 20 or more senators in recorded roll call votes .

of the six district court nominees confirmed during president trump's first year in office , two were confirmed without receiving any nay votes while the other four nominees confirmed received at least one nay vote .

two of the district court nominees confirmed during the first year of the trump presidency , scott l. palk and trevor n. mcfadden , were , of the total 22 district court nominees confirmed by roll call vote during the first years of the trump , obama , and bush presidencies , the only two district court nominees who received any nay votes at the time of confirmation ( none of president clinton's first - year district court nominees were confirmed by roll call vote ) .

