since the late 1700s , congress has expressed public gratitude to individuals and groups by awarding medals and other similar decorations .

the first congressional gold medals were issued by the continental congress .

since that time , congress has awarded gold medals to express public gratitude for distinguished contributions , dramatize the virtues of patriotism , and perpetuate the remembrance of great events .

this tradition of authorizing individually struck gold medals bearing the portraits or actions of honorees is rich with history .

although congress has approved legislation stipulating specific requirements for numerous other awards and decorations , there are no permanent statutory provisions specifically relating to the creation of congressional gold medals .

when such an award has been deemed appropriate , congress has , by special action , provided for the creation of a personalized medal to be given in its name .

once a congressional gold medal bill is introduced , it is typically referred to the house committee on financial services or the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs .

the process for considering legislation varies between the house and senate .

congressional gold medal legislation generally has certain features , including findings that summarize the subject's history and importance ; specifications for awarding the medal ; instructions , if any , for the medal's design and striking ; permission to mint and sell duplicates ; and certification that medals are minted pursuant to existing requirements for national medals ( 5 u.s.c .

ยง5111 ) .

congressional gold medal designs vary for each issuance .

in general , the authorizing legislation provides that the secretary of the treasury "shall strike a gold medal with suitable emblems , devices , and inscriptions , to be determined by the secretary. .

when designing a congressional gold medal , the secretary consults with the citizens coinage advisory commission ( ccac ) and the u.s. commission of fine arts ( cfa ) before determining the final design .

as members of congress contemplate introducing legislation , and the house or the senate potentially consider congressional gold medal measures , there are several issues that could be considered .

these can be divided into issues for individual members of congress with respect to individual congressional gold medals , and issues for congress as an institution .

individual issues include choices members may make about which people or groups might be honored and whether specific design elements might be specified statutorily .

institutional issues might include committee or chamber rules on the consideration of congressional gold medals and creating standards for the issuance of gold medals .

congressional gold medals have long been an important way for congress to express public gratitude for important historical events and achievements .

congressional gold medals , which have been issued since the american revolution , are "the highest civilian honor award program ... [to] honor national achievement in patriotic , humanitarian , and artistic endeavors. .

in recent years , the number of gold medals awarded has "soared from four or five per decade for most of its history to an average of almost twenty in the 1980s , 1990s , and 2000s. .

each congress , legislation to award congressional gold medals is introduced .

in the 113 th congress ( 2013-2014 ) , 52 bills were introduced , 34 in the house and 18 in the senate , to award a gold medal .

in the 114 th congress ( 2015-2016 ) , 52 bills were introduced , 38 in the house and 14 in the senate .

in the 115 th congress ( 2017-2018 ) , 55 bills were introduced , 33 in the house and 22 in the senate .

based on the number of measures offered in both chambers , some members of congress clearly feel it is important to recognize individuals and groups for their patriotic , humanitarian , and artistic achievements .

several considerations appear important when members decide to introduce gold medal legislation .

these include who should be honored , how many medals should be awarded in a given congress , and whether specific design elements should be prescribed for the medal design .

as congress continues to consider legislation to award future gold medals , these considerations and others will likely be important factors for issuing the award .

