o ne of the major motivations for the 2017 tax revision was concern about the international tax system .

issues associated with these rules involved the allocation of investment between the united states and other countries , the loss of revenue due to the artificial shifting of profit out of the united states by multinational firms ( both u.s. and foreign ) , the penalties for repatriating income earned by foreign subsidiaries that led to the accumulation of deferred earnings abroad , and inversions ( u.s. firms shifting their headquarters to other countries for tax reasons ) .

in addition to changes in a variety of rules determining the degree to which foreign income of u.s. persons is subject to u.s. tax , the tax change lowered the corporate tax rate from 35% to 21% .

it also made some changes , both temporary and permanent , in the treatment of investments in the united states that could affect international allocation of capital .

both the rate changes and the changes in international rules have significant implications for the concerns that had arisen due to international tax rules and tax rates .

this report begins by explaining prior international tax rules and the revisions made in the new law .

the second part of the report discusses the four major issues of concern under prior law — allocation of investment , profit shifting , repatriation , and inversions — and how the new law addresses these concerns , or raises new ones .

that section also discusses issues associated with international agreements .

the final section summarizes commentary about problems and issues , including legal challenges and uncertainty , within the new international tax regime and options that have been suggested .

that section discusses some of the more detailed rules .

the description of international tax law is divided into a section on basic rules , a section on allocation and anti - abuse rules , a section on tax treaties , a section on the new deemed repatriation rules , and a section on anti - inversion rules .

during consideration of the tax legislation and after its enactment , numerous issues have been raised about the general system and about specific aspects of the new law , including gilti , fdii , beat , and other provisions .

this section discusses some of the more technical issues within the framework of the new law , but some lawmakers have proposed more basic changes .

representative doggett and senator whitehouse each introduced a bill entitled the "no tax break for outsourcing act" on february 27 , 2018 ( h.r .

5108 , s. 2459 ) , which would increase the gilti rate to 21% , eliminate the deduction for the return on tangible assets , treat foreign corporations that are managed and controlled in the united states as domestic corporations , treat inverted firms as u.s. firms when the shareholders of the former u.s. company own more than 50% of the shares , and limit interest deductions in the united states to the proportionate share of the firm's assets .

the last proposal ( to allocate worldwide interest ) was in both the house and senate versions of h.r .

1 ( in somewhat different form ) but was not retained in the final legislation .

many of the issues discussed in this section have been raised by many individuals discussing different aspects of the bill , both in conferences and in individual articles .

some critics have expressed general concerns about the overall system and the move to a territorial tax that treats operations and owners differently .

the dividend deduction applies only to income of businesses organized as foreign corporations and not to branches .

at the same time , elements of the new law make it costlier to incorporate a new business .

the elimination of the active trade or business exception in section 367 ( a ) ( 3 ) of the tax code taxes transfers of assets used in a foreign branch ( and increases recognition of gain when incorporating branches with losses ) .

the additions of goodwill , going concern value , and workforce in place to the definition of intangibles and the increased irs authority over transfer pricing will increase the value of assets being transferred .

in addition , the system treats individual owners of foreign corporations and portfolio investors differently from corporations with 10% ownership .

there is no deduction for dividends because the provision was enacted as an expansion of the intercorporate dividend deduction , although the repatriation tax applies to corporate and individual shareholders that have at least one u.s. corporate shareholder owning 10% of the firm .

thus individuals pay the repatriation tax , which can be viewed as a transition tax to move to a system with the deduction , although they do not benefit from dividend deduction .

gilti is treated as subpart f income so it will be imposed on individual shareholders , without the indirect foreign tax credits ; in addition , they do not get the gilti deduction , and income is taxed at ordinary rates ( although in some cases they would be eligible for lower rates on qualified dividends ) .

they are also not eligible for a fdii deduction .

the sale of stock will not be eligible for a dividend deduction , so firms may be encouraged to sell the underlying assets abroad to be eligible for the lower gilti rate .

at the same time , at least with respect to the dividend deduction , the individual shareholder is the final taxpayer , whereas a corporation's earnings from abroad would be taxed again to shareholders if distributed as a dividend .

one technical point relating to the dividend relief proposal is that the legislation did not change the rules treating as a deemed distribution when cfc stock is pledged as security on a loan of the u.s. firm , or when the cfc directly guarantees the loan .

in that case , such income would be subject to tax , although an actual dividend would be deductible .

this provision was included in the house and senate bill but not in the final legislation .

gilti has been criticized by some for being too harsh and by some as not capturing enough income .

perhaps the major concern that gilti is too harsh involves the foreign tax credit .

the law retains the existing rules for the allocation of deductions for purposes of the foreign tax credit limit .

these rules allocate interest , r&d spending , and overhead to a narrowed gilti foreign tax credit basket ( which excludes a variety of foreign - source income , including royalties that may be associated with domestic research and development ) .

allocating too many deductions to foreign - source income can cause gilti to apply at a higher rate than 13.125% .

in addition , there is no foreign tax credit carryback or carryforward , so that unused foreign tax credits are lost , and no credits are allowed for loss cfcs .

cfcs with losses also lose the tangible asset return exclusion , as well as foreign tax credits , and foreign tax credits of other cfcs are reduced to the extent that the loss offsets another cfc's income .

another criticism is that interest is offset first against deemed tangible income , so if a firm borrows to buy an intangible asset and has some net tangible income , the expense reduces the exemption and is , in effect , not deductible .

an alternative would be to allocate interest in proportion to the shares of tangible deemed income and overall income before interest deductions .

many critics note that gilti income is not focused on intangible income but on any residual income not associated with tangible property , and thus captures excess profits , along with income from finance or insurance .

another issue is the basing of tangible property on cost less depreciation rather than fair market value .

the depreciation rules in that case provide for slower recovery than those used for domestic equipment ( although they are similar for structures ) , but basis is not adjusted for inflation , so it seems more likely that tangible property will be undervalued , making the tangible exemption too small .

using cost minus depreciation does , however , avoid disputes over fair market value .

others argue that gilti could be made stronger .

unlike some earlier proposals for a minimum tax to limit profit shifting under a territorial tax , which were to be imposed on a per country basis , gilti allows cross - crediting over all countries , which can help shield income from the u.s. tax .

cross - crediting creates incentives to blend operations in high - tax and low - tax countries .

under cross - crediting , if a firm is paying tax , there is an incentive to shift operations from the united states to a country with a similar tax rate to generate foreign tax credits to shield income potentially taxable under gilti .

that is , under these circumstances , investment in intangible assets abroad is subsidized .

another criticism of gilti is that the 10.5% tax rate would still apply to operations in a zero - tax - rate country , and to match the fdii rate , the tax rate should be set at 13.125% as a method to protect the u.s. tax base .

 ( these rates apply initially , but subsequently the rate should be set at 16.406%. ) .

others have argued that the deemed return on tangible income may be too high and is fixed rather than variable .

thus , it cannot reflect inflation or variations in real interest rates .

an alternative is to set the rate at a riskless return plus a fixed risk premium .

another concern about the tangible investment exemption is that it will encourage low - margin tangible investments to move abroad to generate additional gilti deductions , which might support setting the deemed return rate lower .

finally , given the criticisms of fdii ( with respect to violating the wto ) , incentives to locate abroad could also be offset by eliminating both the gilti and fdii deduction , while allowing a 100% foreign tax credit .

or , alternatively , fdii could be eliminated , and the foreign tax credits allowed for gilti could be in proportion to the share of income taxed ( i.e. , 50% of foreign taxes allowed with a 50% deduction , and 62.5% allowed when the exclusion is 37.5% ) , so a residual tax would apply whenever the foreign tax rate was less than the u.s. corporate rate .

some other , more technical issues have also been raised about gilti .

one issue is that there is not a clear allocation method for attributing foreign taxes to gilti income .

most of the revisions that might respond to criticisms are relatively straightforward , such as allowing foreign tax credit carryforwards ( including for loss cfcs ) , allowing the same level of exemptions for gilti as for fdii , apportioning interest deductions based on the share of tangible earnings , imputing income for tangible assets with a riskless return plus a risk premium , or disallowing gilti and fdii deductions altogether or disallowing fdii and reducing foreign tax credits under gilti .

others , such as apportioning deduction allocations across the relevant foreign tax credit baskets , using a per country limit , or valuing tangible assets at market value , may represent administrative and policy challenges .

fdii has attracted considerable criticism because it appears likely to violate wto rules , to the point that some have recommended it be eliminated altogether .

as noted above , the same relative tax treatment at home and abroad can be obtained by eliminating both the gilti and fdii deductions .

commentary has pointed to mechanisms for a firm to increase the benefits of fdii , such as round tripping ( selling abroad to an independent firm and then reimporting products ) , selling unfinished goods to foreign manufacturers , or buying goods from a foreign supplier for resale abroad .

it might also be possible to sell to an unrelated foreign firm with advertising and marketing requirements and price restrictions to accomplish round tripping .

a firm could also buy from a foreign supplier for resale abroad .

fdii also encourages more high - margin tangible investment in the united states to increase the base for fdii ( just as gilti encourages low - margin manufacturing abroad ) .

at the same time , fdii would be available to firms with no manufacturing or employees in the united states .

as indicated above , one of the major concerns about fdii is that it would probably violate the wto rules against export subsidies .

fdii might also be viewed abroad as a harmful tax regime ( similar to some patent boxes ) , although it might be noted that its objective is to remove tax as a factor in locating intellectual property , as is the case of the oecd beps - compliant patent boxes .

however , fdii has a mechanical rule rather than being based on transfer pricing and no nexus requirement ( i.e. , no direct connection against the cost of developing the intangible and revenue , and thus may be noncompliant ) .

germany also has a provision for a royalty barrier that disallows a deduction for royalties paid to related firms that benefit from noncompliant patent box regimes .

loss of a deduction for royalties would more than offset the benefit of fdii in that case .

as noted under the discussion of gilti , the potential for fdii violating wto as an export subsidy had already led some observers to argue that fdii should never have been enacted .

bringing together tax rates for u.s. and foreign locations could also be reached by eliminating both the fdii and gilti deductions , as noted in the section on gilti .

if gilti were also imposed on a per - country basis , the incentive for locating intangibles abroad rather than in the united states would largely be eliminated , especially now that the united states has tax rates at or below those of most developed countries .

revenues might be used for other purposes ( for example , allowing intangibles to be brought back to the united states without paying tax , a provision originally contained in the senate version of h.r .

1 ) .

a related option would be to restrict both gilti and fdii treatment to tax havens or low - tax countries .

another option is to make fdii elective so that if u.s. firms face retaliation from countries denying royalty deductions , they could have an option to forgo the deduction ( an election that is country - by - country would provide more flexibility ) .

proposals introduced in the past to move to a territorial system would have provided reduced rates on royalties , which may or may not violate the beps agreement , but probably would not have been viewed as an export subsidy .

they were proposed for a different purpose , to provide relief from firms that had formerly shielded active royalties from the u.s. tax through excess foreign tax credits , based on the expectation that foreign tax credits would largely disappear .

since the united states retains significant taxation abroad with foreign tax credits , one option would be to add active royalties back to the foreign tax credit basket that contains gilti income .

finally , fdii relies , as does gilti and beat , on a formulaic treatment .

formulas simplify the tax law and reduce disputes with the tax authorities , but a move away from a formulaic treatment might allow fdii to be redesigned to be beps compliant by establishing nexus .

and if it were limited to royalties it might also avoid violating both beps and wto .

beat was aimed at profit shifting out of the united states via outbound payments and may be seen as particularly targeted to u.s. subsidiaries of foreign parents ( although it applies to any related firm payments ) .

for example , a u.s. subsidiary of a foreign parent might pay excessively large royalties for rights to use intangible assets as well as higher than arm's length prices for goods and services , while also having more of the debt and interest deductions , all with the objective of minimizing income subject to u.s. tax ( which was perhaps a greater issue when the united states had a 35% tax rate ) .

many comments have been made about the lack of a credit for foreign taxes under beat .

beat might therefore be triggered for companies that have a lot of foreign - source income from high tax countries along with relatively modest base erosion payments ( enough to trigger beat ) .

in that case , beat acts primarily as a tax on foreign - source income rather than achieving the objective of limiting profit shifting through outbound payments .

beat also excluded cost of goods sold from its base ( except for surrogate firms that inverted after november 9 , 2017 ) , along with the exclusion for services if valued at cost .

both treatments have led to some criticism .

by completely excluding cost of goods sold , it is possible to effectively avoid including royalties in the base by embedding them in inventory .

that is , when a u.s. firm is paying a foreign related firm from tangible property to sell and also paying a royalty for distribution rights or rights to use a logo , the royalty could be eliminated and the price of the goods increased .

thus , royalties will be taxed only if separated , or for firms that do not keep inventory .

other planning possibilities may be associated with the exclusion of costs of goods sold , including supply chain restructuring .

an issue of extensive debate is whether the cost component of services with a markup can be excluded .

the statute states that services using the service cost method with no mark - up can be excluded as a base erosion payment .

some see that and other relevant information from the legislative history as indicating that any service with a markup , whether eligible for the cost method or not , would be included in beat in its entirety .

others argue that only the markup would be included .

issues have been raised about whether individual payments will be aggregated , an issue important to financial institutions ( i.e. , whether interest payments will be assessed on a net or gross basis ) , applying to other payments as well ( for example , where a services hub pays for foreign related party services but also receives a payment for services provided to foreign related parties ) .

there are related issues about the extent to which beat applies to ordinary transactions .

some have noted that beat includes nonabusive commercial transactions such as repos ( short - term repurchase agreements for securities ) and securities lending but not derivatives .

some have expressed concerns that routine lending between groups thus may be penalized .

beat can have important effects on intragroup interest payments made by banks , securities dealers , and other regulated financial intermediaries .

firms may also try to replace intragroup debt with leases , convertible debt , or short - term debt .

there are also no look - through rules to the final suppliers .

for example , if a services payment is made to a related party that in turn subcontracts with an unrelated party for part of the services , the entire payment to the related party would be included in the base ( that is , there is no recognition that part of the services were supplied by an unrelated party ) .

lack of a look - through rule would encourage the domestic corporation to make separate contracts with the unrelated party to minimize the amount of payment included in beat .

another criticism of beat is that it has too high a threshold ( $500 million in revenue ) for applicability , an amount that is 10 times the size of the threshold for the treasury regulations aimed at earnings stripping .

a general criticism of beat is that it is not targeted to abuse but simply captures all payments of a certain type ( which may be a reason it is incompatible with international agreements ) .

moreover , because it is a minimum tax , it is most likely to apply to firms with thin margins , that is , with a lot of costs relative to profits , since a large amount of deductible base erosion payments compared to taxable income leads to effects of beat .

there are a number of revisions to beat that might be considered , some that lose revenue and some that raise revenue .

most follow from the various issues that have been raised .

these might include allowing a foreign tax credit , and including payments for goods but allowing a deduction for the cost component ( which would address the embedding of royalties ) .

a parallel treatment for services could be adopted ( in any case , the treatment of services with a mark - up could be clarified ) .

interest payments might be removed from the beat coverage , substituting a worldwide allocation of interest ( that is , allowing a u.s. firm to deduct only the share of interest in the united states consistent with its share of worldwide income or assets ) .

such a provision was originally in both the house and senate versions of h.r .

1 and was dropped in conference .

a more general proposal for beat is to restrict the tax to payments to tax havens or low - tax countries .

another approach is to substitute stricter transfer pricing rules for beat .

a number of comments have been made about ways to avoid the proposed interest restrictions .

one possibility is that financial institutions that tend to have positive net interest can lease assets , and the rental payments on those leases would be deductible .

other possibilities are to substitute floating - rate debt that has lower interest rates for fixed - rate debt along with a hedge .

firms affected can also make the choice to borrow outside of the united states or to issue preferred equity .

although thin capitalization rules are applied generally , an important target is multinational firms where the incentive to locate interest deductions in higher - tax countries has been an issue .

a provision more specifically targeted to international profit shifting that was in addition to the general thin capitalization rules , providing a restriction on the u.s. firm's share of debt ( based on either a measure of income or assets ) , was contained in both the house and senate bills but not included in the final version .

as noted earlier , the thin capitalization rules are coordinated with beat by treating disallowed interest as associated first with unrelated party and net operating losses ( nols ) , a provision that strengthens the effect of beat .

one uncertainty is whether gilti will be included in the earnings base , which includes items attributable to the taxpayer's business , since gilti is not associated with the domestic business .

a major option that may be considered is to restore the worldwide interest allocation measure , probably in the form of a allocation based on income .

a number of comments have been made concerning the deemed repatriation , which imposes a tax of 15.5% on cash equivalents held abroad and 8% on other unrepatriated earnings .

one concern is that the proposed definition of cash equivalent is overly broad .

under treasury notice 2018-07 , the irs stated that it intends to treat as cash a number of financial instruments — such as options contracts , futures contracts , and non - bona fide hedging transactions — held overseas and tax them at 15.5% .

commentators have questioned whether this treatment is overly harsh , as some of these financial instruments may not be liquid or may serve a nonspeculative business purpose .

a second concern is that the downward attribution rules may unintentionally result in the inclusion of income in the deemed repatriation tax .

a reading of the 2017 tax revision legislative language along with the changes in the downward attribution could increase the number of taxpayers being defined as a u.s. shareholder of a cfc ( and subject to the deemed repatriation tax ) above the level intended by congress , according to the american institute of certified public accountants ( aicpa ) .

another concern that has been raised is the dates used to calculate the base for the deemed repatriation tax .

specifically , setting the base as the higher measured base on two testing dates , ( november 2 , 2017 , and december 31 , 2017 ) could result in an overstatement of cash positions ( subject to the higher 15.5% tax rate ) if tax expenses incurred during the year were not booked prior to the earlier testing date or if cash was transferred abroad ( via a loan from a u.s. parent ) for a pending acquisition .

this issue , however , was recently addressed in irs guidance providing that foreign taxes would be allocated between the two portions of the tax year ( through november 2 , 2017 , and to the period following ending on december 31 , 2017 ) .

another issue related to the testing dates is the effect on taxpayers that use a different tax year than the calendar year ( such as microsoft , with a year ending on june 30 , or apple , with a year ending on september 30 ) .

the measuring point for determining the aggregate cash position is greater than the average of the end of the two taxable years ending before november 2 , 2017 , or the end of the last tax year beginning before january 1 .

since the dividend exclusion takes effect on january 1 , 2018 , these firms can avoid additional cash accumulations by paying out any increase as dividends .

some individuals will likely be subject to the deemed repatriation tax , as a result of owning 10% or more of a foreign corporation , though they do not appear eligible to claim foreign tax credits .

finally , the constitutionality of the deemed repatriation has been questioned by a set of researchers .

the legislation provides the secretary with the authority to define cash equivalents .

the basic idea was to distinguish liquid ( cash and its equivalents ) and illiquid ( eg , plant and equipment ) assets .

drawing the line with respect to financial assets is complex .

for example , the treasury guidance excluded bona fide hedging transactions ( which have the purpose of reducing risk ) .

the regulatory process is ongoing , and although congress could define specific assets by legislation , a regulatory approach is more flexible .

limiting the downward attribution rules to only corporations may be an appropriate way to address the scope of the rules if they were primarily introduced to limit corporate inversions .

another option is to generally revisit the treatment of individual shareholders under the deemed repatriation tax as well as under other rules ( such as gilti ) , especially when foreign tax credits are not allowed .

the issue of two testing dates might be addressed with a facts and circumstances consideration of any cash movements and investments ( in assets or acquisitions ) .

the 2017 tax revision changes in attribution rules are likely to result in more cfcs than under prior law .

specifically , with downward attribution of the shares of the foreign subsidiary to the u.s. subsidiary , the foreign subsidiary becomes a cfc , and the u.s. shareholder could be subject to the deemed repatriation tax .

although it is thought that the change in the attribution rules was intended to block decontrolling transactions made after an inversion , commentators expect a broader reach to other corporate structures unrelated to inversion transactions .

in addition , certain cfc income will also likely be included as income for the deemed repatriation tax due to the downward attribution rule .

although the new law included some anti - inversion measures proposed in the past ( such as the thin capitalization rules ) as well as other measures to restrict inversions , the new law did not include other measures proposed in the past ( and currently in h.r .

5108 and s. 2459 ) , such as treating firms that merge with 50% ownership and / or firms with 25% of business income in the united states , or firms managed and controlled in the united states as u.s. firms .

as noted above , congress might consider whether to revisit the scope of the downward attribution rules .

additional measures to discourage inversions might be considered , including proposals described above and codifying the regulations treating certain related party interest as equity .

