congress plays a central role in the negotiation , approval and implementation of u.s. trade agreements , reflecting its constitutional authority over foreign commerce .

congress shapes the administration's trade agreement negotiations through enacting statutory u.s. trade negotiating objectives , ongoing consultations and oversight , and ratification of concluded agreements through implementing legislation .

it also oversees trade agreement implementation and the enforcement of commitments .

u.s. trade agreements can affect many facets of u.s. economic activity , including the cost and availability of goods and services in the united states , the competitiveness of u.s. firms both domestically and abroad , employment opportunities for u.s. workers , as well as broader u.s. strategic interests .

the trump administration has altered u.s. trade agreement policy by withdrawing from the then - pending trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) , starting renegotiations or modification of two existing free trade agreements ( ftas ) , and stating a preference for bilateral ftas .

it also has put forth a more skeptical approach toward multilateral trade agreements under the world trade organization ( wto ) , and has viewed bilateral trade imbalances as a measure of trade agreement success or failure .

as congress works with the trump administration in establishing and implementing u.s. trade policy , it may have interest in more closely examining the implications of the type and content of u.s. trade agreements and those pursued by major u.s. trading partners that exclude the united states .

key questions to consider may include how other countries' trade agreements may affect u.s. economic and strategic interests and negotiating priorities ; the influence of bilateral and regional agreements on broader international commercial norms and their impact on the multilateral trading system ; the role of the united states in international trade agreement negotiations ; whether the united states should pursue new trade agreement negotiations and if so how to prioritize potential partners ; and the costs and benefits of bilateral versus multi - party or regional negotiating approaches .

to help inform this debate , this report analyzes bilateral and regional trade agreements , including a discussion of the relation between these types of agreements and broader multilateral negotiations .

it also provides information on existing u.s. ftas and their evolution over time .

as other countries' trade agreement policies and negotiations may affect the costs and benefits of various u.s. approaches , it also looks at non - u.s. regional trade agreements ( rtas ) , and the specific rta regimes of the top six u.s. trading partners: the european union , china , canada , mexico , japan , and south korea .

the report concludes with a discussion of potential issues for congress by addressing key policy questions .

in the united states and internationally , trade agreements have changed considerably over the past 70 years , both in the types of agreements negotiated and their content .

those decades saw the creation , prevalence , and then relative stagnation of the multilateral trading system as the primary venue for the negotiated removal of barriers to international trade .

bilateral and now large regional ( so - called mega - regional ) trade liberalization agreements have become increasingly prominent , especially in the last two decades .

meanwhile , tariff barriers have fallen considerably in the united states and globally as a result of multilateral , bilateral / regional , and unilateral liberalization ( figure 1 ) .

as tariffs have become less economically significant , trade agreements have increasingly expanded their content coverage , with more recent agreements including provisions on issues such as worker rights and environmental protections , investment commitments , and enhanced standards for intellectual property rights .

against this backdrop of evolving and increasingly complex trade agreement negotiations and a growing number of rtas worldwide , the trump administration has raised doubts about the economic benefits of recent u.s. ftas and has taken steps to alter the current and future u.s. fta landscape .

this includes the u.s. withdrawal from the signed but not ratified 12-party trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) , renegotiation of existing ftas , including with a stated intent to place a major focus on trade imbalances , and a stated preference to negotiate future agreements bilaterally , rather than on a multi - party or regional basis .

congress will likely play a critical role in shaping future u.s. trade agreements since it must pass implementing legislation to bring ftas into force .

in order to receive expedited legislative consideration , such trade agreements must advance the u.s. trade negotiating objectives congress established in its 2015 grant of trade promotion authority ( tpa ) , which is scheduled to remain in effect until july 1 , 2021 unless congress enacts , by july 1 , 2018 , an extension disapproval resolution regarding the administration's recently submitted extension request .

since the passage of the 1934 reciprocal trade agreements act , u.s. trade policy , and particularly trade agreement negotiations , have focused largely on reducing international barriers to trade on a reciprocal basis .

in the immediate aftermath of world war ii ( wwii ) , policymakers in the united states and europe , in particular , aimed to reverse past policies of the late 1920s and 1930s , when countries raised tariffs against one another , thereby exacerbating and prolonging the great depression and contributing to the economic and financial dislocation that many believe led to the outbreak of the war .

these countries , motivated by a desire to prevent a future escalation in tariff barriers and to use trade liberalization to promote economic growth , peace and stability , created the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) in 1947 , establishing the foundation of the modern multilateral trading system .

in 1995 , as part of the uruguay round negotiations , the gatt became part of the world trade organization ( wto ) , alongside major agreements covering services , intellectual property rights , agriculture and binding dispute settlement for the first time .

since the creation of the gatt , the united states , as the world's largest economy , has been a key driver of multilateral trade agreement negotiations , including in expanding the depth and scope of commitments .

for many reasons , since the conclusion of the uruguay round , it has been increasingly difficult to conclude another major round of multilateral trade liberalization negotiations , such that since that time new trade rules have been established largely in rtas .

in the 1980s , the united states began negotiating ftas , the first of which entered into force with israel in 1985 .

bilateral negotiations on tariffs were part of u.s. trade policy long before the advent of the multilateral system , but u.s. ftas are more extensive than earlier bilateral agreements , including the near complete elimination of tariffs among the parties , and a broad range of commitments beyond tariffs .

while new provisions have been added over time , the general outlines of a u.s. fta have remained largely consistent since the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) entered into force in 1994 .

non - u.s. rtas vary considerably in terms of the scope and depth of commitments .

there is extensive debate over the effect of these agreements on trade negotiations at the broader multilateral level , with some evidence that they have both spurred and impeded multilateral efforts toward liberalization .

the number of bilateral and regional agreements , including u.s. ftas , has grown significantly in number since the conclusion of the uruguay round , the last major multilateral agreement , in 1994 .

while the overarching goal of u.s. trade negotiations in the postwar period has focused on trade liberalization and its broad economic welfare gains , concerns over the effects of import competition on certain domestic u.s. industries and workers have always been present to varying degrees and have influenced policy decisions .

in addition to transition periods for removing certain barriers in specific trade agreements , the united states and other countries have special safeguard mechanisms to address harmful import surges and enable adjustment to trade competition .

other trade policy tools are also in place to provide remedies from injury resulting from unfair trade practices such as dumping and subsidies .

in several instances , action on trade agreement implementation has been accompanied by new or enhanced trade adjustment programs to help workers and firms adversely affected by more open markets adjust to greater trade competition through training and income support .

for example , the trade expansion act of 1962 , which authorized tariff reductions of up to 50% , also created the first iteration of the trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) program that provides compensation and assistance to workers and firms negatively affected by trade .

the trade act of 1974 , which authorized the administration to negotiate reductions in both tariff and nontariff barriers and created the modern tpa , also expanded taa and provided new authorities under section 301 allowing the president to take action to address foreign trade barriers .

the evolution of u.s. trade agreements has been informed by ongoing debate among some members of congress and affected stakeholders , whose varied interests include market access abroad , domestic import competition , and access to lower - cost and a greater variety of goods , services , and agriculture .

the 115 th congress will likely continue to debate many aspects of u.s. trade agreement policy as it engages with the trump administration regarding possible modifications to existing u.s. ftas , including nafta and the u.s. - south korea ( korus ) fta , and potential new trade negotiations .

the relationship between regional trade agreements ( rtas ) and the broader multilateral system ( i.e. , the wto ) is complex .

while permitted by wto rules , rtas are technically a violation of a fundamental principle of the wto , the most - favored nation ( mfn ) concept .

mfn requires wto adherents to treat all other members uniformly in their trade policies .

rtas , however , are explicitly discriminatory , committing participants to treat trade partners inside the agreement differently than those outside , except for certain provisions that may be applied on an mfn basis .

the wto agreements allow an exception for rtas on the theory that such agreements , subject to certain rules , may further wto goals of increasing trade and economic openness and could eventually facilitate a multilateral agreement .

there is considerable debate , however , over how these agreements affect multilateral negotiations , with some historical examples suggesting they can both incentivize as well as impede multilateral action .

in addition to affecting the pace of multilateral negotiations , rtas may also influence their outcomes , including the type and level of commitments negotiated multilaterally .

they may serve as incubators for new trade policies , or potentially create different standards that could complicate the international commercial environment .

these concerns are particularly heightened today given the proliferation of rtas and the rise of mega - regionals .

the united states has been a major advocate of trade liberalization through multilateral agreements , but since the late 1980s has simultaneously pursued ftas for numerous economic , political , and strategic reasons .

through both bilateral and multi - party negotiations the united states has negotiated , signed , and implemented 14 ftas with 20 different countries .

implementing legislation for the first u.s. fta , the agreement with israel , was signed in june 1985 , while the most recent ftas passed by congress — agreements with colombia , panama , and south korea — were signed into law in october 2011 .

during that time , u.s. ftas have evolved with certain commitments clarified and expanded , new issues added , and some commitments dropped .

these agreements have generally built upon one another , often seeking higher standards beyond wto provisions , and have a number of common elements .

this section provides a brief history of u.s. fta negotiations and discussion of trump administration fta policies to date , an examination of the typical components of u.s. ftas , and analysis of trade trends under u.s. trade agreements .

during the past two decades regional trade agreements ( rtas ) have become , arguably , the dominant force in international trade negotiations , increasing in number and expanding in scope .

since 1990 , the number of rtas in force and notified to the wto has increased seven - fold , while metrics on the average depth of provisions ( i.e. , the number of legally enforceable commitments ) have doubled over the same period .

all of the united states' major trading partners participate in multiple rtas .

as of may 2018 , there were 287 such agreements in force and notified to the wto of which the united states is party to 14 ( involving 20 countries ) .

agreements that do not involve the united states have the potential to affect u.s. stakeholders and broader u.s. trade policy goals through a number of channels .

for example , lower tariffs among rta partners can place u.s. exporters at a competitive disadvantage in accessing foreign markets relative to members of the rta .

other countries' participation in rtas could also enhance their ability to attract investment relative to the united states , as potential investors benefit from both the preferential access to foreign markets , as well as the ability to potentially source imports at lower cost from other rta partners .

in addition to these direct economic effects , rtas not involving the united states , may affect u.s. leadership and influence in setting global trading rules , depending on the degree to which such agreements differ from u.s. ftas and the extent to which they establish precedents for future trade agreements .

both domestically and internationally , shifts are underway in trade agreement policies that congress may consider whether to address .

in the united states , the trump administration has withdrawn from the proposed tpp and initiated a renegotiation of the two largest existing u.s. ftas , nafta and korus .

globally , major u.s. trade partners , including china , japan , and the eu are pushing forward with regional trade agreements that do not include the united states .

as congress works with the trump administration to guide future u.s. trade and trade agreement policy , it may wish to consider , among other issues , the following: structure of u.s. fta negotiations .

through legislation , congress has implemented 14 u.s. ftas with 20 different countries ( 15 including the u.s. - canada fta currently subsumed by nafta ) .

twelve of these agreements are bilateral and two ( nafta and cafta - dr ) are multi - party agreements .

in its 2015 grant of tpa , congress also supported the continued u.s. participation in the 12-party tpp negotiations and the t - tip negotiations with the 28-member european union .

since taking office , the trump administration has declared its intent to focus on bilateral negotiations for future ftas , through which it argues the united states can take full advantage of its economic heft to secure the most advantageous terms .

some trade policy experts argue , conversely , that multi - party agreements may better serve u.s. interests given a broader range of potential trade - offs among the parties , the possibility of harmonizing rules across multiple existing ftas under one larger framework , and potential legislative efficiencies in considering one single implementing bill for multiple trade agreement partners .

potential questions for congress include what evidence is there that bilateral fta negotiations result in better outcomes for the united states ? .

should multi - party negotiations , like the tpp , remain part of the u.s. fta negotiating toolkit ? .

content of u.s. fta negotiations .

under the direction of congress , including through new grants of tpa , u.s. trade agreements have evolved in their scope and enforceability since the first fta with israel was passed by congress in 1985 .

certain elements , such as comprehensive tariff coverage , and inclusion of commitments on services trade , intellectual property rights , and labor and environmental protections are present in all but one or two existing u.s. ftas .

the trump administration has argued repeatedly that many existing u.s. ftas are "bad deals" in need of changes .

in its renegotiation of nafta , many trump administration proposals closely align with previous u.s. fta negotiating positions , while others , such as a potential sunset provision that would require the nafta parties to reauthorize the pact at set intervals , represent a significant departure from previous u.s. fta policy .

potential questions for congress include do principal u.s. trade negotiating objectives on the content of prospective u.s. ftas as passed by congress in the 2015 tpa law still reflect the best interests of the united states , or do they require changes ? .

do the trump administration's objectives for the nafta renegotiation align with congressional fta negotiating objectives , as outlined in the 2015 tpa law ? .

u.s. fta negotiating procedure s .

congress and the executive branch have complementary roles in negotiating and implementing u.s. ftas given separate but related constitutional authorities over foreign commerce and international negotiations .

to facilitate this collaboration , congress periodically grants the president trade promotion authority , affording implementing legislation for trade agreements expedited consideration so long as the executive branch adheres to certain requirements .

the trump administration so far has adhered to tpa notification requirements with respect to the nafta renegotiations , but not with respect to the korus modification talks .

according to the administration , the negotiated changes to korus will be limited primarily to tariff modifications and south korean regulatory changes and therefore will not require implementing legislation by congress .

during the renegotiation process , the president has stated a willingness to withdraw from both agreements .

potential questions for congress include aside from changes to u.s. law , what modifications to u.s. ftas require formal congressional consent ? .

is additional clarity regarding the congressional role in fta modifications , amendments , or withdrawal needed in future u.s. ftas or fta implementing legislation ? .

u.s .

leadership in establishing international trade rules .

the united states has been instrumental in the creation of the current international trading system , establishing new global trade rules through negotiations at the multilateral level and in its pioneering bilateral and regional ftas .

the commitments in nafta , for example , influenced later multilateral provisions and an entire generation of third country rtas .

in more recent negotiations , such as the tpp , the united states led in the creation of commitments on state - owned enterprises and digital trade , which have yet to be addressed comprehensively in the global trading system .

through its unique leadership position , the united states has also had the ability to shape global trade norms in ways that align with broader u.s. interests , such as the promotion of economic competition and the protection of labor and environmental standards .

as other countries , particularly economically significant powers such as the eu , china , and japan , move forward with new agreements that do not involve the united states , some trade policy experts worry that the united states may be losing an opportunity to shape future trade rules and influence other countries in adopting standards in areas such as ipr and labor .

potential questions for congress include in what ways has the united states benefitted from its global leadership in establishing the institutions and commitments that comprise the current international trading system ? .

do other countries' ongoing trade negotiations threaten u.s. trade rules - setting leadership ? .

if so , what are the long - term implications ? .

in what ways might commitments in those agreements impact u.s. stakeholders ? .

rtas and the multilateral trading system .

the proliferation of global rtas in the past several decades has fundamentally altered the nature of the global trading system .

on one hand these new agreements have afforded the united states and other countries an opportunity to move forward with new trade negotiations in the face of stalled multilateral action , reducing trade barriers among major world trading partners and establishing commitments on new nontariff issues where multilateral negotiations lag behind the current commercial environment .

on the other hand , the limited membership of rtas makes them inherently discriminatory toward those not party to the agreements , which in many cases includes the united states .

although they technically violate the wto's most - favored nation ( mfn ) principle , the wto allows exceptions for rtas , so long as they meet certain criteria , such as covering substantially all trade .

rtas , however , are seldom challenged against these criteria despite considerable variation in their structure and content .

potential questions for congress include are existing criteria on the types of rtas allowed under wto rules sufficient and are they adequately enforced ? .

in what ways could existing rules and the wto monitoring system be improved ? .

given more than 20 years since the successful conclusion of a major multilateral negotiation is the multilateral system adequately structured to address the most pressing issues in international trade ? .

if not , how much of a priority should the united states give to revitalizing multilateral frameworks ? .

effects of global rtas on u.s. economy and stakeholders .

trade agreements that do not involve the united states can make u.s. exports more costly in foreign markets relative to exports from countries that are party to the agreements and not subject to tariffs .

they may also make u.s. producers reliant on imported components less competitive than foreign producers that face lower tariff barriers on their imports .

certain u.s. industries , including agriculture , export a high share of their production and / or face relatively high tariffs in foreign markets , making them particularly sensitive to tariff changes .

these industries have raised concerns over the potential disadvantage in foreign markets due to other countries rta negotiations .

rtas among top u.s. export partners , with which the united states does not currently have ftas , have the potential for the most significant negative consequences .

given the size of the trading relationship and existing tariff levels , the eu - japan fta , for example , could have a significant effect on u.s. auto and agriculture producers , since it is to eventually eliminate a 10% eu auto tariff on imports from japan and remove or lower relatively high japanese agriculture tariffs on imports from the eu .

likewise , the recently concluded cptpp agreement would eliminate most tariffs among the 11 parties and likely lead to diminished u.s. exports to japan and other growing asian economies .

resumed u.s. engagement in the t - tip negotiations and u.s. pursuit of ftas , bilaterally or collectively , with the cptpp countries could eliminate the potential for discrimination against u.s. exports to these markets .

potential questions for congress include what industries are most likely to be negatively affected by the implementation of new rtas among top u.s. trade partners ? .

what is the best u.s. response to these potential negative consequences ( eg , pursuit of multilateral , bilateral , or regional fta negotiations ) ? .

prioritization of future fta negotiating partners .

the trump administration has stated an interest in negotiating new u.s. ftas on a bilateral basis , and has mentioned tpp partner countries , such as japan , as well as the united kingdom , as potential partners .

to date no tpp countries have formally announced interest in negotiating with the united states bilaterally .

some question whether this lack of interest in new trade negotiations stems from the contentious nature of the current u.s. talks with the nafta parties and other recent trade actions .

congress has periodically encouraged the executive branch to negotiate or explore the possibility of an fta with specific trade partners .

for example , the first iteration of trade promotion authority in the 1970s encouraged an fta negotiation with canada .

potential questions for congress include how should the united states prioritize potential fta partners ( eg , likelihood of successful conclusion , economic benefit , or geostrategic significance ) ? .

are the trump administration's america first agenda and repeated statements of a willingness to withdraw from nafta and korus affecting potential future u.s. trade negotiations with other countries ? .

u.s. ftas and the trade deficit .

the united states in recent years has run significant bilateral merchandise trade deficits with fta partner countries , including mexico and south korea .

the trump administration views these deficits as indications that the ftas are flawed and need change .

most economists , however , argue that while ftas impact bilateral trade flows , other macroeconomic factors such as aggregate savings and investment patterns , fluctuations in exchange rates , and shifts in economic growth rates are the major drivers of changing trade patterns .

potential questions for congress include do u.s. ftas materially affect bilateral trade balances ? .

is it realistic to expect modifications to an fta to significantly alter trade balances without addressing larger macroeconomic factors that also affect trade patterns ? .

what are the risks of using the trade balance as the key metric in evaluating bilateral trade relations and u.s. ftas ? .

appendix a. crs materials on existing and proposed u.s. ftas in focus products crs in focus if10047 , north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , by m. angeles villarreal .

crs in focus if10682 , nafta renegotiation: issues for u.s. agriculture , by renée johnson .

crs in focus if10733 , u.s. - south korea fta ( korus ) , coordinated by brock r. williams .

crs in focus if10000 , tpp: overview and current status , by brock r. williams and ian f. fergusson .

crs in focus if10120 , transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) , by shayerah ilias akhtar and vivian c. jones .

crs in focus if10394 , dominican republic - central america - united states free trade agreement ( cafta - dr ) , by m. angeles villarreal .

reports - nafta renegotiation and modernization crs report r42965 , the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , by m. angeles villarreal and ian f. fergusson .

crs report r44981 , nafta renegotiation and modernization , by m. angeles villarreal and ian f. fergusson .

crs report r44907 , nafta and motor vehicle trade , by bill canis , m. angeles villarreal , and vivian c. jones .

crs report r45018 , potential effects of a u.s. nafta withdrawal: agricultural markets , by renée johnson .

crs report r44630 , u.s. withdrawal from free trade agreements: frequently asked legal questions , by brandon j. murrill .

reports - other ftas crs report rl34330 , the u.s. - south korea free trade agreement ( korus fta ) : provisions and implementation , coordinated by brock r. williams .

crs report r44489 , the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) : key provisions and issues for congress , coordinated by ian f. fergusson and brock r. williams .

crs report r43387 , transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) negotiations , by shayerah ilias akhtar , vivian c. jones , and renée johnson .

crs report rl34470 , the u.s. - colombia free trade agreement: background and issues , by m. angeles villarreal .

crs report r44817 , u.s. - uk free trade agreement: prospects and issues for congress , by shayerah ilias akhtar .

appendix b. rta country groupings asean ( association of southeast asian nations ) includes: brunei , burma , cambodia , laos , indonesia , malaysia , philippines , singapore , thailand , and vietnam .

caricom ( caribbean community ) includes: antigua and barbuda , bahamas , barbados , belize , dominica , grenada , guyana , haiti , jamaica , montserrat , saint kitts and nevis , saint lucia , saint vincent and the grenadines , suriname , and trinidad and tobago .

cariforum ( caribbean forum ) rta includes: antigua and barbuda , bahamas , barbados , belize , dominica , grenada , guyana , jamaica , saint lucia , saint vincent and the grenadines , saint kitts and nevis , surinam , trinidad and tobago , and the dominican republic .

comesa ( common market for eastern and southern africa ) includes: burundi , the comoros , the democratic republic of congo , djibouti , egypt , eritrea , ethiopia , kenya , libya , madagascar , malawi , mauritius , rwanda , sudan , seychelles , swaziland , uganda , zambia , and zimbabwe .

cptpp ( comprehensive and progressive agreement for trans - pacific partnership ) includes: australia , brunei , canada , chile , japan , malaysia , mexico , new zealand , peru , singapore , and vietnam .

also referred to as tpp - 11 .

e fta ( e uropean free trade association ) includes: iceland , liechtenstein , norway , and switzerland .

european economic area includes: the eu , iceland , lichtenstein , and norway .

eu ( european union ) includes: austria , belgium , bulgaria , croatia , cyprus , the czech republic , denmark , estonia , finland , france , germany , greece , hungary , ireland , italy , latvia , lithuania , luxembourg , malta , the netherlands , poland , portugal , romania , slovakia , slovenia , spain , sweden , and the united kingdom .

eu - central america rta includes: costa rica , el salvador , guatemala , honduras , nicaragua , and panama .

eu - east african community rta includes: burundi , kenya , rwanda , tanzania , and uganda .

eu - eastern and southern africa interim rta includes: madagascar , mauritius , seychelles , and zambia .

eu - south african development community rta includes: botswana , lesotho , mozambique , namibia , south africa , and swaziland .

gulf cooperation council includes: bahrain , kuwait , oman , qatar , saudi arabia , and the united arab emirates .

mercosur includes: argentina , brazil , paraguay , uruguay , and venezuela .

venezuela's membership , however , has been suspended since 2016 .

mexico - central america rta includes: costa rica , el salvador , guatemala , honduras , and nicaragua .

nafta ( north american free trade agreement ) includes: canada , mexico , and the united states .

pacific alliance includes: chile , colombia , mexico , and peru .

rcep ( regional comprehensive economic partnership ) includes: australia , brunei , burma , cambodia , china , laos , india , indonesia , japan , malaysia , new zealand , philippines , singapore , south korea , thailand , and vietnam .

tpp ( trans - pacific partnership ) includes: australia , brunei , canada , chile , japan , malaysia , mexico , new zealand , peru , singapore , and vietnam .

the united states was a signatory to the tpp but withdrew in january 2017 .

t - tip ( transatlantic trade and investment partnership ) includes: the eu and the united states .

t - tip negotiations are currently on hold pending further action by the trump administration .

u.s. - cafta - dr ( u.s. - central america - dominican republic ) fta includes: costa rica , el salvador , guatemala , honduras , nicaragua , and the dominican republic .

