generally , the two main kinds of capital flows are foreign direct investment ( fdi ) and foreign portfolio investment ( fpi ) .

fdi involves the acquisition of real assets such as real estate , a manufacturing plant , or controlling interest in an ongoing enterprise by a person or entity from another country .

foreign portfolio investment involves the purchase of foreign equities or bonds , loans to foreign residents , or the opening of foreign bank accounts .

fdi often involves a long - term commitment and can have the advantage of stimulating direct employment for the host country .

by contrast , portfolio investments are extremely liquid and can be withdrawn often at the click of a computer mouse .

in addition , official capital flows are generated by governments for various purposes , such as humanitarian assistance and other foreign aid .

it depends .

from 1990 to 2017 , global trade in goods and services , as measured by exports , grew more than five times , from about $4 trillion a year to $23 trillion .

during the same period , gross capital flows , as measured in the balance of payments accounts ( direct , portfolio , and other official investments ) , expanded from around $1 trillion a year to about $4 trillion — but with a pre - crisis peak of more than $12 trillion in 2007 , which showed significant growth since the 1990s .

during this time period , there was also an explosion in growth in other types of capital flows , known as foreign exchange and over - the - counter derivatives markets .

these markets facilitate trade in foreign exchange and other types of assets .

while the capital flows associated with these markets do not directly relate to transactions in the balance of payments , they do affect the international exchange value of the dollar , which in turn affects prices of goods and services and the cost of securities .

the latest survey of the world's leading central banks indicated that the total daily trading of foreign currencies was more than $5.1 trillion in 2016 .

broadly , firms invest abroad to increase their profits .

however , a range of factors can influence a firm's decision to invest .

multinational corporations ( mncs ) generally invest abroad because they possess some special process or product knowledge or special managerial abilities , which give them an advantage over foreign firms .

major determinants of fdi include the presence of competitive advantages , resources such as low - cost labor in a host country , and greater commercial benefits through an intra - firm relationship as opposed to an arm's - length relationship between the investor and host country .

mncs are motivated by more than a single factor and likely invest abroad not only to gain access to low - cost resources , but to improve efficiency or market share .

fdi has supported the development of global value chains by multinational corporations ( mncs ) , which source production globally .

in addition , many firms find it advantageous to operate close to their customers in foreign countries , where tastes and preferences may differ from the home market .

foreign markets also enable mncs to access various resources , such as a well - educated work force , which might contribute to a firm's r&d activities .

last , some fdi transactions involve mergers and acquisitions , which can help make a firm become more globally competitive .

according to the united nations conference on trade and development ( unctad ) , the total stock of global outward fdi in 2017 was $31 trillion .

the united states remains the largest source of fdi worldwide , followed by hong kong , germany , the netherlands , the united kingdom , and japan , all with individual outward investment positions about one - fourth or less than that of the united states .

the united states is also the largest recipient of fdi , followed by hong kong , china , the united kingdom , and singapore .

by region , developing asia accounted for the largest share of global fdi inflows ( 33% ) , followed by europe ( 26% ) , north america ( 21% ) , latin america and the caribbean ( 11% ) , and africa ( 3% ) .

the united states is the largest source and the largest recipient of fdi .

fdi to and from the united states has increased rapidly over the past few decades .

from 1985 to 2017 , the stock of u.s. fdi abroad rose from $238 billion to $6.0 trillion , while the stock of fdi in the united states increased from $184 billion to $4.0 trillion ( see figure 16 ) .

the largest destinations for cumulative ( or the stock of ) u.s. fdi outflows through 2017 included the netherlands , united kingdom , luxembourg , ireland , canada , singapore , australia , germany , and japan .

the largest sources of cumulative fdi inflows included the united kingdom , japan , canada , luxembourg , the netherlands , germany , switzerland , and france and ireland .

nearly 60% of u.s. direct investment abroad is in europe , while 68% of fdi in the united states comes from europe .

by sector , u.s. outward fdi is primarily concentrated in high - technology , finance , and services .

the largest share of u.s. inward fdi is in manufacturing sector , primarily chemicals and transport industries .

generally , economists argue for unimpeded international flows of capital , such as fdi , because such flows complement domestic economic activity and positively affect both the domestic ( home ) and foreign ( host ) economies .

for the home country , direct investment benefits the firms that invest abroad , because they are better able to exploit their competitive advantages and acquire additional skills and other advantages in foreign markets .

direct investment is also associated with a strengthened competitive position , a higher level of skills of the employees , and higher incomes of firms that invest abroad .

host countries benefit from inward fdi because the investment adds permanently to the capital stock and often to the skill set of the economy .

direct investment also brings technological advances , since firms that invest abroad generally possess advanced technology and production processes , boosts capital formation and contributes to a more competitive business environment and productivity growth .

more broadly , fdi contributes to international trade and global economic integration , since most firms investing abroad are established mncs that operate within global value chains .

both inward and outward fdi play a role in u.s. trade , jobs , and production .

in 2016 , the affiliates of foreign firms in the united states employed 7.1 million workers , exported $369.8 billion in goods , and imported $649.9 billion in goods .

foreign firm affiliates contributed $894.0 billion value - added to u.s. gdp , with larger annual growth in value - added on average compared to other private u.s. firms .

some stakeholders raise concerns that u.s. firms invest abroad to send manufacturing and jobs overseas and that u.s. fdi in operations and production facilities abroad supplants u.s. production and exports , thereby reducing employment and wages in the united states .

there have been examples of u.s. firms closing a domestic plant and opening another plant abroad , but no official sources track such activities .

as a result , most data on the activity of u.s. firms shifting plants or jobs abroad remain anecdotal .

more broadly , most u.s. outward fdi is concentrated in high - income developed countries , where markets and consumer tastes are broadly similar to those in the united states , and most of this production is consumed abroad .

most economists argue there is no conclusive evidence that u.s. direct investment abroad leads to fewer jobs or lower incomes overall for americans .

instead , they generally argue that the loss of u.s. manufacturing jobs in recent decades reflects a broad restructuring of the sector , responding primarily to improvements in productivity and other domestic economic forces .

that said , jobs in particular companies and sectors can be adversely affected when a company makes decisions to produce similar products abroad .

international investment agreements ( iias ) establish binding rules on investment protections .

while world trade organization ( wto ) agreements address some investment issues to a limited extent , there are no comprehensive multilateral rules on investment .

iias have thus become the primary vehicle for promoting investment rules: there are over 2,600 iias in force globally .

iias generally aim to reduce fdi restrictions and ensure nondiscriminatory treatment of investors and investments .

the agreements also include provisions to safeguard a government's right to regulate in the public interest and generally provide for national security and prudential exceptions .

u.s. iias entail reciprocal commitments ; in exchange for specific protections offered to foreign investors in the united states , u.s. investors investing in partner countries expect to receive the same protections .

the primary forms of u.s. iias are bilateral investment treaties ( bits ) , which must be ratified by the senate with two - thirds approval , and investment chapters in free trade agreements ( ftas ) .

ustr and the state department negotiate u.s. iias .

the united states has bilateral investment treaties ( bits ) in force with 40 countries , most of which are with developing countries ( see figure 17 ) .

the latest bit ratified by the u.s. senate , with rwanda , entered into force in 2012 .

the united states had been pursuing bit negotiations with china and india , but both talks have stalled .

the united states also has 14 ftas in force covering 20 countries , most of which include chapters on investment .

investor - state dispute settlement ( isds ) enables private investors to bring claims against host country governments for alleged violations of investment agreements before an international arbitration panel .

isds provisions are intended to establish a binding and impartial procedure for settling disputes , with proceedings conducted under the auspices of the world bank - affiliated international centre for settlement for investment disputes ( icsid ) or comparable rules .

while a successful claim by an investor can result in monetary penalties , a country cannot be compelled to change its laws over a decision .

the number of isds cases has expanded significantly with the growth of global fdi in recent decades ( see figure 18 ) .

u.s. investors account for about one - fifth of investment claims worldwide .

of 16 cases brought by foreign investors against the united states , the u.s. government has yet to lose a case .

isds provisions are included in the majority of u.s .

bits and ftas ; nearly all isds cases brought against the united states were under the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) .

the use of isds , however , has become a subject of debate within recent u.s. trade negotiations .

at the center of the debate is ensuring robust investor protections , while protecting the government's right to regulate in the public interest .

the trump administration departed from past practice with major changes to isds under the nafta renegotiation .

the proposed u.s. - mexico - canada agreement ( usmca ) , signed in november 2018 and pending ratification by each country , would eliminate isds between the united states and canada and places specific limits with respect to mexico .

isds was also a major point of contention in the transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) talks during the obama administration .

the eu has been pushing to include an investment court system in place of isds in its recent trade agreements and negotiations .

foreign investment , particularly by firms owned or controlled by a foreign government , can raise concerns about national security .

cfius is an interagency committee that assists the president in overseeing foreign investment transactions that could affect u.s. national security .

the committee is composed of nine cabinet members , two ex officio members , and other members as appointed .

cfius was originally established by an executive order in 1975 with broad responsibilities and few powers .

the authority to review foreign investments , known as the exon - florio provision , was formally established in 1988 with the passage of p.l .

100-418 .

in 2007 , the foreign investment and national security act ( p.l .

110-49 ) established cfius in statute and expanded the committee's role in reviewing fdi transactions that could affect "homeland security" and "critical industries. .

the secretary of the treasury serves as chairman of cfius , and a designated lead agency conducts a "risk - based analysis" of the threat posed by mergers , acquisitions , or takeovers of a u.s. firm by a foreign investor .

the president has the authority to block proposed or pending transactions ; this authority has been invoked five times since 1988 .

in some cases , issues and concerns raised by cfius have led foreign investors to cancel a planned purchase or to divest if the deal had already been completed .

most recently , president trump blocked the acquisition of lattice semiconductor corp. by a chinese investment firm in 2017 , and the acquisition of qualcomm by singapore - based broadcom in 2018 .

the foreign investment risk review modernization act of 2018  ( firrma , p.l .

115-232 , title xvii ) , signed into law on august 13 , 2018 , amends the current process for investment reviews under cfius and expands the scope of transactions subject to review , including any non - controlling investment in u.s. businesses involved in critical technology or critical infrastructure .

some have objected to an expanded role of cfius as being counter to the long - standing u.s. position of an open investment climate .

the united states promotes both inward and outward fdi .

the overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) , which operates under the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as amended , provides political risk insurance , financing , and other services to help facilitate u.s. private investments abroad in developing countries and emerging markets .

the better utilization of investments leading to development act of 2018 ( build act ) , enacted on october 5 , 2018 ( p.l .

115-254 , division f ) establishes a new u.s. international development finance corporation ( dfc ) as a successor to opic by both expanding and consolidating the development finance functions of opic and usaid .

selectusa , a department of commerce program established in 2011 via executive order , coordinates federal efforts to attract fdi in the united states .

primary functions of selectusa include providing information and data on investments to businesses and economic development organizations ( edos ) , helping to resolve issues involving federal programs , and advocating at the national level for making investments in the united states over a foreign location .

