the development of oil and natural gas resources in the national wildlife refuge system ( nwrs ) has been the subject of administrative rulemaking and the focus of debate in congress .

the nwrs is a network of lan ds and waters administered by the u.s .

fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , an agency within the department of the interior ( doi ) .

the nwrs contains 566 national wildlife refuges , 36 wetland management districts composed of waterfowl production areas ( wpas ) , and 3 wpas that lay outside of wetland management districts .

issues pertaining to oil and gas wells in the nwrs include private property rights , economic and energy security benefits of oil and gas development , and the potential for adverse effects of oil and gas development on nwrs lands and wildlife .

some see these activities as contrary to the mission of the nwrs as stated in the national wildlife refuge system administration act , as amended ( nwrsaa ; 16 u.s.c .

§668dd ) , whereas others think that oil and gas activities can be managed so as to avoid undue harm to wildlife or that u.s. energy needs outweigh conservation concerns .

both the executive branch and congress have addressed oil and gas activity in the nwrs through debating the compatibility of oil and gas activities with the purposes of the nwrs ; examining the potential economic and energy security benefits of developing oil and gas resources in the nwrs , predominantly in alaska ; and promulgating regulations for oil and gas activities in the nwrs to ensure access to nonfederal mineral rights while attempting to minimize impacts on natural resources , including lands , waters , and wildlife .

fws states that it aims to balance the rights of mineral resource owners and lessees in the nwrs with the system's conservation mission .

in 2016 , fws promulgated a final rule , titled "management of non - federal oil and gas rights," to update regulations for nonfederal oil and gas activities on nwrs land .

the 115 th congress also has considered the regulation of nonfederal oil and gas activities in the nwrs and has enacted legislation to establish a federal oil and gas program in the arctic national wildlife refuge ( anwr ) in alaska .

wells associated with oil and gas activities are present in about 18% of nwrs units .

most oil and gas operations on refuge lands involve nonfederal resources .

these activities most often occur when rights to the surface and subsurface estates have been severed and fws has acquired only the surface rights for addition to the nwrs , but valid existing rights to the mineral estate remain in nonfederal ownership .

fws regulation of these nonfederal activities is based on statutory authorities reflected in a 2016 agency final rule and in sections of the fws service manual .

leasing and development of federally owned resources within the nwrs typically is prohibited .

however , in certain cases , such as where the federal leases predate the establishment or expansion of the refuge , there may be federal leases and development on refuge lands .

the administration of federal oil and gas resources in the nwrs is delegated to the bureau of land management ( blm ) , in the doi , under the mineral leasing act of 1920 ( 30 u.s.c .

§§181 et seq. ) .

blm administers federal oil and gas leasing under regulations at title 43 , part 3100 , of the code of federal regulations .

the regulations require blm to obtain fws concurrence as to the time , place , and nature of oil and gas operations , "in order to give complete protection to wildlife populations and wildlife habitat on the areas leased. .

oil and gas activities in alaskan nwrs units , like those in other states , are administered by fws for nonfederal operations and by blm for federal operations .

however , alaskan activities are managed pursuant to alaska - specific law as well as the general statutory and regulatory framework described above .

relevant alaska laws include the alaska national interest lands conservation act ( anilca ; p.l .

96-487 ) and the alaska native claims settlement act ( ancsa ; 43 u.s.c .

§§1601 et seq .

 ) , among others .

this report contains sections on recent developments related to oil and gas wells in the nwrs , nonfederal wells in nwrs units outside of alaska , federal wells in nwrs units outside of alaska , nonfederal and federal wells in alaskan nwrs units , and issues for congress in considering oil and gas activities in the nwrs .

in the sections on federal and nonfederal wells , the report presents information on the number and location of oil and gas wells ; compatibility of oil and gas activities with nwrs purposes ; and regulatory mechanisms for the administration of oil and gas activities .

the fws "management of non - federal oil and gas rights" rule revised requirements applicable to nonfederal oil and gas activities that occur in the nwrs outside of alaska .

this rule replaced prior regulations governing these activities , which , according to fws , had "remained unchanged for more than 50 years and provide[d] only vague guidance to staff and operators. .

fws said the 2016 final rule aimed to update the agency's management practices and improve the compatibility of nonfederal oil and gas activities with the mission of the nwrs .

the rule provides an explicit process for refuge staff to follow to minimize the impact of oil and gas activities on refuge resources to the extent practicable .

the process includes permitting requirements , operating standards , requirements for financial bonding , and penalty provisions .

the rule also requires operators to meet performance - based standards , including standards for surface use and site management , specific resource protections , spill prevention and response , waste management , and reclamation .

fws claims that the performance - based standards , rather than prescriptive regulations , are intended to provide operators with flexibility in meeting the requirements of the permit while ensuring that nwrs resources are protected .

these standards also address resource protection needs in different environments by allowing resource managers and operators to identify the most appropriate management practices for a given situation .

fws also outlines its minerals management policy in the fws service manual .

specifically , section 1.7 ( b ) of the manual states that owners of nonfederal mineral rights within nwrs units outside of alaska can transfer or develop these rights but must do so using the "technologically feasible , least damaging methods. .

under the mineral leasing act of 1920 , blm manages oil and gas leasing on federal lands , including in the nwrs .

blm regulations provide that any drilling in national wildlife refuges may take place only "with the consent and approval of the secretary [of the interior] with the concurrence of the fish and wildlife service as to the time , place and nature of such operations in order to give complete protection to wildlife populations and wildlife habitat on the areas leased. .

fws policy concerning federal oil and gas leasing within the nwrs is summarized in the agency's mineral p olicy service manual .

the manual states that , with limited exceptions , extracting or developing leasable federal minerals is not allowed on nwrs lands .

the exception to this prohibition is for limited circumstances where oil and gas development adjacent to an nwrs unit results in the drainage of federal oil and gas resources .

in cases where the federal leases predate the establishment or expansion of the refuge , valid existing leases and wells may continue to operate .

national wildlife refuges in alaska are governed by the provisions of anilca and other alaska - specific laws , as well as by general authorities for the nwrs .

anilca provides fws with statutory authority to ensure that operators accessing nonfederal mineral rights within nwrs in alaska work with fws to help avoid operational impacts and ensure reclamation standards .

as noted , the regulations promulgated in the fws nonfederal oil and gas rule of november 2016 do not apply to refuges in alaska .

although alaska is exempted from regulations within the rule , the rule states operations on refuges in alaska are exempt from these regulations .

however , the performance - based standards of this rule may be used , as appropriate , as guidance in determining how an operator would meet the various requirements of anilca and ancsa [alaska native claims settlement act , 43 u.s.c .

§§1601 et seq. .

to protect refuge resources and uses .

the 115 th congress has considered several issues relating to oil and gas activities in the nwrs .

issues of interest have included the general compatibility of oil and gas activity with nwrs purposes and oil and gas development in anwr specifically .

 ( see " recent developments " section for more information. ) .

h.j.res .

45 was introduced , under the authorities provided by the congressional review act ( cra ) , to disapprove the 2016 final rule pertaining to nonfederal oil and gas activities within the nwrs outside of alaska .

although the window for considering h.j.res .

45 under the expedited procedures associated with the cra has elapsed , congress may consider the issues raised in this legislation .

for example , congress may be interested in issues pertaining to permitting fees , the role of state regulators , and how to balance or prioritize facilitation of activities with concerns about wildlife and resource protection .

separately in the 115 th congress , p.l .

115-97 addressed the long - standing issue of energy development in anwr by establishing an oil and gas program for the coastal plain within the refuge .

h.r .

49 and s. 49 , introduced prior to the passage of p.l .

115-97 , proposed oil and gas leasing programs for the coastal plain that contained similar but not identical provisions to the enacted law .

also introduced in the 115 th congress , h.r .

1889 and s. 820 would designate the coastal plain as wilderness under the wilderness act , which generally would prohibit commercial activities , including energy development .

congress may remain interested in key aspects of the anwr debate that have been raised in p.l .

115-97 and previously .

these could include issues related to limits on the footprint of development , other environmental protections , compliance with nepa , fws and blm management roles , judicial review of legal challenges , and treatment of special areas within the coastal plain , among other matters .

for more information on these issues , see crs report rl33872 , arctic national wildlife refuge ( anwr ) : an overview .

p.l .

115-97 addressed some of these issues and not others , possibly owing in part to limitations imposed by the budget reconciliation process on the matters that can be considered germane .

congress could choose to address these issues through future oversight or legislation .

appendix a. nonfederal oil and gas activities within the national wildlife refuge system appendix b .

federal oil and gas wells within the national wildlife refuge syste .

