congress has been active in establishing federal policy for the agricultural sector on an ongoing basis since the 1930s .

over the years , as economic conditions and technology have evolved , congress has regularly revisited agricultural policy through periodic farm legislation .

over these decades , the breadth of policy areas addressed through such farm bills has expanded beyond providing support for a limited number of agricultural commodities to include establishing programs and policies that address a spectrum of related areas , such as agricultural conservation , credit , rural development , domestic nutrition assistance , trade and international food aid , organic agriculture , and support for beginning and veteran farmers and ranchers , among others .

on june 21 , 2018 , the house voted 213-211 to approve h.r .

2 , the agriculture and nutrition act of 2018 , an omnibus farm bill that would establish farm and food policy for the next five years , covering fy2019-fy2023 .

the vote to approve h.r .

2 followed a failed vote of 198-213 on the same bill on may 18 , 2018 .

the final passage vote on june 21 followed a vote of 233-191 approving a motion to reconsider , which was made after the unsuccessful vote on final passage of may 18 .

the committee on agriculture marked up and ordered reported h.r .

2 on april 18 , 2018 .

the house - passed version of h.r .

2 continues the tradition of multi - year farm bills that would establish policy for farm programs and nutrition assistance .

to this end , h.r .

2 addresses agriculture and food policy across 11 titles that cover commodity support programs , agricultural conservation , trade and international food aid , domestic nutrition assistance , credit , rural infrastructure and economic development , research and extension , forestry , horticulture , and a variety of other policies and initiatives .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) projected that spending on mandatory programs under h.r .

2 would total $867 billion over the 10-year period fy2019-fy2028 , which equals the cost of extending the current 2014 farm bill for 10 years .

h.r .

2 would supersede the current slate of farm programs and policies authorized by the 2014 farm bill , p.l .

113-79 , many of which will expire in 2018 unless congress acts to reauthorize them or to extend them .

certain programs , such as crop insurance , are permanently authorized and would continue to operate in the absence of new farm legislation or an extension of the current farm bill .

but if the current farm law were to expire , many other programs — such as commodity support programs that provide a safety net for producers of major agricultural commodities , such as corn and wheat , milk , sugar , and others — would be governed by so - called permanent laws , which do not expire and date from the late 1930s and 1940s .

these permanent laws , including the agricultural adjustment act of 1938 ( p.l .

75-430 ) and agricultural act of 1949 ( p.l .

81-439 ) , emphasize supply controls to support price support regimes that would raise prices of these basic farm commodities well above existing market levels .

a change in farm policy along these lines from the market - driven and export - oriented model that characterizes most existing commodity support programs could prove to be broadly disruptive for farmers , farm input suppliers , agricultural exporters , food manufacturers , and consumers .

many other programs , such as conservation programs and rural development programs , would cease to function .

in the past , when congress has faced the prospect of expiring farm legislation without enacting successor legislation , it has acted to extend the existing policies , as it did when the 2002 and 2008 acts expired .

this report provides a title - by - title summary of the policies and provisions in h.r .

2 and compares them with current law .

following an analysis of the budgetary implications of h.r .

2 , summaries of major changes the bill would make in each of its 11 titles are provided .

these summaries are followed by side - by - side comparison tables for each of the bill's 11 titles that briefly describe the provisions in h.r .

2 and compare them with current law .

during the floor debate on h.r .

2 , the house adopted a number of amendments to the bill , which are listed in table a - 1 .

a farm bill authorizes funding in two ways .

it authorizes and pays for mandatory outlays with multiyear budget estimates when the law is enacted .

it also sets the parameters for discretionary programs and authorizes them to receive future appropriations but does not provide funding .

mandatory programs often dominate farm bill policy and the debate over the farm bill budget .

the budgetary impact of mandatory spending proposals is measured relative to an assumption that certain programs continue beyond the end of the farm bill .

the benchmark is the cbo baseline — a projection at a particular point in time of future federal spending on mandatory programs under current law .

the baseline provides funding for reauthorization , reallocation to other programs , or offsets for deficit reduction .

when a new bill is proposed that would affect mandatory spending , the score ( cost impact ) is measured in relation to the baseline .

changes that increase spending relative to the baseline have a positive score ; those that decrease spending relative to the baseline have a negative score .

budget enforcement uses these baselines and scores and may follow "paygo" and other budget rules ( that in part may require no increase to the federal deficit ) .

in april 2018 , cbo released a baseline for farm bill programs with mandatory spending that will be used for the rest of the legislative year .

it projects that , if current law were extended , farm bill programs would cost $867 billion over the next 10 years , fy2019-fy2028 , 77% of which is in the nutrition title for the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) .

the remaining $203 billion baseline is for agricultural programs , mostly in crop insurance , farm commodity programs , and conservation .

other titles of the farm bill contribute less than 1% of the baseline ( figure 1 ) , some of which are funded primarily with discretionary spending .

relative to this baseline , cbo released its score of h.r .

2 on april 13 , 2018 .

cbo estimates that h.r .

2 is essentially budget neutral over the procedural 10-year budget window ( table 2 ) .

the bill would increase mandatory ( direct ) spending by $458 million and is offset by increases in revenue of $465 million , reflecting fees paid by contractors in the snap electronic benefits transfer ( ebt ) program .

under h.r .

2 , the baseline of the three largest titles ( nutrition , crop insurance , and commodities ) is projected to remain within roughly 0.5% of current law .

within individual titles , the conservation and nutrition titles would experience larger shifts among programs within their respective titles .

for example , the conservation title's 10-year baseline would be reduced by $795 million ( - 1.3% ) , reflecting a $12.6 billion reduction ( 21% ) from repealing the conservation stewardship program ( csp ) , which is the offset for increases in other conservation programs ( table 3 ) .

the nutrition title's 10-year baseline would increase by $463 million ( +0.07% ) , although this includes reductions of $20 billion ( 3% ) in benefits that are reallocated to other programs in the nutrition title .

moreover , the overall nutrition title increase , $463 million , is more than offset by the projected $465 million increase in revenue attributed to that title .

bioenergy programs , which had their own title in recent farm bills , are addressed in the rural development title of h.r .

2 , where their mandatory funding is eliminated ( - $517 million over 10 years ) .

animal disease and preparedness programs , including a vaccine bank , receive new mandatory funding ( +$450 million ) in the miscellaneous title .

farm safety net program outlays would be essentially flat overall , with crop insurance title reductions ( - $161 million over 10 years ) nearly offsetting net increases in farm commodity title programs ( $+193 million ) .

for several of the subset of programs in the 2014 farm bill that received mandatory funding but do not have a baseline beyond the end of fy2018 , h.r .

2 would provide new mandatory funding .

two research title programs would receive $250 million in mandatory funds , while trade title programs would receive $450 million and be provided with permanent baseline .

a food insecurity program in the nutrition title would receive $472 million in mandatory funding and gain permanent baseline .

