sequestration is the automatic reduction ( i.e. , cancellation ) of certain federal spending , generally by a uniform percentage .

the sequester is a budget enforcement tool that congress established in the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 ( bbedca , also known as the gramm - rudman - hollings act ; p.l .

99-177 ) intended to encourage compromise and action , rather than actually being implemented ( also known as triggered ) .

generally , this budget enforcement tool has been incorporated into laws to either discourage congress from violating specific budget objectives or encourage congress to fulfill specific budget objectives .

when congress breaks these types of rules , either through the enactment of a law or lack thereof , a sequester is triggered and certain federal spending is reduced .

sequestration is of recent interest due to its current use as an enforcement mechanism for three budget enforcement rules created by the statutory pay - as - you - go act of 2010 ( statutory paygo ; p.l .

111-139 ) and the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) .

currently , only the bca mandatory sequester has been triggered and is in effect .

however , the statutory paygo sequester and the bca discretionary sequester are current law and can be triggered if the budget enforcement rules are broken ( and congress does not take action to change or waive these rules ) .

medicare , which is a federal program that pays for covered health care services of qualified beneficiaries , is subject to a reduction in federal spending associated with the implementation of these three sequesters , although special rules limit the extent to which it is impacted .

this report begins with an overview of budget sequestration and medicare before discussing how budget sequestration has been implemented across the different parts of the medicare program .

additionally , this report provides appendixes that include references to additional congressional research service ( crs ) resources related to this report and budget terminology definitions , as defined by bbedca .

under current law , sequestration is a budget enforcement tool that occurs because certain policy goals have not been met .

when a sequester is triggered , all applicable budget accounts , unless exempted by law , are reduced by a percentage amount for a fiscal year .

the percentage reduction varies between and within budget accounts depending on the categories of funding , as described below , contained within each budget account .

after accounting for each category of funding within a budget account , sequestration reductions are spread evenly across all budget account subcomponents referenced in committee reports , budget justifications , and / or presidential detailed budget estimates – also known as programs , projects or activities .

for budget accounts that contain only one category of funding , all sequestrable funds are reduced by the corresponding percentage .

for accounts that contain multiple categories of funding , the total amount of each category of sequestrable funds is reduced by its corresponding percentage .

the reduced budget resources are usually permanently cancelled .

as currently used , a sequester applies to either discretionary or mandatory spending .

discretionary spending is associated with most funds provided by annual appropriations acts .

while all discretionary spending is subject to the annual appropriations process , only a portion of mandatory spending is provided in appropriations acts .

mandatory spending is generally provided by permanent laws , such as the social security act , which made indefinite budget authority permanently available for medicare benefit payments .

some federal programs , such as medicare , can receive both discretionary and mandatory funding .

in the event that a sequester is triggered , the office of management and budget ( omb ) is responsible for calculating the across - the - board percentage reductions , and calculates separate percentages for medicare , nondefense , and defense funding .

due to sequestration rules , which are covered later in this report , mandatory medicare benefit payments receive a specific percentage reduction different from other types of federal spending .

the methodologies used to calculate these percentages and the sequestered amounts are published in a report produced by omb .

once the president issues a sequestration order , the associated report is made available to the public and transmitted to congress .

medicare , which is a federal program that pays for certain health care services of qualified beneficiaries , is subject to sequestration , although special rules limit the extent to which it is impacted .

due to the varying payment structures of the four parts of the program , sequestration is applied differently across medicare .

medicare was established in 1965 under title xviii of the social security act to provide hospital and supplementary medical insurance to americans age 65 and older .

over time , the program has been expanded to also include certain disabled persons , including those with end - stage renal disease .

in 2017 , the program covered an estimated 58 million persons ( 49 million aged and 9 million disabled ) .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates that total medicare spending will be about $718 billion in fy2018 and will increase to about $1,390 billion in fy2027 .

almost all medicare spending is mandatory spending that is primarily used to cover benefit payments ( i.e. , payments to health care providers for their services ) , administration , and the medicare integrity program ( mip ) .

the remaining medicare outlays are discretionary and used almost entirely for other administrative activities that are described in more detail later in this report .

medicare consists of four distinct parts: 1 .

part a ( hospital insurance , or hi ) covers inpatient hospital services , skilled nursing care , hospice care , and some home health services .

most persons aged 65 and older are automatically entitled to premium - free part a because they or their spouse paid medicare payroll taxes for at least 40 quarters ( 10 years ) on earnings covered by either the social security or the railroad retirement systems .

part a services are paid for out of the hospital insurance trust fund , which is mainly funded by a dedicated 2.9% payroll tax on earnings of current workers , shared equally between employers and workers .

2 .

part b ( supplementary medical insurance , or smi ) covers a broad range of medical services , including physician services , laboratory services , durable medical equipment , and outpatient hospital services .

enrollment in part b is optional , but most beneficiaries with part a also enroll in part b .

part b benefits are paid for out of the supplementary insurance trust fund , which is primarily funded through beneficiary premiums and federal general revenues .

3 .

part c ( medicare advantage , or ma ) is a private plan option that covers all parts a and b services , except hospice .

individuals choosing to enroll in part c must be eligible for part a and must also enroll in part b .

about one - third of medicare beneficiaries are enrolled in ma .

part c is funded through both the hi and smi trust funds .

4 .

part d is a private plan option that covers outpatient prescription drug benefits .

this portion of the program is optional .

about 76% of medicare beneficiaries are enrolled in medicare part d or have coverage through an employer retiree plan subsidized by medicare .

part d benefits are paid for out of the supplementary insurance trust fund , which is primarily funded through beneficiary premiums and federal general revenues .

for more information on the medicare program , see crs report r40425 , medicare primer , coordinated by patricia a. davis .

special rules limit the total effect of budget sequestration on medicare ( see table 1 ) .

most notably , bbedca , as amended by the bca , prohibits medicare benefit payments from being reduced by more than 2% under a bca mandatory sequestration order .

similarly , statutory paygo prohibits medicare benefit payments from being reduced by more than 4% under a statutory paygo sequestration order .

the cap does not apply to medicare mandatory and discretionary administrative spending , which is subject to the unrestricted percentage reduction under both bca and statutory paygo sequestration orders .

under the current mandatory sequestration order triggered by the bca , the medicare sequestration percentage is capped at 2% .

therefore , as omb determines the percentage reductions for each budget category through fy2027 , medicare benefit payments cannot be reduced by more than 2% ; as such , another budget category may be subject to a higher percentage reduction in order to achieve the necessary amount of savings .

more specifically , if omb determines that total nonexempt , nondefense mandatory funds need to be reduced by a percentage larger than 2% in order to achieve necessary savings under a bca sequestration order for a given year , then a 2% reduction would be made to medicare benefit spending , and the uniform reduction percentage for the remaining non - medicare benefit , nonexempt , nondefense mandatory programs would be recalculated and increased by an amount to achieve the necessary level of reductions .

if the uniform percentage reduction needed to achieve the total amount of savings is less than 2% , then the determined percentage would be applied to all nonexempt , nondefense , mandatory accounts , including medicare .

of note , if a mandatory sequestration order were triggered by statutory paygo , the process would be the same , but the reduction of payments for medicare benefits would be capped at 4% .

in addition to these percentage caps , bbedca also prohibits statutory paygo and bca mandatory sequestration effects from being included in the determination of annual adjustments to medicare payment rates established under title xviii of the social security act .

 ( see " reductions in benefit spending ". ) .

finally , certain medicare programs and activities are explicitly exempted from statutory paygo and bca sequestration orders .

specifically , part d low - income subsidies , part d catastrophic subsidies ( reinsurance ) , and qi premiums cannot be reduced under a mandatory sequestration order .

since the first bca mandatory sequester order issued in fy2013 , medicare benefit payments have been subject to the 2% annual reduction limit established by the bca .

nondefense mandatory budget authority reductions , which have applied to medicare administrative spending , have fluctuated between 5.1% and 7.3% through fy2018 .

in the same sequestration order , medicare administrative expenses will be sequestered by the nondefense mandatory percentage , 6.6% .

the total reduction in medicare administration budget authority , however , cannot be identified from the data presented in the omb sequestration report .

in total , medicare benefit payments ( not including administration ) are estimated to account for 89% of all medicare and non - medicare resources available to be sequestered ( sequestrable budget authority ) under the fy2018 bca mandatory sequester .

of the funds that are sequestered , medicare benefit payments are estimated to account for 70% of sequestered funds .

traditionally , medicare benefit payments comprise the largest single source of sequestered funds in a given mandatory sequestration order .

in fy2018 , medicare benefit payments are estimated to account for the largest share of sequestrable budget authority and sequestered funds since the first bca sequestration order was issued for fy2013 , as shown in figure 1 .

figure 2 shows how the fy2018 bca sequestration order is estimated to apply to the various parts of medicare .

it is worth noting that although medicare part c is sequestered , omb sequestration orders delineate at the trust fund level and do not distinguish each medicare part .

part c is funded out of both the part a and part b trust funds and is included in these totals .

for reference , from fy2016-fy2017 , medicare advantage , on average , accounted for 32% of all hi trust fund benefit payments and 38% of all smi trust fund benefit payments .

these ratios could change in fy2018 based on actual spending .

cbo estimates that medicare benefit payment outlays will increase 96% from fy2018 to fy2027 ( $708 billion to $1,387 billion ) , which is the last year of bca mandatory sequestration .

most of this expected increase is due to an aging population and rising health care costs per person .

in addition , most of this increase would be subject to sequestration .

when congress failed to enact legislation that reduced the deficit by at least $1.5 trillion before january 15 , 2012 , the bca prompted savings from three sources: ( 1 ) the mandatory sequestration of funds , ( 2 ) reduced discretionary spending limits , and ( 3 ) lower expected interest payments on u.s. government debt , which resulted from the mandatory sequestration of funds and discretionary spending limits .

although medicare benefit payments traditionally account for a large percentage of mandatory sequestered funds , they account for a much smaller portion of overall bca savings — generally around 10% — because reduced discretionary spending limits account for a larger share of bca savings than the mandatory sequester .

in fy2018 , sequestered medicare benefit payments will account for approximately 10% of total fy2018 bca savings , as determined by omb and shown in figure 3 .

for more information on the budget control act , see crs report r41965 , the budget control act of 2011 , by bill heniff jr. , elizabeth rybicki , and shannon m. mahan ; and crs report r42506 , the budget control act of 2011 as amended: budgetary effects , by grant a. driessen and marc labonte .

appendix a .

additional crs resources to gain a deeper understanding of the topics covered in this report , readers may also wish to consult the following crs reports: crs report r40425 , medicare primer , coordinated by patricia a. davis crs report r43122 , medicare financial status: in brief , by patricia a. davis crs report r44766 , medicare advantage ( ma ) – proposed benchmark update and other adjustments for cy2018: in brief , by paulette c. morgan crs report r40611 , medicare part d prescription drug benefit , by suzanne m. kirchhoff crs report r42506 , the budget control act of 2011 as amended: budgetary effects , by grant a. driessen and marc labonte crs report r42050 , budget "sequestration" and selected program exemptions and special rules , coordinated by karen spar crs report r42972 , sequestration as a budget enforcement process: frequently asked questions , by megan s. lynch crs report r41157 , the statutory pay - as - you - go act of 2010: summary and legislative history , by bill heniff jr. crs report r41965 , the budget control act of 2011 , by bill heniff jr. , elizabeth rybicki , and shannon m. mahan crs report 98-721 , introduction to the federal budget process , coordinated by james v. saturno appendix b .

budget terminology definitions as defined by balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 ( bbedca ; p.l .

99-177 ) and simplified where appropriate: budget authority — authority provided by federal law to enter into financial obligations that will result in immediate or future outlays involving federal government funds .

budgetary resources — an amount available to enter into new obligations and to liquidate them .

budgetary resources are made up of new budget authority ( including direct spending authority provided in existing statute and obligation limitations ) and unobligated balances of budget authority provided in previous years .

discretionary appropriations — budgetary resources ( except to fund direct - spending programs ) provided in appropriation acts .

mandatory spending — also known as direct s pending , refers to budget authority that is provided in laws other than appropriation acts , entitlement authority , and the supplemental nutrition assistance program .

medicare benefit payments — all payments for programs and activities under title xviii of the social security act .

revised nonsecurity category — discretionary appropriations other than in budget function 050 .

revised security category — discretionary appropriations in budget function 050 .

sequestration — the cancellation of budgetary resources provided by discretionary appropriations or direct spending laws .

for definitions of other budget terms mentioned in this report but not defined by bbedca , see u.s. government accountability office , a glossary of terms used in the federal budget process , gao - 05-734sp , september 1 , 2005 , p. 23 , https: / / www.gao.gov / assets / 80 / 76911.pdf .

