workers who lose their jobs due to a natural or other disaster can seek assistance through several federally supported programs .

in many cases , disaster - affected workers will be served by permanent programs and systems that provide assistance to workers who involuntarily lose their jobs .

in some cases , entities located within geographic areas affected by disasters can qualify for additional support that is limited to serving disaster - affected workers .

this report discusses two income support programs and two employment service programs .

in each benefit category , there is a broader permanent program and a more - targeted program for disaster - affected workers .

unemployment c ompensation 1 ( uc ) provides a weekly cash payment to workers who are involuntarily unemployed and meet other criteria .

states administer uc benefits with u.s. department of labor ( dol ) oversight .

uc is financed via payroll taxes paid by employers: uc benefits are funded by state unemployment taxes ( suta ) and uc administration is funded by a federal unemployment tax ( futa ) .

uc benefits are considered entitlements for eligible workers and are required to be paid promptly .

disaster unemployment assistance ( dua ) provides a weekly cash payment to individuals who become unemployed as a direct result of a major disaster and are not eligible for uc benefits .

dua is funded through the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) and administered by dol through each state's uc agency .

dislocated worker activities under the workforce innovation and opportunity act ( wioa - dw ) provides federal formula grants to states to provide training and career services to workers who involuntarily lose their jobs and meet other criteria .

wioa - dw grants are funded via discretionary appropriations to dol and administered by state workforce agencies and local partners with dol oversight .

disaster dislocated worker grants ( ddwgs ) provide competitive federal grants that support temporary disaster response jobs for workers who are unemployed as a direct result of a disaster .

ddwgs are awarded by dol to the state and local partners that receive wioa - dw funds .

in terms of scale , the primary infusion of funds for disaster - affected workers will typically come from increased numbers of uc payments and , to a lesser extent , the availability of dua benefits .

because uc and dua outlays increase as the need grows , these funds can be responsive to the scale of a disaster .

conversely , wioa - dw and ddwg funds are typically limited by annual appropriations and therefore may be less scalable than uc and dua , which are entitlements for individuals .

this report focuses on programs that provide assistance to workers on the basis of job loss due to a disaster .

other programs that may support such disaster - affected individuals but do not have job loss as an eligibility criterion are not included .

similarly , this report does not discuss programs that may assist workers who lost their jobs due to a disaster but establish eligibility based on criteria other than job loss , such as being low - income .

since some of the systems that support disaster - affected workers are permanent and have general eligibility criteria , benefit receipt is not contingent on a disaster meeting specific criteria .

for example , disaster - affected workers may qualify for uc on the basis of becoming unemployed due to conditions created by a disaster ( eg , the place of business is closed because of a disaster ) , but benefit receipt does not require the presence of a specific type or magnitude of disaster .

similarly , the wioa - dw system serves workers whose job loss is due to a disaster as well as workers who lose their jobs for other reasons .

dua and ddwg are contingent on disasters being declared as such .

dua benefits are available only to those individuals who have become unemployed as a direct result of a declared major disaster as determined under the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( p.l .

100-707 , the stafford act ) and if the disaster declaration includes the notice of availability of dua benefits .

ddwg assistance can be awarded in response to a disaster or emergency declared under the stafford act or "an emergency or disaster situation of national significance that could result in a potentially large loss of employment , as declared or otherwise recognized ... by a federal agency. .

the joint federal - state uc program is permanently authorized and provides income support through weekly uc benefit payments to eligible unemployed workers .

the dua program provides income support to individuals who become unemployed as a direct result of a major disaster and are not eligible for uc benefits .

these unemployment insurance programs are entitlement programs funded through direct spending ; benefits provided through these programs are not limited by appropriations .

consequently , these programs may be responsive to unemployment caused by disasters .

two related programs for dislocated workers can assist individuals who involuntarily lose their jobs due to a disaster .

federally funded dislocated worker activities grants under the workforce innovation and opportunity act ( wioa , p.l .

113-128 ) are formula grants to states to provide job training and career services to individuals who lose their jobs , while disaster dislocated worker grants are competitive grants that support the provision of temporary jobs for workers who become unemployed as a result of a disaster .

when considering disaster response programs , it can be useful to consider funding mechanisms ( eg , federal appropriations or state taxes ) , funding limitations ( eg , capped or entitlements ) , and whether a program is designed as an immediate benefit or a longer - term investment .

in the past , congress has enacted legislation in response to some of these issues and program limitations .

in budgetary terms , uc benefits are an entitlement ( although the program is financed by a dedicated state tax imposed on employers in the state and not by general revenue ) .

similarly , dua benefits are paid from federal funds appropriated for the drf and have always been paid to individuals who meet the eligibility requirements in a manner similar to an entitlement .

while funding for the drf depends upon the appropriations process , when the balance of the drf becomes low , congress has always provided additional funding through both annual and supplemental appropriations to replenish the account .

consequently , both uc and dua have the ability to rapidly respond to unemployment caused by disasters and provide immediate income support to the unemployed .

however , increased uc outlays may potentially trigger increases on suta or futa taxes on the affected state's employers because even if a state's trust fund account is depleted , the state remains legally required to continue paying benefits .

such a state may need to raise suta taxes on its employers or reduce uc benefit levels .

alternatively , a state might borrow money either from the dedicated loan account within the utf or from outside sources .

if a state chooses to borrow funds from the utf , not only will the state be required to continue paying benefits , it also will be required to repay the funds ( plus any interest due ) it has borrowed from the federal loan account .

if the loans are not repaid within approximately two years , an increase in the net futa taxes faced by the state's employers may be triggered .

in the past , congress has enacted temporary measures to address high levels of uc claims and corresponding stress on state uc trust funds after a disaster .

after hurricane katrina , congress enacted the qi , tma , and abstinence programs extension and hurricane katrina unemployment relief act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-91 ) , which transferred $500 million from the federal unemployment account of the utf to the state accounts of alabama ( $15 million ) , louisiana ( $400 million ) , and mississippi ( $85 million ) .

this helped to alleviate the burden of the increased uc claims and prevent or dampen automatic suta tax increases that would have otherwise occurred in response to increased state uc outlays .

more recently , congress enacted the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-123 ) .

among other provisions , p.l .

115-123 included section 20801 , which authorized a deferral of interest payments on an outstanding federal ui loan for the u.s. virgin islands .

wioa - dw and ddwg activities are supported by annual discretionary appropriations and associated activities are constrained by appropriations levels .

in some cases , congress has appropriated additional funds for these activities in disaster - related areas , though funding is not automatic and , because it must be appropriated , it is likely to be less timely than uc or dua .

whether or not congress appropriates supplemental funds , states have some flexibility to direct wioa - dw funds to disaster - affected areas ( particularly through the governor's reserve ) and dol has some discretion in awarding ddwg funds .

dol can , for example , choose to direct a larger portion of the national dislocated worker set - aside to ddwg activities , but it is still subject to annual funding limits and prioritizing ddwg activities will likely mean less funding for other national dislocated worker activities .

funding for workforce services has been expanded temporarily through additional appropriations that supplemented regular annual appropriations .

in 2005 , the department of defense , emergency supplemental appropriations to address hurricanes in the gulf of mexico , and pandemic influenza act ( p.l .

109-148 ) appropriated $125 million in supplemental funds for national emergency grants ( a precursor to ddwgs ) "related to the consequences of hurricanes in the gulf of mexico in calendar year 2005," of which hurricane katrina was the most severe .

more recently , the aforementioned p.l .

115-123 appropriated $100 million to the dislocated worker national reserve ( the intermediate funding stream that supports ddwgs ) for expenses directly related to the consequences of hurricanes harvey , maria , and irma and for those jurisdictions that received a major disaster declaration due to wildfires in 2017 .

uc and dua benefits usually offer the advantage of getting assistance to affected workers quickly , but benefits are of limited duration .

conversely , wioa - dw and ddwg may offer less immediate relief , but may function as a longer - term investment in disaster - affected communities .

both uc and dua benefits are structured to rapidly respond to economic conditions ( caused by a disaster in the case of dua ) and provide immediate income support to the unemployed .

in particular , each state agency responsible for administration of the uc program is assessed in part on the state's "methods of administration" to ensure that eligible claimants are paid uc benefits promptly when determined to be eligible .

while these benefits can typically be provided quickly , it should be noted that the prompt payment of both uc and dua benefits is dependent on a functioning state uc program .

if the administrative abilities of the state offices are impacted by the disaster — as occurred in louisiana after hurricane katrina and has also been experienced after the series of 2017 hurricanes in puerto rico and the u.s. virgin islands — the processing of claims and subsequent payment of benefits may be delayed .

uc and dua are available for a limited duration .

uc is limited by state policy and is typically limited to 26 weeks .

dua assistance is available to eligible individuals as long as the major disaster continues , but no longer than 26 weeks after the disaster declaration .

after hurricane katrina , congress enacted the katrina emergency assistance act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-176 ) .

section 2 of this law extended dua benefits for persons eligible under the stafford act due to hurricane katrina or hurricane rita for an additional 13 weeks , for a total of 39 weeks of potential benefits .

workers who exhausted their uc benefits but had received less than a total of 39 weeks of benefits would receive dua benefits for as many weeks as necessary to reach a total of 39 weeks of uc and dua benefits combined .

this extension did not apply to any subsequent major disasters .

the wioa - dw program's general strategy of preparing dislocated workers for locally in - demand jobs may offer limited short - term value , especially if large numbers of local worksites are disrupted due to the disaster .

wioa - dw activities could , however , be viewed as a longer - term investment in preparing dislocated workers for an area's post - disaster labor market .

disaster relief employment under ddwg is designed to respond to labor market disruptions by providing dislocated workers with federally subsidized employment while local labor markets recover .

it may provide a more - immediate benefit than wioa - dw activities , but the time necessary to award a ddwg , recruit workers , begin work , and pay the workers may create some time gap between a disaster and federal resources reaching workers .

the 12-month maximum duration of disaster relief employment , however , may offer a longer benefit window than uc and / or dua .

permanent law specifies that , in some cases , disaster relief employment under ddwgs can be extended past the original 12-month maximum for an additional 12 months .

supplemental appropriations can also extend the window for these programs .

for example , the additional funds appropriated in the aforementioned p.l .

115-123 specified that the funds would be available through september 30 , 2019 , more than two years after the landfall of the 2017 hurricanes .

