blockchain has garnered attention as a novel technology with potential to improve how we conduct business .

initially popularized by bitcoin and other cryptocurrency uses , companies are seeking novel ways of applying the technology .

but despite public intrigue and excitement around the technology , questions still surround what it is , what it does , how it can be used , and its tradeoffs .

this report explains the technologies which underpin blockchain , how blockchain works , potential applications for blockchain , concerns with it , and potential considerations for congress .

blockchain is not a new technology ; rather it is an innovative way of using existing technologies .

it enables parties who may not have reason to trust each other to agree on the current distribution of assets and who has those assets , so that they may conduct new business .

but , despite the hype surrounding the technology , it has certain pitfalls which can inhibit its utility .

a blockchain is a digital ledger that allows parties to transact without the use of a central authority to validate those transactions .

these transactions are not limited to financial ones , but may include item tracking , identity logging , verifying the completion of an action , or others .

the use of a central , validating authority ( i.e. , a third party ) can be avoided because in a blockchain , as transactions are added , the identities of the parties conducting those transactions are verified , and the transactions are verified as they are added to the ledger as a block of transactions .

the ledger is auditable because each block of transactions is dependent upon the previous block in such a way that any change would alert other users of a change to the history of transactions .

the strong relationships between identities , transactions , and the ledger enable parties to verify with a high degree of confidence the state of resources as logged in the ledger .

with an agreement on that history , parties may then conduct a new transaction with a shared understanding of who has which resource and of their ability to trade that resource .

blockchain is not a new , stand - alone technology ; rather it is an innovative use of existing technologies .

four particular technologies are used to enable blockchain: asymmetric key encryption ; hashes ; merkle trees ; and peer - to - peer networks .

blockchain uses asymmetric encryption , hash values , merkle trees , and p2p networks to build a ledger .

the transactions captured in that ledger are not limited to financial ones ( eg , trading currency for goods and services ) .

those participating on a blockchain have a common understanding of how transactions are added and build upon one another , who can participate on the network , and how conflicts are resolved .

blockchain is not a panacea technology .

a blockchain records events as transactions when they happen , in the order they happen , in an add - on only manner .

previous data on the blockchain cannot be altered , and users of the blockchain have access to the data on the blockchain in order to validate the distribution of resources .

however , if an entity has critical data that it wants to share ( e,g, , sensitive corporate information from one facility to another ) , then a combination of current database , cloud , and identity management technologies will likely be adequate for its needs .

but if the entity seeks to have its data be immutable and auditable , then a blockchain may be appropriate .

while an entity may find immutable and auditable transactions enticing , the inability to edit those transactions ( even in cases of error , when an additional invalidating transaction will be necessary ) may make blockchain a suboptimal record keeping technology .

examples of blockchain uses that are in use , are being piloted , or have been discussed are listed below , in alphabetical order .

blockchain's cryptographic attributes may present a compelling reason for its use over other technologies .

but there are pitfalls and unsolved challenges which may inhibit its wide use .

some of these concerns are discussed below .

although blockchain is already being used to execute financial transactions , it is relatively nascent in other sectors of the economy .

because of its novelty , blockchain is being piloted by industry , but at this time does not appear to be a replacement for existing systems .

given these conditions , the technology does not contain the same level of adoption that previous technology had when facing potential legislative action .

however , in addition to examining legislative options concerning the technology's use , congress may , if it chooses to do so , provide oversight of federal agencies seeking to ( 1 ) use it for government business , and / or ( 2 ) regulate its use in the private sector .

for example , the general services administration and the department of homeland security are examining blockchain as a way to achieve efficiencies in the current business of government .

they are seeking ways to better manage identities , assets , data , and contracts .

additionally , federal agencies are creating test beds for blockchain technology .

the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) has established a "workbench" to test blockchain .

the workbench is a virtual environment within nist that is being used as a platform for research and testing .

test beds like this one can serve as a model or shared service for other federal agencies to examine blockchain applications and uses , providing those agencies first - hand experience with the technology as well as information concerning its limitations .

this experience can better inform program managers so that they can determine if they seek to use the technology and it can also help them in their interactions with the private sector concerning the technology .

agencies such as the securities and exchange commission and the commodities futures trading commission are issuing advisories to industry concerning blockchain technology .

in some cases , these actions are to positively declare that the current legal framework governing other transactions also apply to transactions on a blockchain .

in these areas , congress may evaluate whether agencies are achieving congress's policy goals .

these goals may be technology agnostic and thus already established , or congress may develop new policy goals for the adoption of emerging technology across a variety of sectors .

another potential issue of congressional interest is where the concentration of federal authority over blockchain expertise , research , and authority should reside .

issues such as this typically arise at the onset of a new technology .

one option is to place authority for a technology within a single agency ( eg , nuclear energy in the department of energy ) .

historically , this option has been used when a technology is advanced and in relatively wide use , or is targeted at a specific industry or has a very specific application .

when a technology has a broad application ( eg , information communication technologies ) congress has historically opted to have several federal agencies oversee the technology , charging different agencies with overseeing the different applications of that technology ( eg , dhs for federal agency security of information communication technology and the department of commerce for the development of guidelines for its use ) .

interest in blockchain technology continues to grow in both the public and private sectors .

however , it is helpful to remember it is not a single technology , but a novel way of using existing technologies already to enable transactions .

those transactions can also occur through using a combination of commercial off - the - shelf technologies without using blockchain .

but , because of the cryptography involved in blockchain implementations , those transactions can occur among parties that might not otherwise have an established means to carry out a trusted transaction or do not mutually trust each other .

as the public and private sectors consider blockchain use , awareness of both its advantages and limitations will better inform decisions concerning its adoption or avoidance .

congress is aware of the growing interest in blockchain technology and has held several hearings on the technology and its potential implications for the economy and government use .

congressional interest in blockchain technology is likely to continue to grow as the technology becomes more established and especially if its application becomes more widespread .

