the issue of sexual harassment in the workplace has received significant attention in recent months amid reports of harassment and sexual assault by high - level executives , managers , and employees across a range of industries .

this attention has prompted inquiries into the prevalence of harassment , the scope and sufficiency of legal protection for harassment victims , and issues ranging from the use of confidentiality provisions in settlement agreements that preclude victims from speaking publicly about allegations to how to improve procedures by which employees can seek remedy for harassment in all three branches of government .

this report addresses various legal issues related to sexual harassment and title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 ( title vii ) , the federal statute that generally prohibits discrimination in the workplace , including discrimination based on sex .

as the statute contains neither an express prohibition against harassment nor a definition of harassment , this report examines ( 1 ) how the supreme court and federal appellate courts have mapped out the scope of protection that title vii provides employees against sexual harassment , including the supreme court's "severe or pervasive" standard that harassment victims must meet to show a title vii violation ( which applies to most title vii sexual harassment claims ) ; ( 2 ) limits on employer liability for harassment ; and ( 3 ) retaliation for reporting harassment , among other issues .

title vii makes it unlawful for employers to discriminate "against any individual with respect to his compensation , terms , conditions , or privileges of employment , because of such individual's race , color , religion , sex , or national origin. .

though title vii's antidiscrimination provisions do not expressly prohibit harassment , the supreme court and federal circuit courts interpret title vii's prohibition against discrimination in the "terms , conditions , or privileges of employment" to prohibit harassment based on race , color , religion , sex , or national origin .

when a plaintiff raises a title vii harassment claim , federal courts often describe the action as alleging "harassment" or a "hostile work environment. .

the interchangeable use of those terms is perhaps best understood as reflecting the current statutory anchor of a title vii harassment action: as the statute does not expressly prohibit or define harassment , such claims are framed as violations of title vii's prohibition against a discriminatory and abusive work environment , based on the phrase "terms , conditions , or privileges of employment. .

even when a plaintiff establishes the requisite elements of a prima facie case with respect to harassment — with a commonly contested issue being whether the conduct was sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the plaintiff's working environment — the plaintiff must also show a basis for holding the employer liable for the harassment .

the existing legal standard for evaluating employer liability is based on a framework arising from several supreme court decisions: meritor savings bank v. vinson , which held that employers are not always "automatically liable for sexual harassment by their supervisors," followed by two companion decisions , faragher v. city of boca raton and burlington industries , inc. v. ellerth , which further delineated when employers could be held liable for workplace harassment .

like harassment claims under title vii , the legal standards for establishing employer liability for workplace harassment are not expressly included or addressed in the statutory text of title vii .

indeed , the supreme court has repeatedly noted that congress — in amending title vii after its 1986 meritor decision — has not altered or overruled meritor 's limitation on employer liability for harassment .

as discussed in further detail below , under the supreme court's formulation , establishing employer liability for workplace harassment turns significantly on whether the harassing employee was a supervisor .

title vii's anti - retaliation provision makes it unlawful for an employer to discriminate against an employee "because he has opposed any practice made an unlawful employment practice by this subchapter , or because he has made a charge , testified , assisted , or participated in any manner in an investigation , proceeding , or hearing under this subchapter. .

in other words , an employer may not retaliate against an employee because he or she reported an employment practice made unlawful by title vii .

because federal courts interpret title vii to prohibit sexual harassment , employees who report such harassment in the workplace may be protected from unlawful retaliation — such as termination or demotion — for making that report .

to establish a title vii retaliation claim , a plaintiff must show , as an initial matter , that she engaged in "protected activity," such as reporting discriminatory conduct to a manager or human resources office — often categorized as protected opposition — and / or filing an eeoc charge or participating in a title vii proceeding , often categorized as protected participation .

the civil rights act of 1991 permits a plaintiff to recover compensatory damages in any case of intentional discrimination , including sexual harassment .

compensatory damages can include the sum of "future pecuniary losses , emotional pain , suffering , inconvenience , mental anguish , loss of enjoyment of life , and other nonpecuniary losses. .

a plaintiff may also recover punitive damages against nongovernmental entities upon a showing of "malice or reckless indifference to the federally protected rights" of the complainant .

the total amount of combined compensatory and punitive damages that a plaintiff can recover is limited by statute .

for employers with more than 14 but fewer than 101 employees , a plaintiff's maximum damages are limited to $50,000 ; for 201 employees , $100,000 ; for 501 employees , $200,000 ; for employers with more than 500 employees damages are capped at $300,000 .

a complainant who was constructively discharged may also be eligible for awards of backpay or frontpay .

in addition to damages , a title vii sexual harassment plaintiff may also seek injunctive relief .

as a general matter , "[a] district court has broad discretionary powers to craft an injunction to the specific violations found to ensure that the employer complies with the law. .

by way of example , in eeoc v. wilson metal casket , the sixth circuit upheld an injunction which prohibited the harassing supervisor from "asking any female employee to accompany him off the premises of the company unless accompanied by at least one other employee , and kissing or placing his hands on any female employee in the work place. .

the court upheld this injunction even though none of the enjoined conduct was itself , standing alone , likely illegal ; the court noted that the injunction "appropriately enjoins conduct which allowed sexual harassment to occur. .

finally , reasonable attorney's fees are available to a prevailing party , either a plaintiff or a defendant , under title vii .

prevailing plaintiffs generally recover fees unless there are special circumstances that preclude such recovery .

a prevailing plaintiff is one who obtains relief which "materially alters the legal relationship between the parties" ; for example , the appropriate attorney fee when a plaintiff receives an award limited to nominal ( $1 ) damages is generally "no fee at all. .

defendants who prevail are entitled to fees only if the plaintiff's claim was frivolous , unreasonable , or groundless .

