information warfare ( iw ) is a term that appears in recent hearings , news articles , and government documents .

yet these same documents may use other terms to describe the same sets of activities or concepts .

as the definition can affect how the government strategizes , organizes , trains , and equips around that term , congress may be interested in pursuing a definitive theory of iw .

while there is currently no official u.s. government definition of iw , it is typically conceptualized as the use and management of information to pursue a competitive advantage , including offensive and defensive efforts .

for some in the united states , the term "warfare" implies armed conflict or other military activity ; yet political warfare is commonly understood as the use of political means to compel an opponent to do one's will .

according to cold war diplomat george kennan's definition , political warfare is the employment of all the means at a nation's command , short of war , to achieve its national objectives .

such operations are both overt and covert .

they range from such overt actions as political alliances , economic measures , and "white" propaganda to such covert operations as clandestine support of 'friendly' foreign elements , "black" psychological warfare and even encouragement of underground resistance in hostile states .

in this sense , iw is a form of political warfare , where targets include a nation state's government , military , private sector , and general population .

taking place below the level of armed conflict , iw is the range of military and government operations to protect and exploit the information environment .

it consists of both offensive and defensive operations: the protection and assurance of one's own information ( information security ) , and information operations to advance interests .

it is conducted not only in crisis , conflict , and warfare in the operational sense , but is ongoing in peacetime as well .

whether attacking government agencies , political leadership , or news media in order to influence public opinion or to compel decisionmakers to take certain actions , ultimately the target of information warfare activities is human cognition .

for this reason , information warfare is sometimes referred to as persuasion or influence operations , or even psychological operations .

yet information warfare may not always involve compelling or coercing decisions ; rather , it may be part of a "divide and conquer" strategy targeting civil society , sowing confusion in a target population in order to create decision paralysis .

decisionmakers in this case are constantly bombarded by contradictory reports , with no readily available means of discerning the truth .

in the absence of reliable information and facing heightened opposition from factions on both sides of an issue , decisionmakers may be unable to act .

this is the informational equivalent of what carl von clausewitz coined as the "fog and friction" of war .

the fog of war refers to the uncertainty in situational awareness experienced by participants in military operations , while friction is a by - product of this fog .

iw is a whole - of - society endeavor , in which civilians may be knowingly or unknowingly functioning as proxies on behalf of a government .

for example , the russian concept of iw describes preemptive operations to achieve political goals and to control the information space , deploying all elements of society to include patriotic hacker groups and private citizens .

the chinese theory of iw is integrated into "the people's war" concept and involves the use of information technologies by hundreds of millions of people in order to influence an adversary's policymakers , and to gain an advantage against an asymmetric threat .

authoritarian regimes and their control over information infrastructure facilitate the use of a wide range of actors and techniques .

these regimes may compel ordinary citizens to act as agents of information warfare with financial rewards , by appealing to a sense of patriotism , or through threats and coercion .

information warfare may be a prelude to an armed conflict , a preparation of the battlefield preceding the deployment of forces .

information operations set the conditions in theater to gain support of locals , "winning the hearts and minds" to increase the odds of a successful campaign .

alternatively , iw may be an end in and of itself , the process through which nations gain competitive advantages over one another without the use of force .

there may be many terms that describe the use of information as a weapon .

however , because of its emphasis on the strategic implications of mobilizing information as an instrument of power , information warfare is a useful term to describe this particular strategy .

as a source of national power , information is a critical strategic asset , and currently the information element is shared within the u.s. government .

during the cold war , the u.s. information agency ( usia ) was responsible for supporting u.s. national interests abroad through information dissemination .

it was later folded into the state department's bureau of public diplomacy and public affairs before being disbanded in 1999 .

today , the department of state - led interagency global engagement center ( gec ) is charged with many of the former usia activities .

according to steve goldstein , then undersecretary for public diplomacy , the gec recently launched a new $40 million initiative to battle state - sponsored disinformation and propaganda targeting the united states and its interests .

it also plans to launch a series of pilot projects with the department of defense , using additional dod funding .

within the u.s. government , much of the current information warfare doctrine and capability resides with the military , making it the de facto center of gravity .

dod is also relatively well - funded , leading some to posit that the epicenter for iw activities should be the pentagon .

some fear that military leadership of the iw sphere represents the militarization of cyberspace , or the weaponization of information that would counter the principles of global internet freedom .

title 10 u.s.c 2241 prohibits dod from domestic "publicity or propaganda," although the terms are undefined .

it is unclear how iw / io relate to this so - called military propaganda ban .

the central intelligence agency ( cia ) has a history of conducting information warfare or psychological operations , particularly with respect to countering guerilla organizations abroad .

monitoring soviet disinformation was once solely the purview of the cia , until the active measures working group was established in 1981 and tasked with coordinating the activities of multiple , disparate activities within the u.s. government .

during the cold war , the interagency active measures working group collected and analyzed information gathered at usia overseas posts , from cia reporting , and fbi investigations in order to detect and expose soviet propaganda and disinformation efforts .

this information was published in publicly disseminated reports .

the final report of the active measures working group in 1992 warned that with the dissolution of the soviet union , active measures remained a threat to u.s. interests: "as long as states and groups interested in manipulating world opinion , limiting u.s. government actions , or generating opposition to u.s. policies and interests continue to use these techniques , there will be a need for the united states information agency to systematically monitor , analyze , and counter them. .

because there is no similar entity existing today , some government analysts have suggested that a version of the active measures working group be convened to face the current threat environment .

similarly , there have been calls for the resurrection of the u.s. information agency , but with added responsibilities .

information warfare is hardly a new endeavor .

in the battle of thermopylae in 480 bc , persian ruler xerxes used intimidation tactics to break the will of greek city - states .

alexander the great used cultural assimilation to subdue dissent and maintain conquered lands .

these ancient strategists helped to lay the foundation for information warfare strategy in modern times .

some policymakers have questioned whether tampering with , interfering with , or otherwise influencing a sovereign nation's democratic processes in an iw campaign is an act of war that could trigger a military response .

a similar question is whether a cyberattack that falls below the threshold of damage and destruction resulting from a kinetic event could be considered an armed attack or use of force under international law , or whether data breaches of military networks or theft of sensitive defense information constitute an act of aggression rather than espionage .

other questions congress may consider include whether the united states has a strategy in place to match the robust iw strategies of its competitors , and whether the u.s. government has institutions , organization , and programs to wage and win an information war or to deter foreign information operations .

with respect to cyberspace and information operations , the structures supporting each set of capabilities are currently bifurcated within the department of defense .

in addition , cyberspace operations tend to focus on computer network attacks rather than the cognitive and strategic effects of information .

as such , congress may explore whether current organizational and doctrinal constructs support the full integration of these capabilities to maximize their effects , and whether ongoing conceptual confusion has inhibited dod's ability to respond to iw challenges .

when responding to foreign iw activities on the united states , congress may consider whether authorities are in place for dod to conduct counter - io , and if other interagency entities are authorized and resourced to conduct coordinated efforts .

another consideration may be the efficacy of iw as a military function or a whole - of - government responsibility .

