artificial intelligence ( ai ) is a rapidly growing field of technology that is capturing the attention of commercial investors , defense intellectuals , policymakers , and international competitors alike , as evidenced by a number of recent initiatives .

on july 20 , 2017 , the chinese government released a strategy detailing its plan to take the lead in ai by 2030 .

less than two months later vladimir putin publicly announced russia's intent to pursue ai technologies , stating , "[w]hoever becomes the leader in this field will rule the world. .

similarly , the u.s. national defense strategy , released in january 2018 , identified artificial intelligence as one of the key technologies that will "ensure [the united states] will be able to fight and win the wars of the future. .

the u.s. military is already integrating ai systems into combat via a spearhead initiative called project maven , which uses ai algorithms to identify insurgent targets in iraq and syria .

these dynamics raise several questions that congress addressed in hearings during 2017 and 2018: what types of military ai applications are possible , and what limits , if any , should be imposed ? .

what unique advantages and vulnerabilities come with employing ai for defense ? .

how will ai change warfare , and what influence will it have on the military balance with u.s. competitors ? .

congress has a number of oversight , budgetary , and legislative tools available that it may use to influence the answers to these questions and shape the future development of ai technology .

almost all academic studies in artificial intelligence acknowledge that no commonly accepted definition of ai exists , in part because of the diverse approaches to research in the field .

likewise , although section 238 of the fy2019 national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) directs the secretary of defense to produce a definition of artificial intelligence by august 13 , 2019 , no official u.s. government definition of ai currently exists .

the fy2019 ndaa does , however , provide a definition of ai for the purposes of section 238: any artificial system that performs tasks under varying and unpredictable circumstances without significant human oversight , or that can learn from experience and improve performance when exposed to data sets .

an artificial system developed in computer software , physical hardware , or other context that solves tasks requiring human - like perception , cognition , planning , learning , communication , or physical action .

an artificial system designed to think or act like a human , including cognitive architectures and neural networks .

a set of techniques , including machine learning that is designed to approximate a cognitive task .

an artificial system designed to act rationally , including an intelligent software agent or embodied robot that achieves goals using perception , planning , reasoning , learning , communicating , decision - making , and acting .

this definition encompasses many of the descriptions in table 1 below , which summarizes various ai definitions in academic literature .

the field of ai research began in 1956 , but an explosion of interest in ai began around 2010 due to the convergence of three enabling developments: ( 1 ) the availability of "big data" sources , ( 2 ) improvements to machine learning approaches , and ( 3 ) increases in computer processing power .

this growth has advanced the state of narrow ai , which refers to algorithms that address specific problem sets like game playing , image recognition , and navigation .

all current ai systems fall into the narrow ai category .

the most prevalent approach to narrow ai is machine learning , which involves statistical algorithms that replicate human cognitive tasks by deriving their own procedures through analysis of large training data sets .

during the training process , the computer system creates its own statistical model to accomplish the specified task in situations it has not previously encountered .

experts generally agree that it will be many decades before the field advances to develop general ai , which refers to systems capable of human - level intelligence across a broad range of tasks .

nevertheless , the growing power of narrow ai algorithms has sparked a wave of commercial interest , with u.s. technology companies investing an estimated $20-$30 billion in 2016 .

some studies estimate this amount will grow to as high as $126 billion by 2025 .

dod's unclassified expenditures in ai contracts for fy2016 totaled just over $600 million , increasing to over $800 million in fy2017 .

ai has a number of unique characteristics that may be important to consider as these technologies enter the national security arena .

first , ai has the potential to be integrated across a variety of applications , improving the so - called "internet of things" in which disparate devices are networked together to optimize performance .

as kevin kelley , the founder of wired magazine , states , "[ai] will enliven inert objects , much as electricity did more than a century ago .

everything that we formerly electrified we will now cognitize. .

second , many ai applications are dual - use , meaning they have both military and civil applications .

for example , image recognition algorithms can be trained to recognize cats in youtube videos as well as terrorist activity in full motion video captured by uninhabited aerial vehicles over syria or afghanistan .

third , ai is relatively transparent , meaning that its integration into a product is not immediately recognizable .

by and large , ai procurement will not result in countable objects .

rather , the algorithm will be purchased separately and incorporated into an existing system , or it will be part of a tangible system from inception , which may not be considered predominantly ai .

an expert in the field points out , "we will not buy ai .

it will be used to solve problems , and there will be an expectation that ai will be infused in most things we do. .

a number of members of congress have called for action on military ai .

during the opening comments to a january 2018 hearing before the house armed services subcommittee on emerging threats , the subcommittee chair called for a "national level effort" to preserve a technological edge in the field of ai .

former deputy secretary of defense robert work argued in a november 2017 interview that the federal government needs to address ai issues at the highest levels , further stating that "this is not something the pentagon can fix by itself. .

other analysts have called for a national ai strategy to articulate ai objectives and drive whole - of - government initiatives and cross - cutting investments .

in the meantime , dod has published a classified ai strategy and is carrying out multiple tasks directed by dod guidance and the fy2019 ndaa , including establishing a joint artificial intelligence center ( jaic ) , which will "coordinate the efforts of the department to develop , mature , and transition artificial intelligence technologies into operational use" ; publishing a strategic roadmap for ai development and fielding , as well as guidance on "appropriate ethical , legal , and other policies for the department governing the development and use of artificial intelligence enabled systems and technologies in operational situations" ; establishing a national security commission on artificial intelligence ; and conducting a comprehensive assessment of militarily relevant ai technologies and providing recommendations for strengthening u.s. competitiveness .

these initiatives will present a number of oversight opportunities for congress .

in addition , congress may consider the adequacy of current dod funding levels for ai .

lieutenant general john shanahan , the lead for the pentagon's most prominent ai program , identified funding as a barrier to future progress , and a 2017 report by the army science board states that funding is insufficient for the service to pursue disruptive technology like ai .

although dod funding for ai has increased in 2018 — to include the jaic's $1.75 billion six - year budget and the defense advanced research projects agency's ( darpa's ) $2 billion multiyear investment in over 20 ai programs — some experts have argued that additional dod funding will be required to keep pace with u.s. competitors and avoid an "innovation deficit" in military technology .

critics of increased federal funding contend that significant increases to appropriations may not be required , as the military should be leveraging research and development ( r&d ) conducted in the commercial sector .

the 2017 national security strategy identifies a need to "establish strategic partnerships to align private sector r&d resources to priority national security applications" and to reward government agencies that "take risks and rapidly field emerging commercial technologies. .

in addition , the office of management and budget directed dod in preparing its fy2020 budget to "seek to rapidly field innovative technologies from the private sector , where possible , that are easily adaptable to federal needs , rather than reinventing solutions in parallel. .

some experts in the national security community also argue that it would not be a responsible use of taxpayer money to duplicate efforts devoted to ai r&d in the commercial sector when companies take products 90% of the way to a useable military application .

others contend that a number of barriers stand in the way of transitioning ai commercial technology to dod , and that reforming aspects of the defense acquisition process may be necessary .

these issues are discussed in more detail later in this report .

one impediment to accurately evaluating funding levels for ai is the lack of a stand - alone ai program element ( pe ) in dod funding tables .

as a result , ai r&d appropriations are spread throughout generally titled pes and incorporated into funding for larger systems with ai components .

for example , in the fy2019 national defense authorization act , ai funding is spread throughout the pes for the high performance computing modernization program and dominant information sciences and methods , among others .

on the other hand , a dedicated pe for ai may lead to a false precision , as it may be challenging to identify exact investments in enabling technologies like ai .

the lack of an official u.s. government definition of ai could further complicate such an assessment .

congress may also consider specific policies for the development and use of military ai applications .

many experts fear that the pace of ai technology development is moving faster than the speed of policy implementation .

former chairman of the house armed services committee representative mac thornberry has echoed this sentiment , stating , "it seems to me that we're always a lot better at developing technologies than we are the policies on how to use them. .

congress may assess the need for new policies or modifications to existing laws to account for ai developments and ensure that ai applications are free from bias .

perhaps the most immediate policy concern among ai analysts is the absence of an independent entity to develop and enforce ai safety standards and to oversee government - wide ai research .

former secretary of defense ashton b. carter , for example , has suggested the need for an "ai czar" to coordinate such efforts .

relatedly , congress may consider debating policy options on the development and fielding of lethal autonomous weapons systems ( laws ) , which may use ai to select and engage targets .

since 2014 , the united states has participated in international discussions of laws at the united nations ( u.n. ) convention on certain conventional weapons ( ccw ) .

approximately 25 state parties have called for a treaty banning "fully autonomous weapon systems" due to ethical considerations , while others have called for formal regulations or political declarations .

some analysts are concerned that efforts to ban or regulate laws could impose strict controls on ai applications that could be adapted for lethal use , thereby stifling development of other useful military — or even commercial — technology .

during recent testimony to the u.n. , one expert stated , "if we agree to foreswear some technology , we could end up giving up some uses of automation that could make war more humane .

on the other hand a headlong rush into a future of increasing autonomy with no discussion of where it is taking us , is not in humanity's interest either. .

he suggested the leading question for considering military ai applications ought to be , "what role do we want humans to play in wartime decision making ? .

congress may consider the growth of international competition in the ai market and the danger of foreign exploitation of u.s. ai technology for military purposes .

in particular , the chinese government is reported to be aggressively pursuing ai investments in the united states .

amid growing scrutiny of transactions involving chinese firms in the semiconductor industry , in september 2017 president trump , following the recommendation of the committee on foreign investment in the united states ( cfius ) , blocked a chinese firm from acquiring lattice semiconductor , a u.s. company that manufactures chips that are a critical design element for ai technology .

in this way , some experts believe that cfius may provide a means of protecting strategically significant technologies like ai .

indeed , the foreign investment risk review modernization act of 2018 ( firrma ) expands cfius's ability to review certain foreign investments , including those involving "emerging and foundational technologies. .

it also authorized cfius to consider "whether a covered transaction involves a country of special concern that has a demonstrated or declared strategic goal of acquiring a type of critical technology or critical infrastructure that would affect united states leadership in areas related to national security. .

congress may monitor the implementation of firrma and assess whether additional reforms might be necessary to maintain effective congressional oversight of sensitive transactions .

in addition , many analysts believe that it may be necessary to reform federal data policies associated with ai .

large data pools serve as the training sets needed for building many ai systems , and government data may be particularly important in developing military ai applications .

however , some analysts have observed that much of this data is either classified , access - controlled , or otherwise protected on privacy grounds .

these analysts contend that congress should implement a new data policy that balances data protection and privacy with the need to fuel ai development .

closely related , ai development may increase the imperative for strict security standards .

as discussed later in this report , ai algorithms are vulnerable to bias , theft , and manipulation , particularly if the training data set is not adequately curated or protected .

during a february 2018 conference with defense industry ceos , deputy defense secretary patrick shanahan advocated for higher cybersecurity standards in the commercial sector , stating , "[w]e want the bar to be so high that it becomes a condition of doing business. .

some leading commercial technology companies have issued similar calls for increased scrutiny , with microsoft's president brad smith arguing that a lack of regulation in this area could lead to "a commercial race to the bottom , with tech companies forced to choose between social responsibility and market success. .

finally , commercial companies have long cited the potential loss of intellectual property rights as a key impediment to partnering with dod .

in recognition of this issue , section 813 of the fy2016 ndaa established a "government - industry advisory panel" to provide recommendations on technical data rights and intellectual property reform .

the panel's report , released in november 2018 , offers a number of recommendations , including increased training in intellectual property rights for acquisitions professionals and a pilot program for intellectual property valuation in the procurement process .

dod is considering a number of diverse applications for ai .

currently , ai r&d is being left to the discretion of research organizations in the individual services , as well as to darpa and the intelligence advanced research projects agency ( iarpa ) .

however , dod components are currently required to coordinate with the jaic regarding any planned ai initiatives costing more than $15 million annually .

in addition , the jaic has been tasked with overseeing the national mission initiatives , projects that will leverage ai to address pressing operational challenges .

the office of the under secretary of defense for research and engineering , which oversaw the development of dod's ai strategy , will continue to support ai development and delivery .

the algorithmic warfare cross - functional team , also known as project maven , has previously been a focal point for dod ai integration and will transition from the under secretary of defense for intelligence to the jaic , where it will become the first of the jaic's national mission initiatives .

project maven was launched in april 2017 and charged with rapidly incorporating ai into existing dod systems to demonstrate the technology's potential .

project maven's inaugural director stated , "maven is designed to be that pilot project , that pathfinder , that spark that kindles the flame for artificial intelligence across the department. .

ai is also being incorporated into a number of other intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance applications , as well as in logistics , cyberspace operations , information operations , command and control , semiautonomous and autonomous vehicles , and lethal autonomous weapon systems .

from the cold war era until recently , most major defense - related technologies , including nuclear technology , the global positioning system ( gps ) , and the internet , were first developed by government - directed programs before later spreading to the commercial sector .

indeed , darpa's strategic computing initiative invested over $1 billion between 1983 and 1993 to develop the field of artificial intelligence for military applications , but the initiative was ultimately cancelled due to slower - than - anticipated progress .

today , commercial companies — sometimes building on past government - funded research — are leading ai development , with dod later adapting their tools for military applications .

noting this dynamic , one ai expert commented , "it is unusual to have a technology that is so strategically important being developed commercially by a relatively small number of companies. .

in addition to the shift in funding sources , a number of challenges related to technology , process , personnel , and culture continue to impede the adoption of ai for military purposes .

as military applications for ai grow in scale and complexity , many in congress and the defense community are becoming increasingly concerned about international competition .

in his opening comments at "the dawn of ai" hearing before the senate subcommittee on space , science , and competitiveness , senator ted cruz stated , "ceding leadership in developing artificial intelligence to china , russia , and other foreign governments will not only place the united states at a technological disadvantage , but it could have grave implications for national security. .

since at least 2016 , ai has been consistently identified as an "emerging and disruptive technology" at the senate select intelligence committee's annual hearing on the "worldwide threat assessment. .

in his written testimony for the 2017 hearing , director of national intelligence daniel coates asserted , "the implications of our adversaries' abilities to use ai are potentially profound and broad .

they include an increased vulnerability to cyberattack , difficulty in ascertaining attribution , facilitation of advances in foreign weapon and intelligence systems , the risk of accidents and related liability issues , and unemployment. .

consequently , it may be important for congress to understand the state of rival ai development — particularly because u.s. competitors may have fewer moral , legal , or ethical qualms about developing military ai applications .

a number of international institutions have examined issues surrounding ai , including the group of seven ( g7 ) , the organisation for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) , and the asia - pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) .

the u.n. ccw , however , has made the most concerted effort to consider certain military applications of ai , with a particular focus on laws .

in general , the ccw is charged with "banning or restricting the use of specific types of weapons that are considered to cause unnecessary or unjustifiable suffering to combatants or to affect civilian populations" and has previously debated weapons such as mines , cluster munitions , and blinding lasers .

the ccw began discussions on laws in 2014 with informal annual "meetings of experts. .

in parallel , the international committee of the red cross ( icrc ) held similar gatherings of interdisciplinary experts on laws that produced reports for the ccw on technical , legal , moral , and humanitarian issues .

during the ccw's april 2016 meeting , state parties agreed to establish a formal group of governmental experts ( gge ) , with an official mandate to "assess questions related to emerging technologies in the area of laws. .

although the gge has now convened three times , it has not produced an official definition of laws or issued official guidance for their development or use .

as a result , one u.s. participant cautioned that the international community is in danger of "the pace of diplomacy falling behind the speed of technological advancement. .

ai poses a number of unique opportunities and challenges within a national security context .

however , its ultimate impact will likely be determined by the extent to which developers , with the assistance of policymakers , are able to maximize its strengths while identifying options to limit its vulnerabilities .

although ai has not yet entered the combat arena in a serious way , experts are predicting the potential impact that ai will have on the future of warfare .

this influence will be a function of many factors , including the rate of commercial investment , the drive to compete with international rivals , the research community's ability to advance the state of ai capability , the military's general attitude toward ai applications , and the development of ai - specific warfighting concepts .

many experts assert that there is a "sense of inevitability" with ai , arguing that it is bound to be substantially influential .

nevertheless , in january 2016 , the vice chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , general paul selva , intimated that it may be too early to tell , pointing out that dod is still evaluating ai's potential .

he stated , "the question we're trying to pose now is , 'do the technologies that are being developed in the commercial sector principally provide the kind of force multipliers that we got when we combined tactical nuclear weapons or precision and stealth ? .

if the answer is yes , then we can change the way that we fight... .

if not , the military will seek to improve its current capabilities slightly to gain an edge over its adversaries. .

there are a range of opinions on ai's trajectory , and congress may consider these future scenarios as it seeks to influence and conduct oversight of military ai applications .

while many analysts admit that military ai technology is in a stage of infancy , it is difficult to find an expert who believes that ai will be inconsequential in the long run .

however , ai critics point to a number of trends that may minimize the technology's impact .

from a technical standpoint , there is a potential that the current safety problems with ai will be insurmountable and will make ai unsuitable for military applications .

in addition , there is a chance the perceived current inflection point in ai development will instead lead to a plateau .

some experts believe that the present family of algorithms will reach its full potential in another 10 years , and ai development will not be able to proceed without significant leaps in enabling technologies , such as chips with higher power efficiency or advances in quantum computing .

the technology has encountered similar roadblocks in the past , resulting in periods called "ai winters," during which the progress of ai research slowed significantly .

as discussed earlier , the military's willingness to fully embrace ai technology may pose another constraint .

many academic studies on technological innovation argue that military organizations are capable of innovation during wartime , but they characterize the services in peacetime as large , inflexible bureaucracies that are prone to stagnation unless there is a crisis that spurs action .

members of the defense innovation board , composed of ceos from leading u.s. commercial companies , remarked in their most recent report , "dod does not have an innovation problem , it has an innovation adoption problem" with a "preference for small cosmetic steps over actual change. .

another analysis asserts that ai adoption may be halted by poor expectation management .

the report asserts that overhyped ai capabilities may cause frustration that will "diminish people's trust and reduce their willingness to use the system in the future. .

this effect could have a significant chilling effect on ai adoption .

most analysts believe that ai will at a minimum have significant impact on the conduct of warfare .

one study describes ai as a "potentially disruptive technology that may create sharp discontinuities in the conduct of warfare," further asserting that the technology may "produce dramatic improvements in military effectiveness and combat potential. .

these analysts point to research projects to make existing weapon systems and processes faster and more efficient , as well as providing a means to cope with the proliferation of data that complicate intelligence assessments and decisionmaking .

however , these analysts caution that in the near future ai is unlikely to advance beyond narrow , task - specific applications that require human oversight .

some ai proponents contend that although humans will be present , their role will be less significant , and the technology will make combat "less uncertain and more controllable," as machines are not subject to the emotions that cloud human judgment .

however , critics point to the enduring necessity for human presence on the battlefield in some capacity as the principle restraining factor that will keep the technology from upending warfare .

an academic study of this trend argues , at present , even an ai of tremendous power will not be able to determine outcomes in a complex social system , the outcomes are too complex – even without allowing for free will by sentient agents.... strategy that involves humans , no matter that they are assisted by modular ai and fight using legions of autonomous robots , will retain its inevitable human flavor .

pointing to another constraining factor , analysts warn of the psychological impact that autonomous systems will have on an adversary , especially in conflict with cultures that place a premium on courage and physical presence .

one study on this topic quotes a security expert from qatar who stated , "how you conduct war is important .

it gives you dignity or not. .

in addition , experts highlight that the balance of international ai development will affect the magnitude of ai's influence .

as one analyst states , "[t]he most cherished attribute of military technology is asymmetry. .

in other words , military organizations seek to develop technological applications or warfighting concepts that confer an advantage for which their opponent possesses no immediate countermeasure .

indeed , that is the u.s. military's intent with the current wave of technological development as it seeks "an enduring competitive edge that lasts a generation or more. .

for this reason , dod is concerned that if the united states does not increase the pace of ai development and adoption , it will end up with either a symmetrical capability or a capability that bestows only a fleeting advantage , as u.s. competitors like china and russia accelerate their own respective military ai programs .

the democratization of ai technology will further complicate the u.s. military's pursuit of an ai advantage .

as the 2018 national defense strategy warns , "the fact that many technological developments will come from the commercial sector means that state competitors and nonstate actors will also have access to them , a fact that risks eroding the conventional overmatch to which our nation has grown accustomed. .

in these circumstances , ai could still influence warfighting methods , but the technology's overall impact may be limited if adversaries possess comparable capabilities .

a sizeable contingent of experts believe that ai will have a revolutionary impact on warfare .

one analysis asserts that ai will induce a "seismic shift on the field of battle" and "fundamentally transform the way war is waged. .

the 2018 national defense strategy counts ai among a group of emerging technologies that will change the character of war , and frank hoffman , a professor at the national defense university , takes this a step further , arguing that ai may "alter the immutable nature of war. .

statements like this imply that ai's transformative potential is so great that it will challenge long - standing , foundational warfighting principles .

in addition , members of the chinese military establishment assert that ai "will lead to a profound military revolution. .

proponents of this position point to several common factors when making their case .

they argue that the world has passed from the industrial era of warfare into the information era , in which gathering , exploiting , and disseminating information will be the most consequential aspect of combat operations .

in light of this transition , ai's potential ability to facilitate information superiority and "purge combat of uncertainty" will be a decisive wartime advantage , enabling faster and higher - quality decisions .

as one study of information era warfare states , "[w]inning in the decision space is winning in the battlespace. .

members of this camp argue that ai and autonomous systems will gradually distance humans from a direct combat role , and some even forecast a time in which humans will make strategic - level decisions while ai systems exclusively plan and act at the tactical level .

in addition , analysts contend that ai may contest the current preference for quality over quantity , challenging industrial era militaries built around a limited number of expensive platforms with exquisite capabilities , instead creating a preference for large numbers of adequate , less expensive systems .

a range of potential consequences flow from the assumptions surrounding ai's impact on warfighting .

some studies point to overwhelmingly positive results , like "near instantaneous responses" to adversary operations , "perfectly coordinated action," and "domination at a time and place of our choosing" that will "consistently overmatch the enemy's capacity to respond. .

however , ai may create an "environment where weapons are too fast , small , numerous , and complex for humans to digest ... taking us to a place we may not want to go but are probably unable to avoid. .

in other words , ai systems could accelerate the pace of combat to a point in which machine actions surpass the rate of human decisionmaking , potentially resulting in a loss of human control in warfare .

there is also a possibility that ai systems could induce a state of strategic instability .

the speed of ai systems may put the defender at an inherent disadvantage , creating an incentive to strike first against an adversary with like capability .

in addition , placing ai systems capable of inherently unpredictable actions in close proximity to an adversary's systems may result in inadvertent escalation or miscalculation .

although these forecasts project dramatic change , analysts point out that correctly assessing future impacts may be challenging .

historians of technology and warfare emphasize that previous technological revolutions are apparent only in hindsight , and the true utility of a new application like ai may not be apparent until it has been used in combat .

nevertheless , given ai's disruptive potential , for better or for worse , it may be incumbent on military leaders and congress to evaluate the implications of military ai developments and exercise oversight of emerging ai trends .

congressional actions that affect ai funding , acquisitions , norms and standards , and international competition have the potential to significantly shape the trajectory of ai development and may be critical to ensuring that advanced technologies are in place to support u.s. national security objectives and the continued efficacy of the u.s. military .

