t he alarming rise in drug overdose deaths involving opioids over the past two decades has prompted the federal government to examine the causes of the public health crisis , identify possible solutions to counteract the problem , and take actions to address the crisis .

the primary federal law governing the manufacture , distribution , and use of prescription and illicit opioids is the controlled substances act ( csa or the act ) , which is administered and enforced by the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) in the u.s. department of justice .

the csa provides the legal regime through which the federal government ( 1 ) regulates and facilitates the lawful production , possession , and distribution of controlled substances , including opioids ; ( 2 ) prevents diversion of these substances from legitimate purposes ; and ( 3 ) penalizes unauthorized activities involving controlled substances .

the regulatory framework under the csa relies primarily on a registration system: the act requires persons who handle controlled substances ( such as drug manufacturers , wholesale distributors , exporters , importers , health care professionals , hospitals , pharmacies , and scientific researchers ) to register with the dea and comply with the terms and conditions of the registration .

through this registration mechanism , the csa creates a "closed system" of distribution in which distribution may lawfully occur among registered handlers of controlled substances , referred to under the act as "registrants. .

to monitor the amount of particularly dangerous drugs that enters this distribution system , the csa requires the dea to establish a quota system that restricts the total amount of certain controlled substances that may be annually produced or manufactured .

in order to minimize theft and diversion and to help the dea monitor the flow of controlled substances in the united states , the csa and its implementing regulations subject registrants to strict requirements regarding recordkeeping , maintaining the security of their controlled substance inventories , and reporting certain information to the dea .

the "closed system" of distribution , along with registrant compliance with the csa's regulatory requirements , helps to ensure that a particular controlled substance is always accounted for by a dea - registered entity , from its creation until it is dispensed to a patient or is destroyed .

note that patients are not required to register with the dea because the controlled substances in their possession "are no longer part of the closed system of distribution and are no longer subject to dea's system of corresponding accountability. .

a registrant's failure to meet its obligations under the csa can result in a controlled substance being diverted from legitimate channels .

for example , "[d]istributors that blindly sell pharmaceutical controlled substances to rogue pharmacies , and practitioners who issue prescriptions without a legitimate medical purpose are diverting. .

such diversion can contribute to drug abuse and addiction , which , in turn , increase the number of overdose deaths and emergency room visits , two defining features of the current opioid epidemic .

in addition , some users who abuse prescription opioids may also start using cheaper and potentially easier to obtain illicit opioids such as heroin , which provide similar euphoric effects .

the csa provides civil and criminal penalties for any unlawful manufacture , distribution , importation , exportation , or possession of controlled substances .

such violations may include ( 1 ) "regulatory" offenses committed by registrants who do not adhere to their responsibilities under the csa , thereby increasing the risk of diversion , and ( 2 ) illicit trafficking or possession crimes that occur outside the "closed system" of authorized controlled substance distribution that primarily involve nonregistrants .

this report first provides a brief overview of the opioid epidemic and then describes in greater detail the current federal legal regime governing opioids and other controlled substances under the csa and its implementing regulations .

after that , the report examines dea actions taken that are specifically targeted at addressing opioid abuse and describes recently enacted laws amending the csa that impact the opioid regulatory system , including the substance use - disorder prevention that promotes opioid recovery and treatment for patients and communities act ( p.l .

115-271 ) , enacted by the 115 th congress .

the report concludes by discussing other legislative options that the 116 th congress could consider to amend the csa further to address the opioid epidemic .

the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) has declared that the nation "is in the midst of an opioid overdose epidemic," citing statistics that show the number of overdose deaths involving opioids ( including prescription opioids and illegal opioids such as heroin and nonpharmaceutical fentanyl ) has more than quadrupled since 1999 , and on average 115 americans now die each day from an opioid overdose .

former attorney general jeff sessions referred to the opioid epidemic as "the deadliest drug crisis in american history," and president trump in october 2017 directed the secretary of health and human services to declare the crisis a national public health emergency .

the csa defines the term "opioid" to mean "any drug or other substance having an addiction - forming or addiction - sustaining liability similar to morphine or being capable of conversion into a drug having such addiction - forming or addiction - sustaining liability. .

opioids can include prescription pain relief drugs such as hydrocodone , oxycodone , codeine , morphine , and fentanyl , as well as illegal drugs such as heroin and nonpharmaceutical ( illicitly produced ) fentanyl .

while doctors may prescribe u.s. food and drug administration ( fda ) - approved opioids to patients to alleviate their pain , particularly following surgery or injury or for serious health conditions such as cancer , some individuals may choose to abuse opioids for nonmedical reasons ( such as to experience feelings of relaxation or to get "high" ) or by taking them in a higher dosage or through different means than prescribed by their doctor ( such as by snorting or injecting the substance into a vein ) .

the cdc has estimated that more than 40% of all opioid overdose deaths in the united states in 2016 involved an fda - approved prescription opioid .

how the opioid epidemic occurred , and who is responsible for fueling it , are complicated questions , though reports have suggested that many parties are likely involved to some extent , including pharmaceutical manufacturers and distributors , doctors , health insurance companies , rogue pharmacies , and drug dealers and addicts .

the national institute on drug abuse has described the origins of the opioid overdose crisis as follows: in the late 1990s , pharmaceutical companies reassured the medical community that patients would not become addicted to prescription opioid pain relievers , and healthcare providers began to prescribe them at greater rates .

this subsequently led to widespread diversion and misuse of these medications before it became clear that these medications could indeed be highly addictive .

the president's commission on combating drug addiction and the opioid crisis also cited excessive prescribing of opioids since 1999 as a significant contributor to the proliferation of opioids .

the commission identified several other factors that have influenced the current opioid crisis , including large scale production and distribution of addictive opioids , widespread availability of illicit heroin and fentanyl , unethical physician prescribing practices and rogue pharmacies that fill those illegitimate prescriptions , and a lack of education for medical professionals and patients in prescribing and using opioids , respectively .

this section provides a general overview of the csa's closed system of distribution that regulates opioids and other types of controlled substances , including the schedules in which the substances are placed and the regulatory requirements and obligations that registrants must satisfy , such as ( 1 ) registering with the dea , ( 2 ) keeping accurate and complete records of controlled substance inventories and transactions , ( 3 ) implementing security measures to safeguard controlled substances from theft or diversion , ( 4 ) reporting certain information to the dea ( including suspicious controlled substance orders ) , ( 5 ) meeting production quotas , and ( 6 ) prescribing controlled substances only for legitimate medical purposes .

the dea's office of diversion control is responsible for preventing , detecting , and investigating violations of the csa involving controlled pharmaceuticals while also "ensuring an adequate and uninterrupted supply for legitimate medical , commercial , and scientific needs. .

the office of diversion control also manages the regulation of registrants , promulgates regulations concerning the handling of controlled substances , and establishes controlled substance production quotas .

the assistant attorney general for the doj's criminal division conducts , handles , or supervises all criminal and civil litigation to enforce the csa .

several federal courts have held that the csa does not contain an express or implied cause of action provision under which private parties or state , local , or tribal governments may sue registrants for noncompliance with their csa obligations , noting instead that the csa expressly authorizes only the attorney general and the u.s. department of justice to enforce federal controlled substances laws .

this section describes selected dea actions intended to help alleviate the opioid crisis .

existing legal authorities supplied dea with the tools for the agency's efforts to combat opioid abuse as described in the previous section .

in recent years , congress has also taken action to address perceived deficiencies in the federal regulatory regime governing opioids .

to date , the most comprehensive legislative response to the overprescribing and abuse of opioids is the substance use – disorder prevention that promotes opioid recovery and treatment for patients and communities act ( p.l .

115-271 ) ( the support for patients and communities act , or the support act ) that president trump signed into law on october 24 , 2018 .

title iii , subtitle b of the support act contains provisions that amend the csa in various ways to address the opioid epidemic , as described in the following sections .

the 116 th congress may consider legislation to amend the csa beyond the changes made by the support act .

these potential additional amendments to the csa may resemble opioid legislation introduced , but not enacted to date , in the 115 th congress .

legislative proposals introduced in the 115 th congress include the following: changes to the dea's authority to deny , revoke , or suspend a registration , and to issue immediate suspension order s .

the dea opioid enforcement restoration act of 2017 ( h.r .

4095 ) would repeal the ensuring patient access and effective drug enforcement act of 2016 ( epaedea ) ( p.l .

114-145 ) , discussed above in the section describing the dea's authority to issue "immediate suspension orders," and would restore the sections of the csa amended by such act as if it had not been enacted into law .

this bill would thus delete the definition of "imminent danger to the public health or safety" that the epaedea had added to the csa provision governing the dea administrator's power to suspend immediately an existing registration for a temporary period of time to avoid such a harm , thereby returning to the dea significant discretion in interpreting this phrase that is a necessary finding to support an immediate suspension order .

the bill would also remove the option afforded by the epaedea for the registrant or applicant to submit a "corrective action plan" to the dea prior to the agency's denial , revocation , or suspension of his registration .

the opioid immediate suspension order act of 2017 ( h.r .

4073 ) would also delete the statutory definition of "imminent danger to the public health or safety" for purposes of immediately suspending a registration but , unlike h.r .

4095 , the bill would not disturb the "corrective action plan" provision that p.l .

114-145 had added to the csa .

establishing a n opioid prescription limit .

current federal law does not restrict the particular quantity of opioids that may be prescribed by a practitioner .

the opioid addiction prevention act of 2017 ( s. 892 ) would , among other things , amend the csa to prohibit the dea administrator from registering , or renewing the registration of , a practitioner who is licensed under state law to prescribe controlled substances in schedule ii , iii , or iv , unless the practitioner certifies to the dea that he will not prescribe any schedule ii , iii , or iv opioid for the initial treatment of "acute pain" ( except opioids approved by the fda for treating drug addiction ) in an amount greater than a seven - day supply of the drug ( with no refills allowed ) , or exceeding an opioid prescription limit established under state law , whichever is lesser .

the bill would define "acute pain" to mean "pain with abrupt onset and caused by an injury or other process that is not ongoing" and excludes chronic pain , pain associated with cancer , hospice or other end - of - life care , or pain being treated as part of palliative care .

the cara 2.0 act of 2018 ( s. 2456 ) would also impose a supply limitation on opioid prescriptions , requiring practitioners to certify , as a precondition for dea registration or renewal of registration , that they will not prescribe any opioid ( other than an addiction - treatment opioid ) for the initial treatment of acute pain in an amount exceeding a three - day supply .

medical education and prescriber education initiatives .

358 the safer prescribing of controlled substances act ( s. 1554 ) would , among other things , amend the csa to require physicians , dentists , and scientific investigators who wish to dispense or conduct research with controlled substances to complete training that provides them with information concerning best practices for pain management ( including alternatives to prescribing controlled substances ) , responsible prescribing of opioids , methods for diagnosing and treating substance use disorders , and tools to manage diversion of controlled substances such as prescription drug monitoring programs and the use of drugs to treat opioid overdoses .

the bill would also make such required training a precondition to the dea's granting or renewing the registration of these types of practitioners .

the opioid preventing abuse through continuing education ( pace ) act of 2017 ( h.r .

2063 ) would impose similar practitioner education requirements as a condition for registration to prescribe or dispense opioids , though the specifics of the training differ from s. 1554 .

increasing penalties for fentanyl trafficking .

several bills , including the stop trafficking in fentanyl act of 2017 ( h.r .

1354 ) , the comprehensive fentanyl control act ( h.r .

1781 ) , the stop trafficking in fentanyl act of 2018 ( s. 2481 ) , and the ending the fentanyl crisis act of 2018 ( h.r .

5459 , s. 2635 ) , would reduce the quantity ( in grams ) of fentanyl that triggers mandatory minimum sentences for anyone who , in violation of the csa , knowingly or intentionally manufactures , distributes , or dispenses fentanyl or fentanyl analogues ( or possesses such substances with intent to engage in these prohibited activities ) .

under current law , a trafficking offense involving 400 grams or more of a mixture or substance containing a detectable amount of fentanyl , or 100 grams or more of a mixture or substance containing a detectable amount of a fentanyl analogue , is punishable by a te rm of imprisonment of at least 10 years and up to life in prison ( or a minimum sentence of 20 years to life in prison , if death or serious bodily injury results from the use of the trafficked fentanyl ) .

the bills would reduce these quantities to 20 grams and 5 grams , respectively .

in addition , under current law , a drug trafficking offense involving 40 grams or more of a mixture or substance containing a detectable amount of fentanyl , or 10 grams or more of a mixture or substance containing a detectable amount of a fentanyl analogue , is punishable by a term of imprisonment of at least 5 years but not more than 40 years ( or a minimum of 20 years to life in prison , if death or serious bodily injury results from the use of the trafficked fentanyl ) .

the bills would reduce these quantities to 2 grams and 0.5 grams , respectively .

