on february 9 , 2018 , president trump signed the bipartisan budget act of 2018 into law ( p.l .

115-123 ) .

subtitle b of title iv provided for the creation of a joint select committee on budget and appropriations process reform .

the creation of this committee echoed a number of special panels created by congress in the past in order to study and make recommendations on various issues unconstrained by existing committee jurisdictions .

prior examples include committees tasked with studying a wide spectrum of issues , including both budget process — such as the joint committee to study budget control ( created by p.l .

92-599 ) — and other topics , such as the senate select committee to study governmental operations with respect to intelligence activities ( also known as the church committee after its chairman , senator frank church , created by s.res .

2 , 94 th congress ) .

the act directed the joint select committee to "provide recommendations and legislative language that will significantly reform the budget and appropriations process. .

the act required that the committee be composed of 16 members , with 4 members appointed by each of the speaker of the house , the minority leader of the house , the majority leader of the senate , and the minority leader of the senate .

members were appointed to serve for the life of the committee , with any vacancy to be filled within 14 calendar days .

the act further stated that the committee would be led by cochairs .

one cochair was to be appointed jointly by the speaker of the house and the majority leader of the senate , with the other cochair to be appointed jointly by the house and senate minority leaders .

the four members of the joint select committee appointed by then - speaker paul ryan were house budget committee chairman steve womack ( who served as committee cochair ) , house rules committee chairman pete sessions , and representatives rob woodall and jodey arrington .

the four members appointed by then - house minority leader nancy pelosi were house appropriations committee ranking member nita m. lowey ( who served as committee cochair ) , house budget committee ranking member john yarmuth , and representatives lucille roybal - allard and derek kilmer .

the four members appointed by senate majority leader mitch mcconnell were senators roy blunt , david perdue , james lankford , and joni ernst .

the four members appointed by senate minority leader charles schumer were senators sheldon whitehouse , michael bennet , brian schatz , and mazie hirono .

under the act , the joint select committee terminated on december 31 , 2018 .

federal agencies ( including legislative branch agencies ) were tasked with providing technical assistance to the committee if requested in writing by the cochairs , and employees of the legislative branch could be detailed to the committee on a nonreimbursable basis consistent with the rules and regulations of the senate .

the act provided an authorization for use of not more than $500,000 from the appropriations account for ''expenses of inquiries and investigations'' of the senate with such sums to be disbursed by the secretary of the senate , in accordance with senate rules and procedures , upon vouchers signed by the joint panel's cochairs .

under the act , if the committee had approved a report and legislative language , it would have been required to make them available to the public "promptly" and submit them to the president , the vice president , the speaker of the house , and the majority and minority leaders of each chamber within 15 calendar days of approval .

upon receipt of proposed legislative language , the senate majority leader ( or his designee ) was required to introduce it in the senate ( by request ) on the next day on which the senate was in session .

there were no provisions in the law concerning the introduction of the recommendations of the joint select committee in the house .

the bipartisan budget act established certain unique procedures for senate consideration of any legislative language reported by the joint select committee .

these procedures were intended to allow the senate to reach a timely vote on the question of whether or not to consider legislation embodying the recommendations of the joint select committee , but the act did not specify any procedures governing consideration of the bill once the senate agreed to take it up .

there were no provisions in the act concerning the consideration of the recommendations of the joint select committee in the house .

there were also no provisions concerning resolving any differences between the house and senate or the consideration of a veto message from the president .

such actions would have occurred under the regular procedures of each chamber .

the joint select committee held five days of public hearings .

april 17: current challenges facing the budget and appropriations process in congress and possibilities for improvement ; may 9: challenges of the current procedural framework , particularly as it relates to the ability of members to work effectively and in a bipartisan manner regardless of political dynamics ; may 24: the role of the budget resolution and possible options to bolster its impact and influence on subsequent budgetary actions ; june 27: testimony heard from 27 members of the house and senate ( and written statements received from 5 others ) , including speaker of the house paul ryan and hou se minority leader , nancy pelosi ; july 17: former members' historical perspective on enacting budgetary legislation in the context of the challenges presented by both the politics and the framework of the budget and appropriations process .

the committee held multiple meetings , both formal and informal , to provide its members a forum to discuss reforms to the budget and appropriations process .

these meetings — including working sessions on august 22 , september 13 , and september 26 , 2018 — provided the basis for the recommendations that were subsequently incorporated into draft legislation to be considered by the committee as the cochair's mark .

the cochair's mark included a recommendation that the budget resolution be adopted for a two - year cycle rather than the current annual cycle .

the draft also addressed a number of related concerns , such as allowing reconciliation instructions for both years of a biennium , providing for a revision of the budget resolution in the second session of a congress to update it for scoring purposes , and revising the requirements concerning the submission and content of the president's budget in the second year of a biennium .

the recommendations also provided for a change in the membership of the senate budget committee to be comprised of eight members from the majority and seven members from the minority , including the chairs and ranking members from the appropriations and finance committees , and for the house and senate budget committees to hold a joint hearing on the fiscal state of the nation .

on november 15 , 2018 , the committee began marking up the draft legislation .

in that markup , the committee agreed by unanimous consent to apply a voting rule for the adoption of amendments consistent with the rule required by the act for final adoption of any recommendations .

this agreement required separate majorities of the appointees from each party .

the markup continued on november 27 and 29 .

the final vote on reporting the draft bill , as amended , was not agreed to by a roll - call vote of one aye and seven noes of the members appointed by the speaker of the house and the senate majority leader and seven ayes and zero noes of the members appointed by the house minority leader and the senate minority leader .

