the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) is the nation's largest domestic food assistance program , serving about 42.2 million recipients in an average month at a federal cost of over $68 billion in fy2017 .

it is jointly administered by the federal government and the states and provides means - tested benefits to recipients who are deemed eligible .

these benefits may be used only for eligible foods at any of the approximately 260,000 authorized retailers , which range from independent corner stores to national chain supermarkets .

in a program that operates with so many different stakeholders , detecting , preventing , and addressing errors and fraud is a complex undertaking .

among the complexities are the monitoring of retailer acceptance and recipient use of benefits , the accuracy of information provided by applicant households , and states' performance administering the program .

many governmental entities — federal and state agencies , including both human services and law enforcement — play a role in efforts to detect , prevent , and punish fraudulent snap activities and to reduce inadvertent errors .

snap has typically been reauthorized in a farm bill approximately every five years ; this occurred most recently in 2014 ( p.l .

113-79 ) .

policymakers have long been interested in reducing fraud and improving accuracy in the program , and provisions related to these goals are frequently included in farm bills .

in preparation for the next farm bill , up for reauthorization in september 2018 , policymakers have again begun to discuss error and fraud in the program .

the trump administration has also announced related policy changes .

at the same time , some policymakers defend the program against criticism of its integrity .

to help policymakers navigate this complex set of policy issues , this report seeks to define terms related to errors and fraud ; identify problems and describe what is known of their extent ; summarize current policy and practice ; and share recommendations , proposals , and pilots that have come up in recent years .

the report answers several questions around four main types of inaccuracy and misconduct: ( 1 ) trafficking snap benefits ( by retailers and by recipients ) ; ( 2 ) retailer application fraud ; ( 3 ) errors and fraud in snap household applications ; and ( 4 ) errors and fraud committed by state agencies ( including a discussion of states' recent quality control ( qc ) misconduct ) .

the report then discusses challenges to combating errors and fraud — across the four areas — and potential strategies for addressing those challenges .

certain key ideas that are fundamental to discussion of snap errors and fraud are explored further in the report: errors are not the same as fraud .

fraud is intentional activity that breaks federal and / or state laws , but there are also ways that program stakeholders — particularly recipients and states — may inadvertently err , which could affect benefit amounts .

certain acts , such as trafficking , are always considered fraud , but other acts , such as duplicate enrollment , may be the result of either error or fraud depending on the circumstances of the case .

snap fraud is relatively rare , according to available data and reports .

while this report discusses illegal or inaccurate activities in snap , they represent a relatively small fraction of snap activity overall .

there is no single data point that reflects all the forms of fraud in snap .

the most frequently cited measure of fraud is a national estimate of retailer trafficking , which is a significant , but not the only , type of fraud in the program .

while retailer trafficking and retailer application fraud are pursued primarily by a single federal entity , recipient violations are pursued by 53 different state agencies .

this leads to disparate approaches and disparate reporting .

the national payment error rate ( nper ) is the most - often cited measure of nationwide snap payment accuracy , but it has limitations .

for example , it only reflects errors above an error tolerance threshold .

policies to reduce fraud and increase accuracy can be in tension with other policy objectives , and may have unintended consequences .

policies that make retailer authorization more onerous , for instance , have the potential to decrease participants' access to snap - authorized stores .

making eligibility determinations more complex for recipients can impede recipients' access to the program and could strain states' eligibility determination operations .

implementing better data collection and accountability systems could require more staff and could incur more costs than it reduces .

this report provides a foundation for discussing error and fraud in snap and for evaluating policy proposals .

it does not make independent crs findings , but rather synthesizes the many available resources on error and fraud in snap .

it relies , in particular , on reports and data from the united states department of agriculture's food and nutrition service ( usda - fns ) as well as the published audits of the usda's office of the inspector general ( usda - oig ) and the government accountability office ( gao ) .

for a list of abbreviations used in this report , see appendix a .

this section defines each of the types of intentional fraud and unintentional errors committed by recipients , retailers , and state agencies , including retailer trafficking ( fraud ) , recipient trafficking ( fraud ) , retailer application fraud , recipient application fraud , recipient errors , agency errors , state agency employee fraud , and state agency fraud .

state and federal efforts to detect and correct errors , as well as efforts to detect and deter fraud , are detailed in this section .

snap has long had policies and procedures in place for measuring improper payments — largely , the program's quality control ( qc ) system .

qc is currently the basis for levying financial penalties from low - performing states and providing financial performance incentives for the higher - performing and most improved states .

in june 2018 , following concerns that there had been misreporting of errors , usda - fns released a fy2017 nper under new quality control procedures .

this section reviews qc and these developments .

over time , usda - fns , snap state agencies , usda - oig , gao , and other stakeholders have identified issues that may complicate or impede the detection and correction of errors and fraud in snap .

these kinds of issues can stem from shortcomings or gaps in existing regulation and law , as well as complexities in the fundamental design of the program itself .

in addition , stakeholders have proposed strategies to address these kinds of issues and further curb errors and fraud in snap .

these include , for example , proposed rulemaking actions , proposed statutory changes , and state pilots .

changes that strengthen payment accuracy and punishments against fraud can be in tension with other policy objectives , such as preserving recipient access to the program , and may have unintended consequences such as incurring costs greater than their savings .

balancing program objectives such as these is always a consideration for policymakers in this area .

according to snap rules , if a store is permanently disqualified from participating in snap and later that store's owner applies to participate in snap at a new store , then usda - fns will deny the new store's application .

due to a longstanding usda - fns policy , however , store owners who own multiple stores that participate in snap have been able to remain in the program with some of their stores despite a permanent disqualification at another of their stores .

this usda - fns policy , identified and examined in the july 2013 usda - oig report , was intended to prevent the elimination of whole chains of stores from the program as a result of violations at one store .

however , the policy has been applied beyond chain stores , and usda - oig identified it as a weakness in efforts to combat trafficking .

in the july 2013 report , usda - oig identified 586 store owners who remained in snap due to this policy despite their association with a permanently disqualified store ; 66 of these owners were found to have obtained snap authorization at new stores .

in the july 2013 report , usda - oig proposed that usda - fns make a change to snap regulations and usda - fns policy to allow for the permanent disqualification or denial of all current or future stores , respectively , associated with an owner of a store that is permanently disqualified for retailer trafficking unless the retailer can meet certain criteria .

usda - fns responded to usda - oig with an alternative policy that would impose collateral requirements for these owners .

 ( under current law , collateral bonds or letters of credit are required as a condition of participation in snap for stores that have been subjected to a term disqualification .

these are held as collateral against the retailer committing future violations. ) .

usda - fns suggested requiring a bond or letter of credit for all authorized stores associated with a permanently disqualified owner and for new stores when such stores have an owner associated with a store permanently disqualified for trafficking .

usda - oig indicated that it considered this usda - fns alternative to its disqualification recommendations inadequate , noting "[w]e believe that continuing to allow known traffickers to participate in snap will undermine program integrity. .

as of the date of this report , none of these proposed policy changes have been implemented .

an estimated $1.1 billion in snap benefits were trafficked annually at stores , but in fy2016 , usda - fns fined trafficking retailers only about $7.5 million .

monetary penalties can discourage retailers from engaging in trafficking and also help recoup federal funds lost to fraud .

for these reasons , changes to snap rules have been proposed to augment the monetary penalties assessed against trafficking retailers .

increasing transfer of ownership civil money penalties — the 2008 farm bill modified the fna to increase civil monetary penalties against retailers that break snap rules to a maximum of $100,000 per violation .

if a retailer that has been permanently disqualified for trafficking snap benefits subsequently sells or transfers ownership of a store , then usda - fns assesses that retailer a "transfer of ownership civil money penalty" ( tocmp ) .

this is currently the primary financial penalty assessed by usda - fns against retailers found to have engaged in trafficking .

in august 2012 , usda - fns published a notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) to implement the 2008 farm bill change .

this notice stated that existing limits used by usda - fns were $11,000 per violation and $59,000 per investigation , and that this rulemaking action would increase these limits to up to $100,000 per violation per the intent of congress expressed in the 2008 farm bill .

as of the date of this report , this rulemaking action is inactive ( see table b - 1 in appendix b ) .

because this change in the limits on tocmps has not been implemented , usda - fns continues to assess tocmps according to the limits in place before the passage of the 2008 farm bill ( i.e. , $11,000 per violation and $59,000 per investigation ) .

in fy2016 , the mean value of tocmps assessed by usda - fns was $29,284 , about half of the limit per investigation .

implementation of these changes in the maximum limits on tocmps could represent a nearly tenfold increase in the penalty amounts for permanently disqualified retailers engaged in a high volume of snap business , potentially increasing the penalties' deterrent effect .

creating additional civil money penalties — currently , usda - fns only fines a limited share of trafficking retailers .

firms permanently disqualified for trafficking are subject to a tocmp when usda - fns becomes aware that the permanently disqualified store owner has sold a store , but usda - fns can only become aware of such a sale when , and if , the new store owner applies for snap authorization .

for every retailer assessed a tocmp in fy2016 , more than seven retailers were permanently disqualified for trafficking .

ultimately this means that the overwhelming majority of store owners found by usda - fns to have committed and materially benefited from retailer trafficking are subject to no monetary penalty at all .

usda - fns proposed to create a new kind of monetary penalty , the trafficking civil penalty ( tcp ) , in the august 2012 usda - fns nprm .

under this proposal , a retailer permanently disqualified for trafficking would be subject to this new kind of fine , the size of which would be based on the retailer's volume of fraud , as it is for a tocmp .

establishing this new fine would provide an immediate monetary penalty at the time of permanent disqualification to further deter retailers from engaging in trafficking activity and recoup misappropriated federal funds .

as of the date of this report , this rulemaking action is inactive ( see table b - 1 in appendix b ) and usda - fns is not assessing this new kind of fine .

prior to september 2014 , about half of all snap - authorized retailers ( including many smaller independent retailers ) used free ebt - only point of sale ( pos ) devices provided by their state's ebt host processors .

transaction data for purchases made at these free ebt - only pos devices went directly to ebt host processors and then to usda - fns .

usda - fns uses this transaction data to detect retailer trafficking activity .

the 2014 farm bill modified the fna to require that all nonexempt retailers pay for their own ebt equipment and services .

since this change , most stores now work with third - party companies that provide pos equipment and services for a fee .

the introduction of these unregulated intermediary entities has complicated usda - fns's efforts to detect retailer trafficking , and has also facilitated new forms of fraud .

for example , in 2017 , an account executive for a third party processor was sentenced to prison , to be followed by supervised release , and was ordered to pay restitution for his role in illegally providing 50 unauthorized stores with active snap ebt point - of - sale devices which were used to redeem about $6.5 million in benefits ( at least eight of these stores were found to engaged in retailer trafficking ) .

since 1994 , retailers applying to participate in the program have been required to meet stocking standards which mandate a minimum of 12 food items .

in an october 2006 gao report on trafficking , these minimal stocking requirements were identified as a factor potentially contributing to retailer trafficking , as the standards may make it easier for small , fraud - prone retailers that do not primarily sell food to enter the program .

in addition , the september 2017 usda - fns retailer trafficking study identified a correlation between an increase in small stores ( eg , convenience stores ) in the program and an increase in retailer trafficking ( for more information , see appendix d ) .

as a result , increasing stocking standards has been proposed as a strategy to curb retailer trafficking .

the 2014 farm bill modified the fna to enhance retailer stocking standards for participating stores .

the december 2016 usda - fns final rule implemented these changes and included several other provisions that would have significantly increased stocking standards for retailers ; however , section 765 of the consolidated appropriations act of 2017 ( 2017 omnibus , p.l .

115-31 ) prevented full implementation of this rule .

on january 17 , 2018 , usda - fns began implementing the remaining provisions of the december 2016 usda - fns final rule .

current implementation requires a modest increase to the number of items stocked ( from 12 to 36 food items ) but not as much as would have been required by the final rule before the 2017 omnibus ( 84 food items ) .

some retailers have been found to have delayed the disqualification process for their stores , enabling them to continue trafficking .

between the usda - fns official notification of trafficking charges and the permanent disqualification for trafficking , there are a number of administrative steps .

until final implementation of a permanent disqualification , the retailer may continue to participate in the program , accepting and redeeming snap benefits .

according to usda - fns , some charged retailers exploit the delay created by these administrative steps in order to continue ( or even accelerate ) their trafficking of snap benefits , sometimes remaining in the program for months .

the 2008 farm bill modified the fna to require usda - fns to utilize the ebt system to immediately suspend the payment of redeemed snap benefits to stores determined to be engaged in this "flagrant" retailer trafficking .

a february 2013 usda - fns nprm included a provision to implement this 2008 farm bill requirement , but , as of the date of this report , this rulemaking action is inactive ( see table b - 1 in appendix b ) .

when a store applies for authorization to participate in snap , usda - fns internally assigns that store a risk status ( i.e. , high , medium , or low ) based on retailer trafficking data for the location and area .

if a new store applies at a physical address associated with past retailer trafficking , that new store is more likely to be considered "high risk. .

in a july 2013 report , usda - oig noted that certain high - risk store locations evidence a pattern of retailer trafficking that continues under new ownership .

usda - oig recommended requiring a bond or letter of credit as a precondition of snap authorization at high - risk store locations , which would require statutory changes .

while some have argued that placing recipient photographs on ebt cards would reduce trafficking , specifically the sale of cards between recipients and unauthorized use of cards at authorized stores , there are operational and access challenges to this strategy .

since 1996 , state agencies have had the option to require photographs of one or more snap household members on the household's ebt card ( s ) .

this state option is known as "photo ebt. .

like snap benefits , ebt cards are issued to households , not to individuals .

also , households may appoint authorized representatives ( outside of the household ) to use their ebt cards to shop on the households' behalf .

as a result , a photo ebt card might only bear the image of the head of a household despite the fact that all members of the household can use the card .

similarly , an authorized representative may use a card that does not have the representative's picture on it .

retailers therefore cannot legally deny a snap transaction just because the user does not match the photo on the card .

additionally , some advocates point out that photo ebt has shown some adverse effects on recipient access .

a number of states have considered or implemented photo ebt since 1996 .

states' evaluations of photo ebt have generally concluded that the option has or would have little to no effect on recipient trafficking .

though evidence of reduced trafficking is lacking , two states , maine and massachusetts , currently implement photo ebt .

maine contended that it "[strengthens] the integrity of our public assistance programs. .

the implementation of photo ebt in a state requires both upfront and ongoing costs to the state and federal government .

upfront costs generally exceed ongoing costs , and ongoing costs generally increase over time .

state estimates and actual expenditures on the cost of photo ebt vary widely .

as an example , in 2000 , missouri enacted a state law mandating photo ebt , and the office of the missouri state auditor evaluated the option in august 2001 .

this audit determined that in the first year of implementation , photo ebt effected no fraud reduction , cost $1,801,858 ( $947,280 federal costs and $854,578 state costs ) , and should be discontinued .

in 2001 , missouri discontinued its use of photo ebt .

in reviewing 14 states that have considered photo ebt implementation since 2001 , upfront costs range from about $1.6 million in new hampshire ( 2016 ) to about $25.1 million in north carolina ( 2011 ) .

estimates of ongoing annual costs vary across an even wider range , from approximately $65,000 in virginia ( 2017 ) to $8.4 million in arizona ( 2016 ) .

there is currently no single standard measurement of recipient fraud ( neither recipient trafficking nor recipient application fraud ) .

in the absence of a national recipient trafficking rate , it is difficult to observe trends and evaluate the effectiveness of enforcement strategies .

both gao and usda - oig have commented on the significance of this shortcoming and recommended changes to allow for the creation of a national recipient trafficking rate akin to the national retailer trafficking rate .

based on usda - fns analysis , however , gao found it is infeasible to create a uniform methodology for states to calculate a national recipient trafficking rate without statutory changes to require and enable usda - fns and state agencies to assign sufficient resources to this issue .

usda - fns echoed these feasibility concerns in a may 2014 evaluation .

additional authority and resources to develop a recipient trafficking rate might allow usda - fns to do some or all of the following: conduct and publish a study of recipient trafficking of snap benefits using currently existing data , including a national recipient trafficking rate ; determine and document what changes must be made to current regulations , forms , policies , and practices to standardize state agency reporting and calculation of recipient trafficking , including at minimum the definition of relevant terms ( eg , definition of "investigation" ) , the annual timeframes , and the data sources for compilation of recipient trafficking data ; and implement the identified changes necessary to reliably and accurately document the national recipient trafficking rate .

usda - fns provides financial incentives to state agencies to reward high performance .

these bonuses reward states with low error rates but do not reward states that effectively detect and penalize recipient trafficking .

in april 2014 , usda - fns published a request for information ( rfi ) soliciting comment on ways to modify performance bonuses for state agencies , including creating bonuses related to activities targeting recipient trafficking .

the july 2016 gao report also found that usda - fns does not sufficiently incentivize state agencies to pursue recipient trafficking cases .

the report stated , "to help address the increased caseloads and the resources needed to conduct investigations , we recommended that usda explore ways that federal financial incentives could be used to better support cost - effective anti - fraud strategies .

at this time , fns has decided not to pursue bonus awards for anti - fraud and program integrity activities. .

establishing a standard to measure performance for these bonuses would likely require the establishment of a national recipient trafficking rate as discussed earlier in this section .

additionally , as stated earlier , state agencies establish and collect claims against recipients who traffic snap benefits .

if a state agency collects on a claim resulting from fraud , such as recipient trafficking , the state agency is entitled to retain 35% of the amount collected .

the august 2014 gao report suggested that increasing this retention rate and restricting the use of retained funds to state agency anti - fraud activities could significantly enhance efforts to combat recipient trafficking , noting that the strategy "may result in a net savings for snap if increased collections in payment recoveries outweigh the increased amount states receive in retentions. .

implementation of this strategy may require statutory change .

usda - fns oversees state agency administration of snap , and one of the primary tools used in this federal oversight is the management evaluation ( me ) .

usda - fns conducts annual management evaluations on high priority areas and triennial reviews on lower priority areas .

if a state agency is found to be out of compliance with snap rules , then a corrective action plan ( cap ) will be developed and usda - fns will work with the state agency to improve compliance .

a january 2012 usda - oig report noted that usda - fns did not utilize management evaluations to assess the effectiveness of state agencies' efforts to detect and penalize recipient trafficking .

in response , usda - fns created a "recipient integrity" management evaluation in fy2012 which it currently uses to evaluate state agencies every three years .

state agencies are responsible for investigating recipient trafficking , and usda - fns is responsible for investigating retailer trafficking .

a large share of trafficking , however , results from collusion between recipients and retailers .

if a state agency is made aware that a store in its jurisdiction is engaged in retailer trafficking , it can place the store under surveillance and build cases against recipients engaged in trafficking at that location .

usually , however , state agencies have no such opportunity .

usda - fns provides retailer trafficking cases to state agencies only after completing the agency administrative and appeal process .

by the time the state agency is made aware of a retailer trafficking case , the store has ceased accepting snap and has often closed .

at that point , meaningful surveillance of the store cannot be performed and ebt transaction data cannot be corroborated with other forms of hard evidence .

it is important to note , however , that providing state agencies with advance notification regarding ongoing usda - fns investigations of retailers may jeopardize these investigations .

retailer and recipient trafficking proceedings have different burdens of proof ; therefore , governments will not necessarily prevail in both cases with the same evidence .

accepting snap benefits as a form of payment is not an entitlement for retailers .

to disqualify a snap retailer for a violation of snap rules , usda - fns must only meet a lower - level burden of proof — the "preponderance of the evidence" standard .

receiving snap benefits is an entitlement for eligible individuals .

to disqualify a snap recipient for fraud , a state agency must meet a higher - level burden of proof — the "clear and convincing evidence" standard .

this means that evidence deemed sufficient to prove retailer trafficking may not be sufficient to prove recipient trafficking .

indeed , over 84% of the usda - fns retailer trafficking cases that resulted in a permanent disqualification in fy2016 relied primarily on an analysis of suspicious transaction patterns based on anti - fraud locator using ebt retailer transactions ( alert ) system data .

these ebt transaction data , on their own , are not generally considered sufficient grounds for the disqualification of snap recipients .

for this reason , state agencies often have difficulty disqualifying recipients whose ebt cards were used in transactions flagged as trafficking by alert transaction data analysis , absent other evidence of recipient trafficking .

grants to states for integrity activities , established by section 4029 of the 2014 farm bill , were awarded in fy2014 and fy2015 but not in fy2016 or fy2017 .

usda - fns is currently developing a "snap fraud framework," which combines best practices for fraud prevention gathered by usda - fns over several years from federal , state , and private partners .

usda - fns plans to launch the snap fraud framework in fy2018 and to offer states grant opportunities using this funding to implement the framework .

usda - fns is responsible for reviewing the applications submitted by retailers and ensuring that retailers authorized to participate in snap meet all eligibility requirements .

included in these applications are store owners' personal information , including but not limited to owners' social security numbers ( ssns ) , but usda - fns is statutorily limited in how it can use these ssns .

during the application process , retailers provide usda - fns with the ssns of all store owners .

usda - oig compared these retailer - submitted ssns to the social security administration's death master file to identify store owners using ssns that matched the ssns of deceased individuals .

in a january 2017 usda - oig report , 3,394 stores were found to have at least one owner using an ssa - dmf matched ssn , and 346 of these stores were found to have all owners using ssa - dmf matched ssns .

usda - oig recommended that usda - fns follow up with these 3,394 retailers and implement a new workflow process to check retailer - submitted ssns on an ongoing basis .

in the agency response to the report , usda - fns addressed these 3,394 identified retailers , but also identified the statutory barrier to this proposed change , stating: "fns recognizes the value in conducting a dmf match on an on - going basis .

as such , should fns be granted future authority to use ssn for matching purposes , fns will match to the ssa dmf using ssn on an on - going basis. .

as of the date of this report , usda - fns does not verify retailer - submitted ssns or match against the ssa - dmf due to this statutory restriction .

implementation of this change would require modification to the social security act .

in the july 2013 report , usda - oig recommended that usda - fns use other methods to verify applicant retailer information such as memoranda of understanding ( mous ) with state licensing agencies .

usda - fns proposed instead to test the use of data brokers to complement existing techniques used to verify retailer applicant information .

in 2014 , usda - fns conducted four pilots testing the use of data brokers and determined that it had low return on investment , in part due to usda - fns's inability to utilize applicant retailers' ssns in data matches .

store owners who have been convicted of certain crimes will be denied authorization to participate in snap for lack of business integrity if they declare the past conviction when applying .

however , usda - fns is not currently able to verify the information provided by the retailer if he / she chooses to falsify the application and conceal past criminal convictions .

a september 2008 usda - oig report suggested that usda - fns utilize the interstate identification index ( iii ) of the national crime information center ( ncic ) to perform background checks on retailers applying to participate in snap .

the july 2013 usda - oig report repeated this recommendation , finding three owners who failed to disclose past criminal convictions on their application for snap authorization out of a sample of 212 owners ( all three were later permanently disqualified for retailer trafficking ) .

in response , usda - fns agreed to initiate a proposed rulemaking action to require retailer applicants and currently authorized retailers deemed "high risk" to provide usda - fns with a self - initiated background check .

however , usda - fns does not currently have the statutory authority to compel retailer applicants to submit background checks .

as of the date of this report , this rulemaking action is "inactive" ( see table b - 1 in appendix b ) .

the august 2012 and february 2013 usda - fns nprms contained four provisions addressing shortcomings in existing retailer application regulations .

these proposed rules are currently "inactive" ( see table b - 1 in appendix b ) .

proposed changes included the following: retailers failing to report changes in ownership — currently , authorized retailers are required to report any changes in the ownership of their stores , but there is currently no penalty for noncompliance .

to deter retailer noncompliance , usda - fns proposed to subject to a six - month disqualification any retailer that failed to report ownership changes to usda - fns within 10 days of the change .

disqualified snap recipients applying to become snap - authorized retailers — under current snap rules , usda - fns may not deny the application of a retailer who was permanently disqualified from snap as a recipient for fraud on business integrity grounds .

usda - fns proposed to add recipient fraud to the definition of business integrity standards , "because a person , who violates program rules as a recipient , lacks the necessary business integrity and responsibility expected of a store owner who must train employees and oversee operations to ensure that snap ebt transactions are conducted in accordance with department rules. .

data matches with the usda - fns electronic disqualified recipient system ( edrs ) are needed to determine whether individuals are disqualified from receiving snap benefits , and such matches rely on the use of individuals' ssns ; therefore , usda - fns would have difficulty implementing this provision due to statutory restrictions on allowable uses of applicant retailers' ssns .

illegal retailer - to - retailer transfers of snap authorization — authorized retailers are prohibited from transferring the snap authorization of their stores to a new owner in the event of a sale , and retailers are prohibited from accepting snap benefits without first applying for and obtaining snap authorization .

under current regulations , if a retailer sells the authorization and a retailer buyer uses it , usda - fns penalizes the buyer but not the seller .

to address illegal collusion on the part of the seller and curtail unauthorized snap redemptions , usda - fns proposed to subject the seller to two penalties: permanent snap retailer ineligibility ( for all current and future stores ) and a fine equal to that of the buyer ( under current regulations ) .

retailers' failure to pay fines , claims , or fiscal penalties — current snap regulations allow usda - fns , on the basis of business integrity , to deny or withdraw the authorization of retailers who fail to pay certain fiscal claims or fines .

usda - fns proposed to allow the agency to deny or withdraw the authorization of retailers who fail to pay any fine , claim , or fiscal penalty assessed against them under 7 c.f.r .

§278 when such debts become delinquent .

in the june 2016 gao report , gao recommended that federal financial incentives should be restructured to encourage effective pre - certification investigations "because some investigative agencies were not rewarded for cost - effective , anti - fraud efforts that could prevent ineligible people from receiving benefits. .

as this report noted , "when fraud by a recipient is discovered , the state may generally retain 35 percent of the recovered overpayment , but when a state detects potential fraud by an applicant and denies the application , there are no payments to recover. .

according to fy2016 state activity report data , about half of the state agencies dedicated minimal resources to pre - certification investigations .

the five state agencies that engaged in the most extensive pre - certification investigation activity represented 96% of these investigations despite serving only 32% of all snap participants in fy2016 .

together , the five states reported about $369 million in prevented improper federal expenditure through these efforts .

with incentives , it is possible that more states would dedicate resources to conducting pre - certification investigations to find error and fraud on a regular basis .

as one might expect , it is challenging to recover overpayments from poor and near - poor households .

establishing and collecting claims is the primary way that overpayments are recovered ; and , while state agencies have improved the rate of claims establishment since fy2005 , states' efforts to actually collect on these claims have not likewise improved .

from fy2005 to fy2014: the total annual dollar value of claims established has increased from about 20% to about 28% of the total annual dollar value of estimated overpayments ; this improvement indicates increased claims establishment activity by state agencies .

the total annual dollar value of claims collected has remained around 16% of the total annual dollar value of estimated overpayments ; this reflects persistent difficulties in claim collection .

figure 5 reflects these trends .

this was a finding in the august 2014 gao report and , furthermore , "[s]tates' difficulty collecting overpayments compounds their concerns about having adequate resources for investigations because some states use recovered overpayments for this purpose. .

the gao report did not provide strategies for how states might address this concern .

individuals are not allowed to apply for or receive benefits from more than one state agency at a time .

it is important to note , however , that duplicate enrollment may be indicative of either an error or fraud depending on the circumstances of the case .

duplicate enrollment ( or "dual participation" ) results in a 10-year disqualification from snap if it is due to intentional fraud .

some state agencies detect duplicate enrollment through exchanging enrollment data with neighboring states .

as of the october 2016 gao report , massachusetts and new york , for example , had such an arrangement .

the national accuracy clearinghouse ( nac ) is a significant effort to detect and prevent duplicate enrollment .

the nac was funded as a pilot by the u.s. office of management and budget ( omb ) partnership for program integrity and innovation from april 2013 until may 2015 .

the nac gathers and analyzes snap state enrollment data from five participating states .

since the conclusion of the pilot in may 2015 , these five states have continued nac operations .

in practice , the nac is another data match performed during certification .

nac matches are not considered verified upon receipt , so additional steps are necessary to confirm matches .

an evaluation of nac published in october 2015 documented several elements of nac's performance , outcomes , and costs , including the following: in may 2014 , prior to implementation , 10,076 instances of duplicate enrollment across the five states were identified .

one year later , in may 2015 , duplicate enrollment in these five states had been reduced by almost 50% ( 5,464 instances identified ) .

using nac is estimated to have prevented about $548,336 in monthly overpayments during the pilot year , with monthly state agency work effort costs totaling $81,913 ( resulting in about $6.69 in monthly overpayments prevented for every $1.00 spent monthly ) .

in the first year , using nac produced an estimated annualized savings of $5,597,076 ( less the $669,331 spent on one - time startup costs ) .

nationalizing nac has been estimated to result in $114,072,753 in annual savings .

costs of setting up and utilizing nac for the first year came to about $1,652,287 for all five participating states .

usda - fns provides federal matching funds for states' program administration costs , including costs of nac participation .

during the 115 th congress , the house passed an emergency supplemental appropriations bill , which included a provision that would have required the expansion of nac to all states ( section 3003 of h.r .

4667 ; however , this provision was not included in the emergency supplemental appropriations which became law ( bipartisan budget act of 2018 , p.l .

115-123 ) .

as discussed earlier , states are required to conduct certain data matches to verify household application information , and many opt to include additional data sources .

there are arguments for and against expanding states' use of additional data matches .

while verifying household data to high - fidelity sources seems compelling , the use of matching to less authoritative data can require additional employee hours and might introduce the errors it seeks to prevent .

implementing new data matches may require large upfront investments and ongoing costs to state agencies .

non - verified upon receipt data matches may necessitate additional manual follow - up , which can create even more cost and delay .

as a result , state agencies prefer to use verified upon receipt data matches whenever possible .

however , only one of the six federally required databases is considered verified upon receipt .

in comments published in response to usda - fns rulemaking implementing the statutorily mandated data matches , some states pointed out that the implementation of these data matches is burdensome on state agencies while providing minimal cost avoidance due to the rarity of matches and the effort needed to verify them .

a range of anecdotal evidence also points to the limited return on investment for the non - verified upon receipt of federally mandated data matches .

in a 2017 series of usda - oig audits of five states' compliance with federal requirements for state agencies , usda - oig found that all five were improperly handling a mandatory ssa - pvs data match .

at least one state explicitly stated that it elected not to perform the mandatory match due to perceived low return on investment .

some optional data matches are widely used and considered worthwhile by state agencies , while other verified upon receipt and useful non - verified upon receipt data matches are arguably underutilized .

although not federally mandated , ssa benefit program databases were utilized and considered useful by all state agencies surveyed in the october 2016 gao report , because these data matches provide verified upon receipt data on unearned income .

matches with state systems that provide verified upon receipt data on eligibility and income were used by many , but not all , state agencies .

in some cases , statutory obstacles prevent using existing federal data sources , such as the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) federal data services hub ( the hub ) , which consolidates various sources of earned and unearned income data matching .

some state agencies were concerned that the same data match services are being paid for twice , once for snap and once for medicaid , often for the same beneficiaries .

in 2017 , certain states have piloted data sharing agreements to utilize these federal data services hubs for snap .

earned income may be especially difficult to verify through data matching , and the costs associated with these matches may be prohibitive .

currently , state agencies contract individually with the work number , but usda - fns has proposed negotiating a single contract that would make the service available for all state agencies at a greatly reduced cost per match .

according to the october 2016 gao report , usda - fns has not done enough to encourage state agencies to adopt best practices in data matching .

this includes explaining technical improvements such as unifying data sources into a centralized portal ( data brokering ) and publicizing the methods and successes of pilot projects like nac .

the september 2015 usda - oig report stated that the primary vulnerability of the qc system was its "two - tier" structure .

usda - oig argued that because a state calculates its own sper , it has the means to manipulate the outcome of the qc process , and because a state stands to benefit from a low sper , it has the motive to commit this fraud .

usda - oig recommended the adoption of a "one - tier" qc process conducted exclusively by usda - fns .

usda - fns noted that a one - tier qc system could create additional federal cost .

appendix a. glossary of abbreviations appendix b .

"inactive" usda - fns rules in the last 10 years , the u.s. department of agriculture food and nutrition service ( usda - fns ) had started to draft new rules in response to direction in federal law and usda office of the inspector general ( usda - oig ) audit findings , and at their own initiative .

currently , none of the regulatory initiatives discussed in this appendix have been completed .

before usda - fns's actions were suspended , they were in various stages of the regulatory process , which occurs as follows: in order to codify a federal regulation in the code of federal regulations ( c.f.r .

 ) , the following steps must generally be completed: a regulatory work plan must be submitted to the office of management and budget ( omb ) and omb must assign the rulemaking action a regulatory identification number ( rin ) , adding the rin to omb's unified agenda ( ua ) ; a notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) generally must be published by the rulemaking agency in the federal register ( fr ) with a comment period open to the public ; and the rulemaking agency must consider the comments , make necessary changes to the rulemaking action , and then publish the final rule in the fr .

along with other rulemaking actions , usda rules had been in a "pending" status and had not been made available to the public .

the trump administration made these rules public in july 2017 and termed them "inactive. .

appendix c. optional income data matches data matching is used during the snap certification process to help make snap eligibility determinations and , if appropriate , designate the benefit allotment amounts for applicant households .

in addition to the mandatory data matches discussed earlier in this report , states have many additional federal , state , and local data sources that they might use to verify household income data .

this appendix lists some additional data matches that are discussed in related audit reports and state - specific policy manuals .

their verified upon receipt status varies .

optional federal income data matches social security administration ( ssa ) benefit programs databases — state agencies can match with ssa databases to verify an applicant's unearned income from these ssa programs .

these are verified upon receipt data matches .

they are conducted and considered moderately or extremely useful by 51 of the 51 state agencies surveyed ( 50 states plus d.c. ) in october 2016 .

ssa beneficiary earnings exchange record ( beer ) — state agencies can match with ssa - beer to verify income based on internal revenue service ( irs ) earnings and tax data .

this is a non - verified upon receipt data match .

it is conducted by 24 of the 51 state agencies and considered moderately or extremely useful by only 10 of those using it .

u.s. department of health and human services administration for children and families ( hhs - acf ) public assistance reporting information system ( paris ) — state agencies can match with hhs - acf - paris to verify an applicant's earned and unearned income from public assistance and federal employment or retirement .

these are non - verified upon receipt data matches .

the hhs - acf - paris interstate match file is conducted by 40 of the 51 state agencies and considered moderately or extremely useful by 31 of those using it .

the hhs - acf - paris federal / va file matches are conducted by 31 of the 51 state agencies and considered moderately or extremely useful by 20 of those using them .

the work number — state agencies can match with this commercial verification service operated by equifax , inc. ( for a fee ) to obtain payroll information from participating retailers ( covering about 35% - 40% of working population ) to verify an applicant's earned income .

this is a non - verified upon receipt data match .

it is used by 45 of the 51 state agencies and considered moderately or extremely useful by 43 of those using it .

hhs - acf national directory of new hires ( ndnh ) unemployment insurance and quarterly wage files — these data matches are distinct from the mandatory hhs - acf - ndnh new hire file match .

the unemployment insurance file compiles information from state workforce agencies regarding unearned income , and the quarterly wage file compiles information from state workforce agencies regarding earned income .

these are non - verified upon receipt data matches .

the former is used by 9 of the 51 state agencies and the latter by 4 of the 51 .

optional state income data matches state unemployment insurance benefits ( uib ) database — state agencies can match with state workforce agencies that administer uib to verify applicants' unearned income .

this is generally a verified upon receipt data match .

it is conducted by 49 of the 51 state agencies surveyed in october 2016 and considered moderately or extremely useful by 48 of those using it .

child support payments database — state agencies can match with state human or social services agencies that administer and enforce child support payments to verify applicants' unearned income .

this is generally a verified upon receipt data match .

it is conducted by 47 of the 51 state agencies and considered moderately or extremely useful by 46 of those using it .

state wage information collection agency ( swica ) database — state agencies can match with swicas that gather quarterly wage and new hire data from employers to verify applicants' earned income .

this is the state equivalent of the hhs - acf - ndnh .

these are non - verified upon receipt data matches .

the former is conducted by 45 of the 51 state agencies and considered moderately or extremely useful by 31 of those using it ; the latter is conducted by 36 of the 51 state agencies and considered moderately or extremely useful by 23 of those using it .

state day care license database — state agencies can match with state human or social services agencies that license day care workers and facilities to verify applicants' earned income .

this is generally a verified upon receipt data match .

it is conducted by 11 of the 51 state agencies .

state taxpayer database — state agencies can match with state taxation agencies to verify applicants' unearned and earned income .

this is generally a verified upon receipt data match .

it is conducted by 7 of the 51 state agencies .

database of income verified by other state programs — state agencies can match with state human or social services agencies that administer other means - tested programs to verify applicants' unearned and earned income .

this is generally a verified upon receipt data match .

it is conducted by 42 of the 51 state agencies and considered moderately or extremely useful by 38 of those using it .

appendix d. trends in retailer trafficking and convenience store participation in snap the following three tables include crs calculations based on data from u.s. department of agriculture food and nutrition service ( usda - fns ) retailer management reports , the last three retailer trafficking studies , and other agency sources .

table d - 1 compares the growth in total stores participating in snap with the growth of convenience stores ( "c - stores" ) participating in the program .

from fy2007 to fy2016 , convenience stores have grown from about 36% of all stores in the program to about 46% .

the national retailer trafficking rate represents the proportion of snap benefits redeemed that were trafficked at stores , and the national store violation rate represents the proportion of authorized stores that were estimated to have engaged in trafficking .

table d - 2 compares these two rates for all stores with these rates for convenience stores .

across the nine years examined in the three studies , the convenience store retailer trafficking rates have been more than 1000% of the national retailer trafficking rates , and the convenience store violation rates have been more than 150% of the national store violation rates .

table d - 3 displays data regarding the convenience store share of total redemptions and data regarding the estimated convenience store share of total trafficking .

across the nine years examined in these three studies , convenience stores' shares of redemptions have not exceeded 5% of total redemptions and convenience store shares of trafficking have averaged more than half of total trafficking .

appendix e. payment error rate information this appendix provides a state - by - state summary of payment - error related data from fy2010-fy2014 , including state payment error rates ( spers ) , high - performance bonuses , and liabilities for low performance .

table e - 1 shows the states' annual rates and whether the state received an award or a sanction , while table e - 2 displays the amounts of awards and sanctions .

using alabama as an example , according to the first table the state received a bonus in fy2012 based on a 1.85% sper , and according to the second table that award amount was approximately $1.9 million .

