when a bill is enacted into law , it may amend or repeal earlier laws , or it may create an entirely new or "freestanding" law .

recently enacted laws are first printed individually as separate statutes known as "slip laws. .

at the end of a congress , the slip laws are sequentially compiled in the annual federal session law volumes known as the united states statutes at large .

most statutes are then broken down by subject matter and incorporated into the 54 volumes and five appendices of the united states code .

this report provides an overview of federal statutes in each of these forms , as well as basic guidance for congressional staff researching statutes .

when an individual piece of legislation is enacted under the procedures set forth in article i , section 7 of the u.s. constitution , it is characterized as a "public law" or a "private law" depending on its intended audience .

the overwhelming majority of laws passed by congress are public laws because they have general applicability to the whole of society and are continuing and permanent in nature .

private laws are enacted for the benefit of a named individual or entity ( for example , private laws can be enacted to assist a citizen injured by a government program ) .

each newly passed law — public or private — is assigned a number according to the order of its enactment within a particular congress .

this system began in 1957 with the 85 th congress .

laws enacted prior to 1957 are cited by the date of enactment and the chapter number assigned to them in the statutes at large , discussed further below .

when researchers want to obtain a copy of a newly enacted law , they will most likely be looking for the "slip law. .

a slip law is the first official publication of a public or private law , prepared by the office of the federal register ( ofr ) , and published by the government publishing office ( gpo ) .

every two years at the end of a congressional session , slip laws ( both public and private laws ) are accumulated and published chronologically in a series of volumes entitled the united states statutes at large ( statutes at large ) .

the statutes at large also contain concurrent resolutions , reorganization plans , proposed and ratified amendments to the constitution , and proclamations by the president .

until 1948 , treaties and international agreements approved by the senate were also published in the statutes at large .

laws are cited by the statutes at large volume and page number ( eg , 125 stat .

753 refers to page 753 of volume 125 of the statutes at large ) .

the printed edition of the statutes at large is "legal evidence of the laws...in all the courts of the united states" and thus researchers may likely refer to this publication when citing a law before a court .

the united states code ( u.s. code or u.s.c. ) .

is the official government codification of all general and permanent laws of the united states .

the u.s. code has its roots in an 1866 law that initiated a project to "revise , simplify , arrange , and consolidate all statutes of the united states , general and permanent in their nature...." this endeavor was not fully realized until 1874 , when the revised statutes of 1874 became the first official codification of u.s. laws .

a second edition making corrections and updates followed in 1878 .

however , despite numerous efforts to supplement and revise inaccuracies in the revised statutes , the publication contained errors .

the revised statutes were also not updated regularly , making it difficult to know if a particular law had been amended .

in 1919 , work on a new codification project began , but it was not until 1926 that what is today known as the united states code came to exist .

the u.s. code has been published by the gpo every six years since its initial publication in 1926 .

the current edition of the u.s. code was printed in 2012 and is updated annually with cumulative print supplements .

in the u.s. c ode , statutes are grouped by subject matter into 54 titles and five appendices .

each title is organized into chapters and then sections , which is how a particular provision is cited ( eg , 27 u.s.c .

§124 refers to section 124 of title 27 ) .

source credits and historical notes at the end of each section provide additional information , including the statutory origin of the provision , its effective date , a brief citation , discussion of any amendments , and cross references to related provisions .

it is important to note that generally , the u.s. code is an unofficial restatement of the statutes at large organized by topic for ease of access .

as discussed further below , the exception to this general rule is when a particular title of the u.s. code has been enacted into positive law .

the office of the law revision counsel ( olrc ) of the u.s. house of representatives is responsible for maintaining and publishing the u.s. code .

the olrc oversees the organization of statutes by subject matter , assigning a statute to a u.s. code section if the law has general applicability and permanence .

if a provision is not intended to be permanent or does not have relevance to a wide audience , the olrc may not include that language in the u.s. code , or the olrc may classify the provision as a statutory note or appendix to an existing u.s. code section .

language enacted as part of government appropriations measures is a common instance of this ; for example , provisions appropriating funds to the office of highway administration each fiscal year are not likely to be codified because , by their own terms , they govern for only one year .

nevertheless , it is important to remember that whether a provision is codified or classified as a note or appendix in no way diminishes the statute's significance or authority .

provisions that are not codified in the u.s. code are still acts of congress .

the language of a law as set forth in the u.s. code is not necessarily a literal duplication of the law as it was enacted .

because the u.s. code is arranged by subject , a slip law is often divided up among titles , with different sections of a slip law being assigned to different volumes , chapters and sections of the u.s. code .

there may also be slight changes from the original statute , particularly with regard to section numbers and cross - references , corresponding to u.s. code sections , not statute sections .

the most notable difference between the u.s. code and the statutes at large , however , is that language in the u.s. code exists as amended to reflect subsequent changes made by later laws .

for additional information or specific questions on federal statutes , congressional clients may contact crs .

for programs offering training on statutory research , congressional clients please consult "federal legal research" under the "events" section of crs.gov .

