the mission of hhs is to "enhance the health and well - being of americans by providing for effective health and human services and by fostering sound , sustained advances in the sciences underlying medicine , public health , and social services. .

hhs is currently organized into 11 main agencies , called "operating divisions" ( see below ) , which are responsible for a wide variety of health and human services and related research .

in addition , hhs has a number of "staff divisions" within the office of the secretary ( os ) .

these staff divisions fulfill a broad array of management , research , oversight , and emergency preparedness functions in support of the entire department .

hhs operating divisions eight of the hhs operating divisions are part of the u.s. public health service ( phs ) .

phs agencies have diverse missions in support of public health , including the provision of health care services and supports ( eg , ihs , hrsa , samhsa ) , the advancement of health care quality and medical research ( eg , ahrq , nih ) , the prevention and control of disease and injury and environmental health hazards ( eg , cdc , atsdr ) , and the regulation of food and drugs ( eg , fda ) .

the three remaining hhs operating divisions — acf , acl , and cms — are not phs agencies .

acf and acl largely administer human services programs focused on the well - being of vulnerable children , families , older americans , and individuals with disabilities .

cms — which accounts for the largest share of the hhs budget by far — is responsible for administering the medicare and medicaid programs , in addition to some aspects of the private health insurance market .

the president's budget request for fy2019 , which was released on february 12 , 2018 , occurred in the context of at least two significant circumstances .

first , annual appropriations for fy2018 had not been enacted at the time of the budget's release .

second , on february 9 , 2018 — just days before the president's budget was released — the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-123 ; bba 2018 ) was enacted .

this law increased the amount of discretionary spending that would be allowed for fy2018 and fy2019 , extended temporary funding provided under earlier fy2018 continuing appropriations , provided new fy2018 supplemental appropriations , and extended funding for a number of hhs mandatory spending programs through fy2019 ( or beyond ) .

this section discusses the extent to which these circumstances affected the fy2018 and fy2019 funding levels published in the office of management and budget ( omb ) budget request materials and the hhs budget in brief ( bib ) , which are the primary data sources for this report .

under the budget request , hhs would spend an estimated $1.216 trillion in outlays in fy2019 ( see table 1 ) .

this is $48 billion more than the fy2018 estimate ( based on the annualized cr and current services mandatory spending ) and about $113 billion ( +10% ) more than fy2017 actual .

historical estimates by omb indicate that hhs has accounted for at least 20% of all federal outlays in each year since fy1995 .

most recently , hhs is estimated to have accounted for 28% of all federal outlays in fy2017 .

figure 1 displays proposed fy2019 hhs outlays by major program or spending category in the president's request .

as this figure shows , mandatory spending typically accounts for the vast majority of the hhs budget .

in fact , two programs — medicare and medicaid — are expected to account for 86% of all estimated hhs spending in fy2019 .

medicare and medicaid are "entitlement" programs , meaning the federal government is required to make mandatory payments to individuals , states , or other entities based on criteria established in authorizing law .

this figure also shows that discretionary spending accounts for about 8% of fy2019 hhs outlays in the president's request .

although discretionary spending represents a relatively small share of total hhs spending , the department nevertheless receives more discretionary money than most federal departments .

according to omb data , hhs accounted for 7.2% of all discretionary budget authority in fy2017 .

the department of defense is the only federal agency to account for a larger share of all discretionary budget authority in that year .

 table 3 displays budgetary totals for each hhs operating division , as well as the office of the secretary .

these totals are inclusive of both mandatory and discretionary funding .

the fy2017 actual , fy2018 estimate ( based on the annualized cr and current services mandatory spending ) , and fy2019 request figures are taken from the hhs bib for fy2019 ; the fy2016 actual figures are taken from the fy2018 bib .

the remainder of this section provides a brief summary of the mission of each operating division , the fy2019 budget request , and links to additional resources related to that request .

a table of relevant crs key policy staff is included at the end of the report .

the figures in this section are provided in terms of budget authority ( ba ) and outlays .

ba is the authority provided by federal law to enter into contracts or other financial obligations that will result in immediate or future expenditures involving federal government funds .

outlays occur when funds are actually expended from the treasury ; they could be the result of either new budget authority enacted in the current fiscal year or unexpended budget authority that was enacted in previous fiscal years .

as a consequence , the ba and outlays in this table represent two different ways of accounting for the funding that is provided to each hhs agency through the federal budget process .

the fda mission is focused on regulating the safety of human foods , dietary supplements , cosmetics , and animal foods ; and the safety and effectiveness of human drugs , biological products ( eg , vaccines ) , medical devices , radiation - emitting products , and animal drugs .

it also regulates the manufacture , marketing , and sale of tobacco products .

relevant appropriations bill: ag fy2019 request: ba: $3.257 billion outlays: $3.092 billio .

the hrsa mission is focused on "improving access to health care for those who are uninsured , isolated , or medically vulnerable. .

among its many programs and activities , hrsa supports health care workforce training , the national health service corps , and the federal health centers program , which provides grants to nonprofit entities that provide primary care services to people who experience financial , geographic , cultural , or other barriers to health care .

relevant appropriations bill: lhhs fy2019 request: ba: $9.891 billion outlays: $10.634 billio .

the ihs mission is focused on providing "comprehensive health services for american indians and alaska natives ... to improve their health status and overall quality of life. .

ihs provides health care for approximately 2.2 million eligible american indians / alaska natives through a system of programs and facilities located on or near indian reservations , and through contractors in certain urban areas .

relevant appropriations bill: int fy2019 r equest: ba: $5.433 billion outlays: $5.410 billio .

the cdc mission is focused on "disease prevention and control , environmental health , and health promotion and health education. .

cdc is organized into a number of centers , institutes , and offices , some focused on specific public health challenges ( eg , injury prevention ) and others focused on general public health capabilities ( eg , surveillance and laboratory services ) .

in addition , the agency for toxic substances and disease registry ( atsdr ) is headed by the cdc director .

for that reason , the atsdr budget is often shown within cdc .

following the conventions of the fy2019 hhs bib , atsdr's budget request is included in the cdc totals shown in this report .

atsdr's work is focused on preventing or mitigating the adverse effects resulting from exposure to hazardous substances in the environment .

relevant appropriations bills: lhhs ( cdc ) int ( atsdr ) fy2019 request ( cdc and atsdr combined ) : ba: $6.078 billion outlays: $7.530 billio .

the nih mission is focused on supporting and conducting research "into the causes , diagnosis , treatment , control , and prevention of diseases" and promoting the "acquisition and dissemination of medical knowledge to health professionals and the public. .

nih is organized into 27 research institutes and centers , headed by the nih director .

 ( the fy2019 president's budget assumes that ahrq's functions will be consolidated within nih , in the new national institute for research on safety and quality [nirsq] .

this assumption is reflected in the figures below. ) .

relevant appropriations bill: lhhs fy2019 request: ba: $33.888 billion outlays: $35.082 billio .

the samhsa mission is focused on reducing the "impact of substance abuse and mental illness on america's communities. .

samhsa coordinates behavioral health surveillance to improve understanding of the impact of substance abuse and mental illness on children , individuals , and families , and the costs associated with treatment .

relevant appropriations bill: lhhs fy2019 request: ba: $3.426 billion outlays: $3.616 billio .

the ahrq mission is focused on research to make health care "safer , higher quality , more accessible , equitable , and affordable. .

specific ahrq research efforts are aimed at reducing the costs of care , promoting patient safety , measuring the quality of health care , and improving health care services , organization , and financing .

the fy2019 president's budget proposes consolidating ahrq's functions within nih , in the new national institute for research on safety and quality ( nirsq ) .

relevant appropriations bill: lhhs fy201 9 request: ba: $0 outlays: $240 millio .

the cms mission is focused on supporting "innovative approaches to improve quality , accessibility , and affordability" of medicare , medicaid , the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) , and private insurance and private insurance market reform programs .

the president's budget estimates that in fy2018 , "over 143 million americans will rely on programs cms administers including medicare , medicaid , the children's health insurance program ( chip ) , and the health insurance exchanges. .

relevant appropriations bill: lhhs fy2019 request: ba: $1,122.804 billion outlays: $1,092.541 billio .

the acf mission is focused on promoting the "economic and social well - being of children , youth , families , and communities. .

acf administers a wide array of human services programs , including temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) , head start , child care , the social services block grant ( ssbg ) , and various child welfare programs .

relevant appropriations bill: lhhs fy201 9 request: ba: $47.247 billion outlays: $48.971 billio .

the acl mission is focused on maximizing the "independence , well - being , and health of older adults , people with disabilities across the lifespan , and their families and caregivers. .

acl administers a number of programs targeted at older americans and the disabled , including home and community - based supportive services and state councils on developmental disabilities .

relevant appropriations bill: lhhs fy201 9 request: ba: $1.819 billion outlays: $1.966 billio .

