this report briefly describes cotton's special treatment , relative to other traditional farm program crops , in the 2014 farm bill .

it also reviews the legislative attempts — which successfully culminated with the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-123 ; bba ) — to reintegrate cotton as a program crop eligible for major farm revenue support programs .

then , it reviews the specifics of the new seed cotton program and discusses three potential issues related to the establishment of seed cotton as a program crop .

cotton's proponents then determined that the path forward would be through an act of congress .

such an act of congress would have budgetary implications .

the general view of the agricultural community was that , if a new cotton program were to be incorporated into the next farm bill , it would likely have a budgetary cost , thus requiring possibly difficult budgetary offsets .

the bba provision , section 60101 ( a ) , includes seed cotton as a covered commodity , thus making it eligible for participation in plc and arc beginning with crop year 2018 .

participating producers must make three decisions during the signup period ( july 30 , 2018 , to december 7 , 2018 ) : how to allocate their generic base acres , whether to update cotton program yields , and whether to participate in arc or plc .

signup is for the crop year 2018 .

three issues that could figure into future policy debate as a result of this program change include the potential for large budget costs if commodity markets weaken further , the realignment of program payment acres , and considerations surrounding the potential for re - opening of the wto u.s. - brazil cotton disput .

projections for plc payments on seed cotton base are sensitive to changes in market prices .

in april 2018 cbo released new baseline projections of usda's mandatory farm program outlays including seed cotton as a covered commodity .

under slightly different market price expectations , cbo estimated the cost of seed cotton payments under the arc and plc programs to be $2.015 billion over five years ( 2018-2022 ) , up 59% from the february 2018 score .

figure 1 compares the historical and projected weighted seed cotton price since 1980 and compares it with the plc reference price and loan rate established for seed cotton in the bba .

the reallocation of generic base to seed cotton or other covered commodities , combined with the elimination of payments to residual base ( unallocated generic base ) , suggests that a significant portion of historical upland cotton base acres could become ineligible for revenue support payments .

the likelihood of plc payments to seed cotton base , as suggested in the previous section , could provide an incentive for reallocating generic base to seed cotton rather than to other program crops .

upland cotton producers planted an average of 10.8 million acres during the 2009-2015 period compared with 17.6 million acres of generic base ( figure 2 ) .

to obtain the highest seed cotton base possible , most cotton producers might opt to reallocate 80% of generic base to seed cotton per the statutory reallocation formula for farms with a recent history of covered crops .

if so , national seed cotton base would be approximately 14.1 million acres .

this , in turn , would imply that as much as 20% of generic base ( or 3.56 million acres ) would be residual generic base and thus be disqualified from receiving farm revenue support payments .

this contributes to the size of the budgetary offset in the cbo score for the bba .

under the october 2014 mou — signed by brazil and the united states to avoid trade retaliation by brazil — the united states agreed to limit domestic cotton support payments to those programs specifically authorized by the 2014 farm bill .

however , two new u.s. cotton support programs have been implemented since the october 2014 mou — the cgcs program and seed cotton as a covered commodity eligible for arc and plc payments .

according to section vi of the mou — the peace clause — brazil would refrain from retaliation prior to september 30 , 2018 , provided that the united states limits cotton payments to those programs specifically authorized by the 2014 farm bill .

there is some ambiguity about how brazil might respond under wto rules , if at all , to the addition of the two new u.s. cotton programs .

for example , brazil might choose to ignore them , or it might find these new u.s. cotton support programs to be in violation of the mou .

under the peace clause of the mou , brazil must inform the united states and provide a reasonable opportunity for informal bilateral consultations before brazil requests official dispute settlement consultations on any current domestic support program or policy .

alternatively , since the two new cotton support programs were implemented after the mou was signed , there may be a legal question as to whether these programs would qualify as "current domestic support" under the mou .

brazil might argue that these new cotton programs fall outside the mou and that brazil would have no obligation to inform and informally consult with the united states before requesting official consultations as part of formal dispute settlement procedures .

or brazil could choose to operate outside of the wto framework and impose retaliatory tariffs ( or a similar trade action ) on selected u.s. agricultural products .

finally , brazil could avoid the issue of whether the mou has been violated by simply awaiting the mou's expiration on september 30 , 2018 .

there is some ambiguity about how brazil may proceed with charges against u.s. cotton programs after the mou's expiration — whether brazil could use the existing dispute settlement case and extend its retaliation authority or would have to start a new wto dispute settlement case .

a potential counterargument would be that , under the seed cotton related provisions of the bba , congress has replaced coupled payments linked to crops planted on generic base acres with decoupled payments under the new seed cotton program , thus making u.s. farm programs more wto - compliant , not less .

it is also unclear how to interpret the cgcs repeat payments , which , although linked to the previous year's plantings , were separated by a year ( 2017 ) of non - payments .

thus , cgcs payments are not decoupled from producer behavior ( potentially leading to distortive incentives ) , but they do not occur on a continuous basis such that cotton producers may not necessarily factor cgcs payments into their production behavior .

several economists have also raised more general concerns about linking cotton program payments to cotton market prices , particularly when the seed cotton reference price — which represents a composite of upland cotton and cottonseed market prices — is not intuitive and appears high relative to historical and projected market conditions .

still other economists contend that large government payments tend to mute market signals , and any incentive to produce more cotton than the market can support at current prices has potentially negative impacts on developing countries .

however , these policy concerns may not , of themselves , be sufficient to justify a claim that the mou has been violated or that these new programs are out of compliance with wto rules .

furthermore , it is not clear to what extent brazil would have to show evidence ( to either a wto panel or the united states ) that the united states is in violation of the mou .

if brazil were compelled to show harm before a wto panel would accept brazil's claim that the united states had violated the mou , this would likely delay any evidence - based determination until late 2020 .

this is because the seed cotton program will first be implemented for the 2018 crop .

if any plc seed cotton payments are triggered , they would not be paid out until after october 1 , 2019 , and would not be reported by usda until december 2019 or january 2020 at the earliest .

