the united states is the largest single financial contributor to the united nations ( u.n. ) system .

congress plays a key role in shaping u.s. policy at the united nations through funding and oversight .

each fiscal year ( fy ) , congress authorizes and appropriates u.s. contributions to a range of u.n. entities .

in fy2017 , the united states provided more than $8.5 billion to the u.n. regular budget , specialized agencies , peacekeeping operations , and funds and programs .

over the decades , congressional debates on u.n. funding have generally focused on three key issues: the appropriate level of u.s. contributions to the u.n. system ; whether u.s. funds are being used effectively ; and how changes in u.s. funding might further u.s. policy priorities in the u.n. system .

congress is currently considering president trump's fy2019 budget request which , if enacted , would significantly reduce u.s. funding to u.n. bodies .

this report provides an overview of the processes and mechanisms for u.n. funding .

it discusses how the united states funds the united nations and outlines selected u.s. contributions to u.n. bodies .

the final section presents selected policy issues for congress , including debates over u.s. assessment levels , the possible impacts of u.s. withholdings , u.s. arrears to the united nations , and the relationship between u.s. funding and u.n. reform .

the united states is one of the founding members of the united nations and continues to play a lead role in the organization today .

u.s. participation in and funding of the united nations is authorized through the u.n .

participation act of 1945 , as amended ( 22 u.s.c .

287 et seq. ) .

both congress and the executive branch shape u.s. policy toward the organization .

congress authorizes , appropriates , and oversees u.s. funding to the united nations , while the executive branch represents the united states in u.n. bodies through the state department and the u.s. mission to the united nations ( usun ) .

the president nominates ambassadors for u.n. posts , and the senate provides advice and consent for executive branch nominees .

usun is led by ambassador nikki haley , the current u.s .

permanent representative to the united nations .

the united states is a member of several key u.n. bodies .

it serves as one of five permanent members of the security council ( with veto power over council resolutions ) , along with china , france , russia , and the united kingdom .

it is also a member of the general assembly and 12 specialized agencies .

the united states is often elected to leadership positions on u.n. boards , councils , and other entities .

members of congress hold varied perspectives on the appropriate level and extent of u.s. funding to the united nations .

generally , congress supports the united nations and its overall mission ; it provides funding to u.n. bodies each year , and often uses u.n. mechanisms to further u.s. foreign policy objectives .

in fy2017 , the last year in which comprehensive information is available , u.s. funding included $1 billion in assessed contributions to the u.n. regular budget and specialized agencies ; $1.9 billion in assessed contributions to u.n. peacekeeping operations ; $295 million in voluntary contributions to u.n. funds and programs ; and $5.6 billion in voluntary contributions to u.n. humanitarian - related entities ( figure 1 ) .

at the same time , some policymakers have been critical of the united nations , especially when they believe u.n. actions may not align with u.s. policy priorities .

many members have also expressed frustration with u.n. bodies or activities that , in their view , are not operating efficiently or lack effective accountability mechanisms .

over the years , congress has sought to address the aforementioned concerns by raising or lowering u.n. funding levels and placing financial conditions or limits on u.s. contributions to u.n. entities .

some members have also proposed eliminating all u.s. funding to the organization or providing only voluntary , and not assessed , contributions .

in addition , congress conducts oversight of u.n. funding by holding committee hearings , enacting reporting requirements , or consulting with executive branch agencies .

it also queries executive branch nominees for u.n. - related posts , and can investigate u.n. entities or activities funded by the united states .

the u.n. system is made up of interconnected components that include specialized agencies , voluntary funds and programs , peacekeeping operations , and the u.n. organization itself .

article 17 of the u.n. charter requires each u.n. member to contribute to the expenses of the organization .

u.n. entities are financed largely by contributions from members , which are made through two main channels: assessed and voluntary contributions .

congress has generally authorized the majority of assessed and voluntary contributions to the u.n. system as part of foreign relations authorization acts , with appropriations provided to the department of state and u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) to meet obligations .

when authorization bills are not enacted , congress has waived the authorization requirements and appropriated funds through u.n. and u.n. - related accounts in annual department of state , foreign operations , and related programs ( sfops ) appropriations acts .

in some cases , u.s. contributions to u.n. bodies might be funded through other appropriations acts .

a number of congressional committees are responsible for overseeing different aspects of u.n. funding .

authorizing committees include the senate committee on foreign relations and house committee on foreign affairs .

most u.n. - related appropriations fall under the jurisdiction of the state - foreign operations subcommittees of the house and senate committees on appropriations .

some u.n. activities — particularly those related to global health , labor , defense , or the environment — might fall under the jurisdiction of other authorizing and appropriations committees such as labor - health and human services , interior and the environment , or defense .

this section outlines selected u.s. contributions to the u.n. system through annual state , foreign operation , and related programs ( sfops ) appropriations acts since fy2015 , including the president's fy2019 budget request .

in some cases , fy2017 funding levels are used as the main point of comparison because u.n. - specific fy2018 appropriations have not been finalized .

in general , congress appropriates lump sums to the u.n. - related accounts and does not direct u.s. contributions to specific u.n. entities , although it could opt to do so through line item appropriations or other enacted legislation .

members of congress have debated the level and extent of u.s. funding to the united nations since the united states first joined the organization in 1945 .

over the decades , a number of recurring policy tools and issues have emerged , many of which may continue to be discussed in the 115 th congress .

for several decades , many u.s. policymakers , including some members of congress , have maintained that the u.s. assessments for the u.n. regular budget and u.n. peacekeeping operations are too high .

in particular , some contend that current assessment levels for the regular budget result in a limited number of countries , particularly the united states , providing the bulk of funding while having what they view as minimal influence in the u.n. budget process .

some policymakers have expressed similar concerns about the u.s. peacekeeping assessment , which congress has capped at 25% .

they maintain that a cap on u.s. assessments plays an important role in keeping the current u.s. assessments from rising .

on the other hand , some argue that the current assessment levels allow the united states to share peacekeeping , development , and humanitarian funding with other governments ( often referred to as burden sharing ) at a lower cost than if it were to act unilaterally .

more broadly , they contend that current assessment levels reflect the u.s. commitment to the united nations and allow the united states to pursue its policy priorities and maintain its influence in u.n. bodies .

some suggest that if the united states were to decrease its contributions to the united nations , other countries with priorities at odds with the united states could step in and undermine u.s. interests .

with these issues in mind , some members of congress may wish to monitor ongoing u.n. member states negotiations regarding the scale of assessments for the years 2019 through 2021 .

it is expected that the assembly will adopt new regular budget and peacekeeping assessments in december 2018 .

the trump administration has stated that it will seek to reduce the u.s. peacekeeping assessment to the statutory cap of 25% .

the last time there were significant changes to the u.n. scales of assessments was in 2000 , when the u.s. regular budget assessment decreased from 25% to 22% , and the peacekeeping assessment decreased from over 30% to about 26% ( it has since risen to 28.43% ) .

withholding funding from u.n. entities is one of the most common mechanisms by which congress asserts or seeks to influence u.s. policy at the united nations .

in general , congressional withholdings fall into three categories: c aps on payment of u.s. assessments .

congress has at times limited u.s. payments to assessed budgets due to concerns that u.s. assessments were too high .

in 1990s , for example , congress capped the u.s. contribution to the u.n. regular budget at 22% and the u.n. peacekeeping assessment at 25% .

f ull or partial withholdings from specific u.n. entities or activities .

over the years , and for a range of reasons , congress has withheld or placed conditions on funding to selected u.n. entities or activities — some of which have required executive branch waivers or certifications to release funds ( table 5 ) .

co ngressional holds .

members of congress have sometimes placed holds on u.n. funding through foreign affairs appropriations for policy reasons .

holds are generally requested by members of appropriations committees and , in many cases , little information is publicly available on the details of the hold .

an additional category of withholding involves the executive branch .

if congress does not enact legislation that authorizes or appropriates funding to a specific u.n. entity , the administration can unilaterally decide to withhold partial or full funding to such organizations , in some instances without being required to notify or consult with congress .

congressional views on the role and effectiveness of u.s. withholdings vary .

some maintain that placing limitations or conditions on u.s. funding may weaken u.s. influence and standing within the organization , thereby undercutting the united states' ability to conduct diplomacy and make foreign policy decisions both in and out of the u.n. system .

some also argue that withholding u.s. assessed payments to the united nations infringes on u.s. treaty obligations .

on the other hand , some suggest that the united states should use its position as the largest u.n. financial contributor to push for the implementation of policies that are in the best interests of the united states .

they contend that despite continued u.s. diplomatic and political pressures , u.s. foreign policy priorities are not adequately reflected in many u.n. bodies .

the overall impact of u.s. withholdings on u.n. budget and operations depends on the origin of the program or entity's funding .

for example , if an activity is funded by the u.n. regular budget and the united states withholds a proportionate share of its normal contributions , the cost of the program will most likely be covered , at least temporarily , by surplus regular budget funds .

in such cases , a u.s. withholding would be largely symbolic and have little or no immediate impact on the program's operation or funding levels .

on the other hand , if the united states withholds all or part of its assessed funding — or its voluntary contributions — from an entity funded primarily by member contributions , the impact of the u.s. withholding on the operations and budgets of such organizations could be significant — particularly for u.n. bodies for which the united states accounts for almost one - quarter of total funding .

some members of congress have demonstrated an ongoing interest in the accumulation of u.s. arrears to u.n. entities .

each u.n. body has its own payment timeline and system for defining and tracking arrears , which are generally outlined in the organization's constitution , statutes , or financial regulations .

for instance , assessed contributions to the u.n. regular budget and u.n. peacekeeping operations are due and payable within 30 days of the receipt of notice from the u.n. secretary - general .

as of january 1 of the following calendar year , unpaid balances of such contributions are considered to be arrears .

a consequence of accumulating arrears to the united nations is the loss of voting rights in the general assembly .

under article 19 of the u.n. charter , members who are in arrears "shall have no vote in the general assembly if the amount of its arrears equals or exceeds the amount of the contributions due from it for the preceding two full years. .

in practice , the "amount of the contributions" refers to both assessed contributions to the u.n. regular budget and to u.n peacekeeping operations .

each u.n. specialized agency has its own rules and guidelines for nonpayment of arrears and the possible effects on membership .

the causes of u.s. arrears often vary by u.n. entity , with total amounts fluctuating depending on the time of year .

congressional actions such as caps on assessments and withholdings from specific u.n. entities can play key roles in accumulating arrears .

the aforementioned practice of deferred payments , which began under the reagan administration , also contributes .

in the 1990s , the united states came close to losing its vote in the general assembly under article 19 due to substantial outstanding balances for the u.n. regular budget and u.n. peacekeeping .

to prevent the loss of a vote , congress and the clinton administration negotiated the "helms - biden agreement" in 1999 that established conditions under which some u.s. arrears were paid .

as of september 2017 , the state department reports that total estimated u.s. arrears to the u.n. regular budget are $347 million , while estimated arrears to u.n. peacekeeping budgets are $536 million .

these arrears are the result of a combination of u.s. withholdings , deferred payments , and the u.n. peacekeeping cap .

in some cases , the state department plans to pay these arrears , but in other cases it does not .

congressional views on the payment of u.s. arrears are mixed .

some members argue that they should be fully paid , while others do not recognize u.s. outstanding balances as arrears and claim the united states is under no obligation to pay them .

recognizing the complexity of tracking u.n. funding , over the years congress has enacted several executive branch reporting requirements to help determine the full level and extent of u.s. contributions .

the first of these reports , united states contributions to international organizations , has been published annually since 1952 ; in fy2016 congress expanded its requirements to include information on the source of funds — including federal agency and account — and a description of the purpose of such funds disbursed in the previous year to international organizations in which the united states is a participant .

during the past decade , congress has periodically enacted additional reporting requirements .

from fy2007 to fy2010 , defense authorization legislation required that the office of management and budget ( omb ) submit an annual report to congress listing all assessed and voluntary contributions to the united nations and its related bodies .

more recently , the department of state authorities act , fy2017 ( p.l .

114-323 ) directed that omb annually submit to congress a report on all u.s. assessed and voluntary contributions to the united nations with a value greater than $100,000 , including in - kind services , during the previous fiscal year .

some of these more recent reporting requirements are similar to , and overlap with , previously enacted requirements .

in certain cases , the executive branch has combined multiple requirements into one report .

a key challenge to compiling u.n. funding - related data is one of self - reporting .

according to the state department , each participating agency is responsible for the completeness and accuracy of the information provided in the reports , and not all executive branch agencies provide the requested data .

the agencies charged with compiling the reports , such as the state department or omb , often lack the authority to require other agencies to respond accurately or within a given timeframe , if at all .

consequently , some reporting requirements are incomplete and may not illustrate the full scope of u.s contributions .

since its establishment , the united nations has evolved as various international stakeholders seek ways to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the u.n. system through reform .

some members of congress have demonstrated a continued interest in u.n. reform and over the years have sought to link u.s. funding to specific reform benchmarks .

in the 1980s and 1990s , for example , congress enacted legislation tying u.s. funding to u.n. reform and u.n. regular budget policies that favored the united states , including caps on the u.s. assessments rates , changes to u.n. budget processes , and strengthening u.n. internal oversight .

more recently , congress has enacted legislation conditioning u.s. funding on the implementation of management reforms that aim to improve transparency and accountability ( see text box ) and withholding funding to specific u.n. entities , such as the human rights council .

congress has also demonstrated an increased interest in u.n. reforms related to sexual exploitation and abuse ( sea ) by u.n. peacekeepers ; legislation in the 115 th congress requires that the united states withhold assistance from "any unit of the security forces of a foreign country" if the secretary of state determines such unit has engaged in sea while serving in a u.n. peacekeeping operation .

more broadly , some members have introduced legislation requiring a government - wide review of u.s. multilateral aid .

the explanatory statement to the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 , requires the secretary of state to provide congress with a report that includes a description of current tools , methods , and resources to assess the value of , and prioritize contributions to , international organizations and other multilateral entities , as well as to provide related recommendations .

supporters of linking u.s. funding to u.n. reform contend that the united states should use its position as the largest u.n. financial contributor to push for the implementation of policies that lead to comprehensive reform .

they note that despite diplomatic and political pressures from many countries , the united nations has been slow to implement substantive reform .

they believe that tying u.s. funding to reform may motivate countries to find common ground on otherwise divisive issues .

on the other hand , opponents argue that linking u.s. funding to u.n. reform might not be effective and could ultimately weaken u.s. influence at the united nations .

in particular , some maintain that u.n. reform legislation proposals may be unrealistic because the scope and depth of reforms required by the legislation cannot be adequately achieved in the proposed timeframes .

some also contend that the united states can obtain its u.n. reform objectives through other means , including collaborating with like - minded members and working with the u.n. secretary - general on common reform priorities .

policymakers have observed that countries that receive u.s. foreign aid sometimes vote against u.s. foreign policy or national security interests in u.n. bodies such as the security council and general assembly .

on occasion , the united states has periodically debated linking u.s. foreign assistance to the u.n. voting records of potential aid recipients .

supporters maintain that doing so could increase member support for u.s. policy priorities in u.n. bodies .

the reagan administration strongly supported such a policy ; then - u.n .

ambassador jeanne kirkpatrick stated in a 1983 congressional hearing that the united states must "communicate to nations that their votes , their attitudes and their actions inside the u.n. system inevitably must have consequences for their relations with the united states outside the u.n .

system. .

recognizing these concerns , in 1984 congress required the state department to submit an annual report to congress , voting practices in the united nations , which tracks member voting records on u.n. resolutions important to the united states .

over the years , some members of congress have also periodically introduced , but not enacted , legislation requiring reductions in foreign aid to countries that do not consistently vote with the united states .

opponents of these efforts contend that reducing funding to countries based on u.n. voting records could undermine the overall effectiveness of u.s. foreign assistance and , depending on the issue being considered in u.n. bodies , ultimately have little impact on how countries vote .

some have also questioned the criteria the state department would use to eliminate or decrease aid , noting that many u.s. foreign aid priorities are based on a combination of need and political considerations that may not always align with how countries vote in the united nations .

they further contend that withholding aid in this manner might punish the citizens of countries who often have the greatest need and no control over the foreign policy decisions of their leaders .

in the past year , president trump and ambassador haley have expressed support for linking u.s. foreign aid to u.n. votes ; prospects for implementation , however , are unclear .

congress is ultimately responsible for appropriating foreign assistance to specific countries , and the trump administration's fy2019 budget did not propose foreign aid reductions based on u.n. votes .

many congressional debates regarding u.n. funding occur against the backdrop of competing foreign and domestic funding priorities and broad questions about the role of the united nations in u.s. national security and foreign policy .

the emergence of president trump's "america first" position raises questions about the future of u.s. participation in and funding of the united nations .

in the near term , members of the 115 th congress might consider the following issues: how , if at all , the president's fy2019 budget proposal aligns with congressional perspectives on u.n. funding .

what role and actions , if any , congress might take in the absence of administration support for some u.n. activities .

the possible impacts of current and potential u.s. financial withholding on ( 1 ) u.s. influence in u.n. bodies , and ( 2 ) the operations and effectiveness of u.n. activities — particularly in light of continued accumulation of u.s. peacekeeping arrears and the administration's proposed funding reductions for certain u.n. bodies .

in the longer term , some members might consider the following u.n. funding issues in the context of the changing multilateral and global landscape .

the benefits and drawbacks of u.s. funding of the united nations — including areas where the united states can ( 1 ) reduce funding while increasing efficiency and accountability or ( 2 ) achieve the most "bang for its buck. .

steps congress can take to ensure that u.s. contributions to the u.n. system are used as effectively as possible .

the domestic and foreign policy implications , if any , of reduced u.s. participation in and funding of the united nations , including the possible impact of other countries stepping into the funding and leadership role traditionally held by the united states .

how the united states can further its u.n. reform agenda , and to what extent , if any , such efforts could be linked to u.s. funding .

the advantages and disadvantages of multilateral and bilateral u.s. assistance , including the comparative advantage , if any , the united nations might have over other multilateral organizations , and how the united states might maximize this advantage .

appendix a .

organizational chart of the u.n. system appendix b .

contributions to international organizations ( cio ) account by u.n .

entity the following table lists cio account funding by u.n. and u.n. - affiliated entities since fy2015 , including amounts appropriated by congress and u.s. assessment levels .

fy2018 funding levels for individual u.n. bodies are not yet available .

appendix c. contributions for international peacekeeping activities ( cipa ) account by u.n. peacekeeping operation the following table lists cipa account funding by peacekeeping operation since fy2015 , including amounts appropriated by congress .

fy2018 funding levels for individual peacekeeping missions have not yet been finalized .

appendix d. international organizations and programs ( io&p ) account by u.n .

entity the following table lists u.s. contributions to u.n. entities through the io&p account since fy2015 .

appendix e. timeline of u.s. peacekeeping assessment cap the following table outlines changes to the u.s. peacekeeping assessment and enacted u.s. peacekeeping cap since fy1994 , including related legislation .

appendix f. global humanitarian accounts by u.n .

entity table f - 1 provides an overview of top u.s. voluntary contributions to u.n. humanitarian - related activities through the global humanitarian accounts since fy2015 .

contributions for each account are appropriated by congress , with the executive branch allocating funding to specific u.n. entities and activities based on humanitarian needs and u.s. foreign policy priorities .

some u.n. entities are funded through both state and usaid accounts , while others are only funded through specific agencies or agency accounts .

funding for u.n. entities in fy2018 has not been finalized .

appendix g. selected legislation: u.s. funding and u.n. reform the following sections highlight selected reform legislation from 1986 to the present that ties u.s. funding to u.n. reform and notes any subsequent changes to internal u.n. policy .

kassebaum - solomon amendment ( 1986-1987 ) in the mid - 1980s , some members of congress expressed concern that u.s. influence over the u.n. budget was not proportionate to its rate of assessment .

in 1986 congress passed legislation , popularly known as the "kassebaum - solomon amendment," which required that the u.s. assessed contribution to the u.n. regular budget be reduced to 20% unless the united nations gave major u.n. financial contributors a greater say in the budget process .

subsequently , in 1986 the general assembly adopted a new budget and planning process that incorporated consensus - based budgeting as a decisionmaking mechanism , thus giving u.n. members with higher assessment levels a potentially greater voice in the budget process .

u.n. office of internal oversight services ( 1993 ) in the early 1990s , some members of congress and the administration were concerned with the apparent lack of oversight and accountability within the u.n. system .

in 1993 , as part of the fy1994 state department appropriations act , congress directed that 10% of u.s. assessed contributions to the u.n. regular budget be withheld until the secretary of state certified to congress that "the united nations has established an independent office with responsibilities and powers substantially similar to offices of inspectors general act of 1978 .

on july 29 , 1994 , the u.n. general assembly established the office of internal oversight services ( oios ) which reports directly to the secretary - general and provides "internal auditing , investigation , inspection , programme monitoring , evaluation and consulting services to all u.n. activities under the secretary - general's authority. .

helms - biden agreement ( 1999 ) in the late 1990s , congress and the administration negotiated and agreed to legislation that would further u.s. reform policy at the united nations .

the helms - biden bill authorized payment of some u.s. arrears if specific reform benchmarks were met and certified to congress by the secretary of state .

under the terms of helms - biden , the united states agreed to ( 1 ) pay $819 million in arrearages over fiscal years 1998 , 1999 , and 2000 ; and ( 2 ) forgive $107 million owed to the united states by the united nations in peacekeeping costs if the united nations applied the $107 million to u.s. peacekeeping arrears .

for arrearage payments to occur congress required that the u.s. assessment for contributions to the u.n. regular budget be reduced from 25% to 22% and that the peacekeeping contribution be reduced from 30% to 25% .

in december 2000 , the u.n. general assembly reduced the regular budget assessment level from 25% to 22% , and the peacekeeping share from approximately 30.4% to 28% .

in subsequent years , the u.s. peacekeeping assessment continued to fluctuate and is currently 28.43% .

