disaster - damaged roads and public transportation systems are eligible for federal assistance under two u.s. department of transportation ( dot ) programs , the emergency relief ( er ) program administered by the federal highway administration ( fhwa ) and the public transportation er program administered by the federal transit administration ( fta ) .

the two programs have different histories and legal and regulatory authorities , but they share a similar intent and face some of the same issues .

for example , there are concerns with both programs about the extent to which federally funded activities should go beyond restoring infrastructure to predisaster conditions , including so - called resilience projects .

this report begins by discussing fhwa assistance for the repair and reconstruction of highways and bridges damaged by disasters ( such as the 2017 hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria ) or catastrophic failures ( such as the collapse of the skagit river bridge in washington state in 2013 ) .

this includes information on the use of er funds on disaster - damaged federally owned public - use roadways , such as national park service roads and u.s. forest service roads , under an affiliated program , the emergency relief for federally owned roads program .

this is followed by a discussion of fta's assistance program , established in 2012 , which has provided assistance to public transportation systems on two occasions , once after hurricane sandy in 2012 and again after the 2017 hurricanes .

for over 80 years , federal aid has been available for the emergency repair and restoration of disaster - damaged roads .

the first legislation authorizing such use of federal funds was the hayden - cartwright act of 1934 ( 48 stat .

993 ) .

this act , however , provided no separate funds , and states subject to disasters had to divert their regularly apportioned federal highway funds from other uses to repairing disaster - damaged roads .

the federal - aid highway and highway revenue act of 1956 ( 70 stat .

374 and 70 stat .

387 ) was the first act that authorized separate funds for the er program .

from 1956 through 1978 , funding for the program was drawn 40% from the treasury's general fund revenues and 60% from the highway trust fund ( htf ) .

the htf is supported primarily by taxes paid by highway users , mainly on gasoline and diesel fuel .

starting in 1979 , the er program was funded 100% from the htf .

in 1998 congress made the annual $100 million htf authorization permanent .

however , beginning in 2005 , while congress continued the $100 million permanent authorization from the htf , it authorized supplemental appropriations from the general fund .

on december 4 , 2015 , the er program was reauthorized through fy2020 in the fixing america's surface transportation act ( fast act ; p.l .

114-94 ) .

er funds may be used for the repair and reconstruction of federal - aid highways and roads on federally owned lands that have suffered serious damage as a result of either ( 1 ) a natural disaster over a wide area , such as a flood , hurricane , tidal wave , earthquake , tornado , severe storm , or landslide ; or ( 2 ) a catastrophic failure from any external cause ( for example , the collapse of a bridge that is struck by a barge ) .

historically , however , the vast majority of er funds have gone for repair and reconstruction following natural disasters .

as is true with most other fhwa programs , the er program is administered through state departments of transportation in close coordination with fhwa's division offices in each state .

the decision to seek financial assistance under the program is made by state departments of transportation , not by the federal government .

local officials who wish to seek er funding must do so through their state departments of transportation ; they do not deal directly with fhwa .

as state departments of transportation normally deal with fhwa division office staff on many matters , they typically have working relationships that facilitate a quick coordinated response to disasters .

the public transportation emergency relief program ( 49 u.s.c .

ยง5324 ; 49 c.f.r .

ยง602 ) , established in section 20017 of the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century ( map - 21 ; p.l .

112-141 ) , is administered by the federal transit administration ( fta ) and is similar in intent to fhwa's er program .

fta's program provides federal funding on a reimbursement basis to states , territories , local government authorities , indian tribes , and public transportation agencies for damage to public transportation facilities or operations as a result of a natural disaster or other emergency and to protect assets from future damage .

in the past , funding for these purposes was provided by fema or through appropriations administered by fta following a specific disaster .

for example , in response to the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , which caused severe damage to rapid transit lines in new york city , about $4.7 billion was provided in emergency supplemental appropriations for transit , some of which was administered by fta .

the public transportation er program provides federal support for both capital and operating expenses .

capital expenses include projects for repairing and replacing transit facilities that have been damaged , as well as projects to protect facilities from future damage , known as resilience projects .

sometimes a capital project can involve both damage restoration and resilience elements .

operating expenses include evacuation activities , rescue operations , and temporary transit service before , during , or after an emergency event .

operating costs are eligible for reimbursement for one year beginning on the date a disaster is declared , although the secretary of transportation may extend that period to two years after determining a compelling need .

unlike the fhwa's er program , fta's er program does not have a permanent annual authorization .

all funds are authorized on a "such sums as necessary" basis and require an appropriation from the treasury's general fund .

the federal share for most capital and operating projects under the program is 80% , but the secretary of transportation may increase this share up to 100% .

emergency funding will not be provided when project costs are reimbursed by another federal agency , such as fema , have been funded through insurance proceeds , or are already funded in an existing fta grant .

since its enactment in 2012 , there have been two appropriations to the public transportation er program .

funds were appropriated as part of the disaster relief appropriations act ( p.l .

113-2 ) in january 2013 in response to hurricane sandy , which struck the united states in october 2012 .

funds were also appropriated as part of the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-123 ) in response to hurricane harvey , which struck the united states in august 2017 , and hurricanes irma and maria , which struck the united states in september 2017 .

hurricane sandy affected 12 states and the district of columbia ; new york and new jersey , states with some of the largest public transportation systems in the country , were the hardest hit .

the disaster relief appropriations act of 2013 provided $10.9 billion for fta's public transportation er program for recovery , relief , and resilience projects and activities in areas impacted by hurricane sandy .

approximately $10.4 billion remained available after sequestration under the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-25 ) , and $185 million was transferred from fta to the federal railroad administration .

fta allocated the remaining approximately $10.2 billion according to several funding categories: $5.2 billion for response , recovery , and rebuilding costs incurred by affected agencies ; $1.3 billion for locally prioritized resilience projects at designated transportation agencies in the new york metropolitan area ; $3.6 billion for competitive resilience projects that will protect or otherwise increase the resilience of public transportation equipment and facilities to future hurricanes and storms in the areas affected by hurricane sandy ; and $76 million for oversight and administration .

according to fta , approximately $7.1 billion of the hurricane sandy funding had been obligated by march 31 , 2018 .

congress appropriated $330 million for fta's public transportation er program in response to hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria on february 9 , 2018 .

damage to transit systems associated with hurricane harvey was concentrated in texas , particularly flooding in houston , and the damage associated with hurricane irma was concentrated in puerto rico and florida .

hurricane maria's effects on transit systems were concentrated in puerto rico .

on may 31 , 2018 , fta announced its allocation of these funds by purpose and location ( table 2 ) .

because the public transportation er program does not have a permanent annual authorization , fta cannot provide funding immediately after a disaster or emergency .

transit agencies , therefore , typically rely on fema for funding their immediate needs .

gao observes that this could make it more difficult for some transit agencies to respond immediately after a disaster , and that the reliance on fema can cause transit agencies to be confused about which agency to approach for help if fta funds do later become available .

an existing memorandum of understanding between fema and fta seeks to coordinate their roles and responsibilities , but fta cannot define its role with certainty ahead of an appropriation .

consequently , as gao has noted , "fta and fema will have to determine their specific roles and responsibilities on a per - incident basis. .

adding a quick - release mechanism to fta's er program , similar to that in fhwa's er program , would allow fta funds to be approved and distributed within a few days of a disaster .

fhwa's er program has an annual authorization of funds from the htf , and fta's program could similarly be authorized an amount from the mass transit account of the fund .

such an authorization , however , would place a new claim on resources of the htf , adding to the current gap between revenues and outlays .

gao has observed that fta's er program has fewer limits and more flexibility than the emergency relief programs administered by fema and , to some extent , fhwa .

the fta's er program , for example , does not have a limit on the amount that can be spent on resilience projects , and it also allows damaged assets to be replaced with those that are improved or upgraded .

as fta notes , "it may not always be feasible or advisable to replace damaged assets with identical facilities , vehicles , or equipment .

as a result , projects to repair , replace , or reconstruct assets may include improvements and upgrades as necessary to meet current safety and design standards. .

although there may be advantages to including upgrades and resilience with public transportation er funds , including these elements requires congress to appropriate larger amounts than might otherwise be necessary .

it could also be a way for transit agencies to fund betterments and new facilities that have little direct connection to the goals of repairing damages and making the transit systems resilient to future storm events .

gao found that some hurricane sandy funding awards were for projects that were probably outside the scope of the program .

consequently , gao recommended a better alignment of program purposes with project evaluation and selection , and an examination of funded projects for duplication with other efforts to improve resilience .

