the board of governors of the u.s .

postal service ( hereinafter , the board ) was created by the postal reorganization act in 1970 ( pra , 39 u.s. c. §202 ) .

the u.s .

postal service ( usps ) describes the board as " comparable to a board of directors of a private corporation . .

guided by statute and its bylaws , the board "directs the exercise of the powers of the postal service , reviews the practices and policies of the postal service , and directs and controls the expenditures of the postal service. .

the board is composed of 11 members , including nine governors who are appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the senate .

as noted in a usps office of inspector general ( uspsoig ) white paper , as an executive branch agency , the postal service is to be led by presidentially appointed and senate - confirmed officers .

the nine governors serve this role .

additionally , the board includes the postmaster general , who is appointed , or may be removed , by the governors , and the deputy postmaster general , who is appointed , or may be removed , by both the governors and the postmaster general .

under the pra , governors served nine - year terms , with the first nine appointees serving staggered terms of one to nine years .

the postal accountability and enhancement act ( paea , p.l .

109-435 ) reduced the governors' staggered terms to seven years .

additionally , the paea requires that governors represent the public interest and that at least four governors be chosen based on their demonstrated ability to manage organizations with at least 50,000 employees .

no more than five governors may belong to the same political party .

the president is required by law to consult with the speaker of the house of representatives , the minority leader of the house of representatives , the majority leader of the senate , and the minority leader of the senate in selecting a nominee to the board of governors .

while the statute stipulates that "not more than 5 of [the governors] may be adherents of the same political party," it does not specify an order in which nominations are to be considered and confirmed to satisfy this requirement .

because usps governor nominations are advice and consent positions , senate procedural considerations may affect the confirmation process .

for example , a governor nomination , like any other measure or matter available for senate floor consideration , may be the subject of a senate "hold. .

senators place holds to accomplish a variety of purposes — to receive notification of upcoming legislative proceedings , for instance , or to express objections to a particular proposal or executive nomination — but ultimately the decision to honor a hold request , and for how long , rests with the majority leader .

typically , an executive agency head is appointed by the president , by and with the advice and consent of the senate .

in the case of usps , however , the postmaster general is only appointed , or may be removed , by the governors .

similarly , the deputy postmaster general is only appointed , or may be removed by the postmaster general and the governors .

no term limits exist for either the postmaster general or deputy postmaster general .

it is unclear whether the appointment or removal clauses of 39 u.s.c .

§202 could operate as written , given the board's current composition .

as of the date of this report , the board has no governors .

the term of the last governor , chairman james h. bilbray , expired on december 8 , 2016 .

the board's membership as a whole includes the postmaster general , megan j. brennan , and the deputy postmaster general , ronald a. stroman .

figure 1 shows the terms of governors serving at the time the paea was enacted and governors appointed or reappointed since the paea was enacted .

president barack obama sent seven nominations to the position of governor of the united states postal service to the senate during the 114 th congress .

all seven nominations were returned to the president under the provisions of senate rule xxxi at the conclusion of the 114 th congress on january 3 , 2017 .

of these seven nominations , one received a hearing .

on april 21 , 2016 , the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs held a hearing to consider the nomination of jeffrey a. rosen .

all seven nominations were subsequently reported favorably from the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs and all were placed on the senate executive calendar .

no votes were held on any of the nominations .

in the 115 th congress , president trump sent four nominations for governors of the usps to the senate on october 30 , 2017 .

the three nominees are robert m. duncan of kentucky ( who is the subject of two nominations to two separate terms ) , calvin r. tucker of pennsylvania , and david williams of illinois .

of the four nominations , three were placed on the senate executive calendar on may 7 , 2018 .

the fourth nomination , of calvin r. tucker , received a hearing on april 18 , 2018 .

table 1 provides details on each nomination .

although many authorities and responsibilities are given to the board , certain matters are reserved for decision by the governors alone .

table 2 lists selected matters that are reserved for decision by the governors alone or by the full board .

it is unclear whether decisions that are reserved to the governors alone ( eg , appointment and removal of the postmaster general ) could be made when no governors remain on the board .

the postal service's day - to - day operations are largely the responsibility of usps senior leadership and may not be affected by the absence of governors .

as shown in table 2 , however , certain actions may only be authorized or approved by the board or the governors .

however , under 39 u.s.c .

§ 205 , vacancies may not prevent the board from conducting its business as long as there is a quorum of members .

to have a quorum , generally at least six members of the board must be present .

for example , if the postmaster general , deputy postmaster general , and four governors are present , then the board would have a quorum for the transaction of business .

the quorum requirement applies to the business of the board , but not to the conduct of business related to those matters that are reserved for decision by the governors alone .

the board lost its quorum when the term of former governor mickey d. barnett expired on december 8 , 2014 , and the board's makeup dropped to five members .

just prior to the loss of its quorum , the board adopted a resolution delegating its authority to a temporary emergency committee ( tec ) , in order to "provide for continuity of [postal] operations" in light of the loss of a board quorum .

while the board has the authority ( with certain restrictions ) to create such a committee , it is unknown to what extent the tec may act on matters that are explicitly reserved to the board .

further , unlike the loss of quorum , the loss of the final governor leaves the usps without legal authority for several actions that must be authorized by the governors .

select usps appointment authority is provided to the governors rather than to the board .

for example , the appointment of , removal of , and setting compensation for the postmaster general requires an absolute majority of the governors currently in office .

in addition , the inspector general is appointed by the governors and may be removed only for cause "upon the written concurrence of at least 7 governors. .

in the event the postmaster general is incapacitated due to "an enemy attack or other national emergency," usps guidance names the deputy postmaster general followed by the vice president , area operations , eastern area , in the line of succession to perform the postmaster's duties .

the guidance does not specify whether a vacancy caused by lack of governors would qualify as an emergency or trigger its emergency succession plan .

the governors have sole authority to ( 1 ) establish rates for competitive mail products ( eg , priority mail® , priority mail express® ) and ( 2 ) adjust rates of market dominant products ( eg , first - class mail , advertising mail ) .

as noted by the uspsoig , without at least one sitting governor , the usps cannot perform these actions — or any actions listed in the left column of table 2 — without subjecting itself to potential legal challenge .

while governor bilbray remained on the board , he continued to act on those matters alone .

prior to his departure , bilbray wrote governors' decision no .

16-8 allowing for an increase in rates for usps competitive products "on or about january 21 , 2018. .

on october 6 , 2017 , usps filed with the postal regulatory commission ( prc ) a notice of its intent to increase prices for certain market dominant products under this authority , and the prc approved the request on november 9 , 2017 .

as mentioned earlier , governor bilbray's term expired on december 8 , 2016 .

another issue for consideration is the authority , in absence of a quorum , of any newly appointed governors to act on matters reserved to the board .

as discussed above , prior to the loss of its quorum , the board established and delegated its authority to the tec in order to "provide for continuity of [postal] operations" in light of the loss of a board quorum .

the board will continue without a quorum until four or more governors have been confirmed .

in its resolution establishing the tec , the board affirmed that "the inability of the board to constitute a quorum does not prevent the governors then in office from exercising those powers vested solely in the governors , as distinguished from the board" ( emphasis added ) .

the resolution , however , did not specify whether newly appointed governors are automatically members of the tec .

