individuals and households that suffer uninsured or underinsured losse s under a major disaster declaration typically apply for individual assistance ( ia ) , administered by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , and may also apply for disaster loans , administered by the small business administration ( sba ) .

this report opens with an overview of the two programs and a discussion about how declarations are used to put them into effect .

the report also discusses their respective application processes and eligibility criteria used by fema and sba to make grant and loan determinations , respectively .

the report then describes the appeals process before concluding with policy observations and considerations .

fema ia and the sba disaster loan program are interlaced to a certain degree .

functionally , sba and fema have a computer matching agreement ( cma ) to share real - time data on assistance provided to applicants .

sba and fema use the interface between their systems to identify potential duplication of benefits ( dob ) and determine loan and grant eligibility .

from an administrative perspective , eligibility and assistance from one source can impact eligibility and assistance from the other source .

while the overlap between the two programs may have some benefits , it arguably also causes some confusion .

moreover , as some observers have pointed out , there are elements of the application process that are not entirely known or understood .

for instance , members have asked for clarification concerning the criteria used to determine eligibility for grants and / or loans , as well as how decisions are made with respect to whether an applicant is provided a grant , loan , or both .

others have questioned whether determinations are made on a case - by - case basis , or if the determination criteria are applied uniformly to all applicants seeking disaster assistance .

the following sections provide descriptions of the sba and fema programs that provide assistance to individuals and households .

in many cases , disaster survivors find that they need assistance from both of these programs in addition to other sources of assistance including private insurance , state and local government assistance , and assistance from private voluntary organizations in order to fully recover .

two declaration authorities put fema ia and the sba disaster loan program into effect: ( 1 ) the stafford act , and ( 2 ) the small business act ( p.l .

85-536 , as amended ) .

though integrated to a large extent , ultimately each agency is responsible for determining eligibility based on the applicant's losses and the forms of assistance they have received .

in the case of sba disaster loans , the sba's office of disaster assistance ( oda ) determines eligibility based on the applicant's disaster - related losses , as verified by sba .

ia eligibility determinations are made by fema's individual assistance division , under the office of response and recovery .

the sba disaster loan program uses three main criteria for making credit decisions: ( 1 ) eligibility , which is based on the applicant's disaster - related losses ; ( 2 ) satisfactory credit ; and ( 3 ) repayment ability , including minimum income levels .

sba will not decline an application for not having collateral to secure a loan but , to the extent it is available , a borrower may be required to pledge collateral for loans over certain amounts ( eg , $25,000 for physical damage loans ) .

according to fema's individuals and households program unified guidance , fema is required to use four main criteria for determining fema ia eligibility: ( 1 ) the applicant is a u.s. citizen , non - citizen national , or qualified alien residing ; ( 2 ) fema must be able to verify the applicant's identity ; ( 3 ) the applicant's insurance , or other forms of disaster assistance received , cannot meet their disaster - caused needs ; and ( 4 ) the applicant's necessary expenses and serious needs are directly caused by a declared disaster .

as described below and discussed in more detail in " sba income test ," while fema claims that assistance is based on damage amounts rather than income , household income does appear to be a key criterion for making grant determinations .

as demonstrated in figure 1 , applicants typically apply for fema ia assistance first .

based on income information provided as part of the fema registration process fema applies an income test developed by sba for its initial applicant screening .

applicants above certain income thresholds are not eligible for fema ia assistance and are referred back to sba for loan consideration .

sba developed the minimum income levels or "minimum cost of living estimates" by applying a formula to the u.s department of health and human services federal poverty guidelines .

as shown in table 1 , sba establishes minimum income levels by multiplying the poverty level for a family of one by a factor of 1.5 , and multiplying the poverty level for families of greater than one by a factor of 1.25 .

the income test formula is not specifically authorized in statute and is not published in sba regulations .

rather , the formula was first introduced as agency policy in 1985 by sba memorandum 85-20 as a means to help determine the applicant's ability to repay the loan and is still in use today ( see appendix b ) .

fema refers applicants to the sba disaster loan program if they meet or exceed certain income levels and therefore do not qualify for grant assistance .

for example , it could be inferred that an individual who earns $18,210 or more per year would initially be denied fema grant assistance and referred to the sba disaster loan program to apply for an sba disaster loan to repair and rebuild their home ( see stage 2 of figure 1 ) .

if the applicant is denied an sba disaster loan , or the loan is insufficient for their recovery needs , the applicant is referred back to fema for eligible "sba dependent ona" assistance from fema ( see stage 5 of figure 1 ) .

sba disaster loan applicants with income below the minimum income level are classified as failed income test ( fit ) .

fit applicants are notified that their sba disaster loan application has been denied and advised that they will be notified if there are any changes to the decision .

they are then referred back to fema to be considered for possible additional fema grant assistance .

applicants may submit a written appeal if they disagree with any fema determination within 60 days of the date of their eligibility notification letter .

applicants may appeal initial eligibility determinations for housing assistance and ona , and denials for continued rental assistance , and direct housing assistance .

fema does not accept multiple appeals for the same reason , but may request additional information and conduct additional reviews as new information is received .

all appeals must be in writing and require an applicant signature — they cannot be accepted via email .

the applicant must submit their appeal to the state , territorial , or tribal government if ona is administered under the joint or state option .

applicants have six months to request a reconsideration of a decline decision for an sba disaster loan application .

applicants have 30 days to appeal a subsequent decline decision of their sba disaster loan application .

following a major disaster , homeowners and businesses may have access to a number of resources to assist in the response , recovery , and rebuilding process .

the range of resources includes insurance payouts , state and local government assistance , charitable donations from private institutions and individuals , as well as certain forms of federal assistance .

in addition to fema and sba disaster assistance , individuals and households may be eligible for the department of housing and urban development's ( hud's ) community development block grant disaster recovery ( cdbg - dr ) program .

compensation from multiple sources that exceed the total loss amount is generally considered a duplication of benefits .

when duplication occurs , the recipient is liable to the united states to pay back the duplicated benefit .

section 312 of the stafford act requires federal agencies to ensure that individuals ( and businesses ) do not receive disaster assistance for losses for which they have already been compensated or may expect to be compensated .

fema is the primary agency responsible for policy and procedural guidance on duplication of benefits .

the uniformity requirement set forth in section 312 of the stafford act is located in fema regulation 44 c.f.r .

§206.191 , which establishes a delivery sequence of disaster assistance provided by federal agencies and organizations ( see figure 2 ) .

an organization's position within the sequence determines the order in which it should provide assistance and what other resources must be considered before that assistance is provided .

further , each organization is responsible for delivering assistance without regard to duplication later in the sequence .

according to fema regulations , the agency or organization that is lower in the delivery sequence should not provide assistance that duplicates assistance provided by an agency or organization higher in the sequence .

when the delivery sequence has been disrupted , the disrupting agency is responsible for rectifying the duplication .

as mentioned previously in this report , sba and fema have a computer matching agreement ( cma ) to share real - time data on assistance provided to applicants .

sba also shares relevant data with states , territories , tribes , and local government jurisdictions and voluntary agencies .

in cases where the data contains personally identifiable information ( pii ) , a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) must first be prepared and signed by both sba and the authorized requesting party to help avoid duplication of benefits .

sba and fema entered into the cma pursuant to section ( o ) of the privacy act of 1974 ( 5 u.s.c .

§552a ) .

as outlined in the september 25 , 2015 , federal register notice , "the financial and administrative responsibilities will be evenly distributed between sba and dhs / fema unless otherwise set forth in this agreement. .

the federal register notice further stated that the cma is "part of a government - wide initiative , executive order 13411 — improving assistance for disaster victims ( august 29 , 2006 ) ... to ensure that benefits provided to disaster survivors by dhs / fema and sba are not duplicated. .

though the cma is part of a government - wide initiative to prevent duplication of benefits , it is solely used by fema and sba .

some may argue that the cma should also be used by other federal agencies that offer disaster assistance ( such as cdbg - dr ) .

others , however , might argue using the cma with agencies other than fema and sba is problematic or potentially ineffective .

for example , hud provides funds to state and local jurisdiction grantees .

hud does not have the individual award data to match up with sba loan applicant data to determine instances of duplication .

if congress is concerned about the use of the cma , it could investigate how it could be used in conjunction with other disaster assistance programs .

if cma is not being universally used by federal agencies , congress could investigate why it is not being used , evaluate challenges preventing its use , and mandate its use across the federal government .

additionally , congress could use oversight to investigate how effective the cma has been at preventing duplication since its implementation .

similarly , congress could also review how mous are being used by states , territories , tribes , local government jurisdictions , and voluntary agencies to determine their efficacy in reducing duplication .

congress could also consider making the mous a requirement for certain types of assistance or investigate other incentives that would induce the entities to sign mous .

as mentioned previously , both fema and sba screen applicants according to minimum income levels ( see table 1 ) .

sba creates the minimum income levels by applying a formula to the u.s department of health and human services federal poverty guidelines .

according to sba standard operation procedure ( sop ) , minimum income includes wages , alimony , child support payments , interest and dividend income from savings , retirement , pension , social security or disability payments .

according to sba memorandum 85-20 ( see appendix b ) , the income test table is used as a guide "for summary declines. .

it is unclear from sba sops if income levels are a hard limit to screen out applicants , or if there is some discretion in the process .

additionally , some might be confused about income standards based on publicly available information provided to disaster survivors .

for example , in a news release published in the wake of the 2011 missouri river flooding , fema stated "federal and state disaster assistance programs are available to all who suffered damages .

aid is damage - based , not income - based .

the kinds of help provided depend on an applicant's circumstances and unmet needs" in another news release issued may 9 , 2014 , fema stated that "income is not a consideration for fema disaster assistance. .

on the one hand , it could be argued that the income test is being used by fema as a "pre - decisional" screening tool , and that ultimately , income is not a factor for fema grant assistance .

others may disagree and question why fema reviews household income if it has no bearing on grant assistance .

if congress does not want grant determinations to be based on income , it could prohibit fema from collecting income information and using it as a screening tool .

if , however , congress determines that grant determinations should be based , at least in part , on certain income levels , it could require fema to publish policy documents that specify how income is used to award grant assistance .

congress may also consider whether sba should continue to use established thresholds and formulas based on sba memorandum 85-20 to determine eligibility , or provide sba with some measure of discretion in the process .

some might argue that uniformity is needed to ensure equitable determinations .

others might argue that a one size - fits - all approach does not address special or mitigating circumstances .

in general , eligibility for an sba disaster loan is assigned to the person ( or entity in the case of businesses ) that legally owns or is responsible for the repair or replacement of the disaster - damaged property based on that person's ability to repay the loan .

it could be argued , however , that the ability to pay a loan is not solely determined by income and that a range of factors and circumstances should be also be considered .

for example , a retired person may not meet a certain minimum income level , but own assets that could be liquidated for repayment purposes .

another example is the parent ( s ) of a university student who are willing to co - sign for their child's disaster loan .

in both these examples , strict adherence to an income test might prevent people from obtaining loans who may be able to repay them through nontraditional methods .

congress may also consider whether the income test is an ineffective screening tool for identifying applicants that meet the income test but cannot repay their disaster loan ; for example , a person who earns more than the minimum income level , but has debt that impedes their ability to repay the disaster loan .

finally , it is not clear if fema has access to the same income information as sba .

as mentioned earlier , minimum income includes wages , alimony , child support payments , interest and dividend income from savings , retirement , pension , social security , and disability payments .

this information is gathered on sba form 5c and irs form 4506-t .

applicants , however , can fill these forms out after initially registering with fema .

this could result in the reporting of different income levels .

for example , the income reported to fema could be less than what is reported to sba .

if congress is concerned about how determinations are made , it could consider requiring sba and fema to publish specific determination criteria in their respective regulations and policy guidance documents .

congress may also consider putting the determination formula into statute .

finally , congress may decide whether it is best to have uniformity in the determination process , or whether to provide the agencies certain parameters that allow for some discretion when making grant and loan decisions .

appendix a .

relevant statutory authorities and regulations the following is a listing of selected authorities and regulations pertaining to the duplication of disaster assistance benefits .

this list should be considered representative , not exhaustive .

stafford act ( 42 u.s.c .

§5155 ) the stafford act is the primary statute governing the provision of federal disaster assistance , particularly fema assistance .

section 312 of the stafford act requires federal agencies that provide financial disaster assistance to ensure that individuals , businesses , or other entities suffering losses as a result of a major disaster or emergency do not receive assistance for losses for which they have already been compensated .

section 312 also requires the president to establish procedures that ensure uniformity in preventing duplication of benefits .

under section 312 , any person , business , or other entity that has received or is entitled to receive federal disaster assistance is liable to the united states for the repayment of such assistance to the extent that such assistance duplicates benefits available for the same purpose from another source , including insurance and other federal programs .

stafford act ( 42 u.s.c .

§5174 ) section 408 ( a ) ( 1 ) states that the president may provide assistance to individuals and households who , as a result of a major disaster , "have necessary expenses and serious needs in cases in which the individuals and households are unable to meet such expenses or needs through other means. .

fema regulation 44 c.f.r .

206.191 , which establishes the policies implementing section 312 of the stafford act , states that it is fema policy to prevent the duplication of benefits between its own programs , other assistance programs , and insurance benefits .

the regulation requires individuals to repay all duplicated assistance to the agency providing the assistance .

under 44 c.f.r .

206.191 , a federal agency providing disaster assistance is responsible for preventing or rectifying duplication of benefits when they occur .

44 c.f.r .

206.191 also includes a "delivery sequence" hierarchy intended to prevent waste , fraud , and abuse of program assistance , including the duplication of benefits ( see figure 2 ) .

44 c.f.r .

206.111 defines financial ability of the applicant of pay housing costs .

according to 44 c.f.r .

206.111 if the "household income has not changed subsequent to or as a result of the disaster then the determination is based upon the amount paid for housing before the disaster .

if the household income is reduced as a result of the disaster then the applicant will be deemed capable of paying 30 percent of gross post disaster income for housing .

when computing financial ability , extreme or unusual financial circumstances may be considered by the regional administrator. .

small business act ( 15 u.s.c .

§636 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ) the first proviso in 15 u.s.c .

§636 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( a ) states that sba is authorized to make disaster loans "provided that such damage or destruction is not compensated for by insurance or otherwise. .

small business act ( 15 u.s.c .

§647 ) section 18 ( a ) of the small business act ( p.l .

85-536 , as amended ) prohibits the sba from providing benefits that duplicate the assistance provided by another department or agency of the federal government .

section 18 ( a ) states that if loan applications are refused or denied by a department or agency due to administrative withholding or due to an administratively declared moratorium , then no duplication is deemed to have occurred .

sba regulation 13 c.f.r .

123.101 ( c ) states that applicants for sba disaster loan assistance are not eligible for a home disaster loan if their damaged property can be repaired or replaced with the proceeds of insurance , gifts , or other compensation .

these amounts must either be deducted from the amount of the claimed losses or , if received after sba has disbursed the loan , must be paid to sba as principal payments on the loan .

appendix b. sba memorandum 85-20 appendix c. fema and sba constituent resources the following provides various fema and sba resources and information that may be of use for constituents in declared disaster areas .

application websites fema assistance: https: / / www.disasterassistance.gov / sba assistance: https: / / disasterloan.sba.gov / ela / contact numbers fema 1-800-621-fema ( 3362 ) tty: 1-800-462-7585 sba 1-800-659-2955 tty: 1-800-877-8339 frequently asked questions about fema individual assistance https: / / www.fema.gov / news - release / 2015 / 06 / 04 / frequently - asked - questions - about - individual - assistance frequently asked questions about the sba disaster loan program https: / / www.sba.gov / sites / default / files / articles / sba - disaster - loans - faq.pdf sba form 5c https: / / disasterloan.sba.gov / ela / documents / disaster%20home%20loan%20application%20 ( sba%20form%205c ) .aspx sba form 5c in spanish https: / / disasterloan.sba.gov / ela / documents / loan%20application%20home%20spanish%20 ( form%205c ) .pdf irs form 4506-t instructions https: / / disasterloan.sba.gov / ela / documents / request%20for%20transcript%20of%20tax%20return%20 ( irs%20form%204506t ) .aspx ? ff=false&sp=0 irs form 4506-t https: / / disasterloan.sba.gov / ela / documents / request%20for%20transcript%20of%20tax%20return%20 ( irs%20form%204506t ) .aspx ? pt=home&sp=1 irs form 4506-t instructions in spanish https: / / disasterloan.sba.gov / ela / documents / instrucciones%20para%20completar%20el%20formulario%204506-t%20del%20irs%202017.pd .

