t he mara salvatrucha ( ms - 13 ) is a violent criminal gang operating both in the united states and abroad — namely central america .

u.s. - based members have committed both local and transnational crimes ranging from extortion , homicide , and drug distribution to human and drug trafficking .

the gang has a reputation for committing particularly violent crimes , which has generated attention from law enforcement , policymakers , and the public .

this report provides a brief background on ms - 13 with a focus on its structure and criminal activities in the united states .

it highlights u.s. law enforcement initiatives and other federal resources used to counter the gang's illicit activities .

it discusses how the gang is conceptualized by the federal government and how this conceptualization may drive specific policy responses to the gang's activities .

the report also provides an overview of selected domestic policy issues congress may examine as part of its efforts to counter ms - 13 .

ms - 13 was born on the streets of los angeles , ca .

it was formed in the 1980s by refugees who were fleeing civil conflict in el salvador .

when these salvadoran nationals moved into the los angeles area , some youth coalesced to form ms - 13 , in part for protection from existing latino gangs , such as the 18 th street gang , as well as for a way to connect with other salvadorans .

by the 1990s , ms - 13 had reached the east coast , particularly washington , dc , and long island , ny .

historically , ms - 13 members were mostly salvadoran nationals or first - generation salvadoran - americans , but the group has expanded to include other central and south american immigrants .

ms - 13 has largely focused on creating an identity and community , though members do engage in activities that generate revenue for the gang .

ms - 13 became a transnational gang as members who were deported from the united states to central america established gang ties there .

legislation enacted in the mid - 1990s increased the number of foreign nationals subject to detention and removal from the united states .

from 2001 to 2010 , nearly 130,000 foreign nationals were deported to central america because of a criminal conviction , primarily to the northern triangle countries of el salvador , guatemala , and honduras .

the exact number of these deportees who were gang members is unknown , as is the number of deported gang members who were affiliated with ms - 13 .

however , some of these deportees helped to establish ms - 13 gang ties in their home countries ( where gangs were already present ) and assisted in the spread of u.s. gang culture in central america .

in recent years , law enforcement , the media , and policymakers have shown interest in ms - 13 and its violent criminal activities .

high - profile incidents of violent behavior committed by gang members have raised questions about whether this reflects a developing organizational structure , increasing size , or changing criminality .

countering gang crime is generally the purview of state and local law enforcement .

however , given that gang activity is not constrained by jurisdictional boundaries , and that local law enforcement agencies may not have the capacity to investigate complex gang crimes , federal law enforcement has had a long - standing interest in contending with gangs , including ms - 13 .

there is no single federal agency charged with investigating crimes committed by gangs , and federal resources for confronting this threat are allocated across several departments and agencies including the fbi , drug enforcement administration ( dea ) , bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms , and explosives ( atf ) , and u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , among others .

as the fbi and ice are often seen as having leading roles in federal gang enforcement efforts , this section largely focuses on their activities .

within the department of justice ( doj ) , the fbi is charged with investigating violent gangs and runs a number of anti - gang initiatives .

one of the primary tools the fbi uses to counter the gang threat is violent gang safe streets task forces , which focus on countering violent gangs and violent crimes .

the fbi established the safe streets violent crime initiative in 1992 and , through this program , administers violent gang safe streets task forces across the united states .

these gang task forces include federal , state , and local law enforcement officers that investigate crimes ranging from racketeering to drug conspiracy and firearms violations .

in addition to domestic law enforcement initiatives to counter violent gangs such as ms - 13 , the fbi has transnational policing partnerships .

in 2004 , the fbi launched an ms - 13 national gang task force ( ngtf ) to coordinate federal , state , and local investigations of ms - 13 .

this has since evolved into the transnational anti - gang task force ( tag ) initiative that targets transnational gang threats — with a current focus on ms - 13 and the 18 th street gang .

the fbi has established tag task forces , comprised of fbi agents and vetted local officers , in el salvador , guatemala , and honduras .

in addition to being operational task forces , these tags facilitate intelligence and information sharing .

the tag initiative also includes the central american law enforcement exchange ( calee ) program , which helps train local law enforcement in the united states and central america on gang - related issues and techniques for countering the gang threats .

work of the tag units can be seen in a number of investigations .

for example , in september 2017 , through operation regional shield , over 3,800 gang members — from ms - 13 and the 18 th street gang — in the united states , el salvador , guatemala , and honduras were charged with crimes including murder , arson , racketeering , and conspiracy to distribute marijuana ; the fbi's tag units were involved with the investigations in central america .

in the united states , over 70 individuals were charged , including 17 ms - 13 members who were alleged to have committed murder and other crimes on long island , ny .

the fbi , through the direction of congress , established the national gang intelligence center ( ngic ) in 2005 .

the ngic was established to coordinate intelligence information from federal , state , and local policing agencies .

it supports law enforcement investigations by providing strategic and tactical analysis of intelligence .

agencies contributing to the ngic share gang information and resources to identify and respond to the greatest gang threats .

within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , ice homeland security investigations ( hsi ) has a national gang unit ( ngu ) that works to deter and disrupt domestic gang operations — specifically those of transnational criminal gangs , prison gangs , and outlaw motorcycle gangs ( omgs ) .

the ngu also "identifies and develops intelligence on gang membership , associations , activities , and international networks. .

one ongoing hsi gang initiative is known as operation community shield , which ice launched in 2005 to disrupt and dismantle transnational criminal gangs .

ice hsi reports that in fy2017 it arrested 796 ms - 13 gang members and associates ( up from 434 in fy2016 ) through this program .

to put these 796 ms - 13 arrests in the context of other gang - related arrests , during the same time , "hsi made 4,818 criminal arrests related to gang activity and 892 administrative arrests as a result of gang investigations .

additionally , [ice enforcement and removal operations] administratively arrested 5,225 gang members and associates" in fy2017 .

operation community shield has included a number of operations that specifically target ms - 13 .

through operation raging bull , ice and its domestic and international law enforcement partners arrested 267 ms - 13 members and associates from september through november 2017 .

of the 267 arrests , 214 were in the united states ; of those , 93 suspects were arrested for criminal violations — such as murder , robbery , and drug possession and trafficking — and 121 were arrested for administrative immigration violations ( eg , unlawful presence ) .

elsewhere , federal law enforcement initiatives that are generally not focused on countering gangs could potentially be leveraged to address certain gang threats , such as those posed by ms - 13 .

for instance , led by the dea , the organized crime drug enforcement task force ( ocdetf ) program targets major drug trafficking , money laundering , and transnational criminal organizations .

attorney general sessions has directed the ocdetf program to make countering ms - 13 a priority .

however , some have suggested that investigating ms - 13 may not truly be an ocdetf priority because the gang is more involved in small - scale drug distribution rather than the larger distribution that is traditionally the target of ocdetf investigations .

one challenge in determining the appropriate policy responses to tackle threats posed by ms - 13 is developing a clear conceptualization of the gang .

there is a range of law enforcement tools and other resources that the federal government could leverage to counter the illicit activities of ms - 13 .

having a clear conceptualization of ms - 13 may help to determine the most appropriate and effective tools and resources to counter their criminal activity .

researchers and authorities have primarily described ms - 13 as either a criminal street gang or a transnational criminal organization ( tco ) ; however , policy discussions of the gang often blur these lines .

as policymakers debate the best path to tackle threats posed by ms - 13 , a key challenge is developing a clear conceptualization of the gang , including potential changes in its organizational structure , size , and criminality .

this conceptualization may help in understanding the scope of the threat and identify the resources available to counter it .

policymakers may then be poised to evaluate law enforcement's tools and techniques to gather and share gang - related information , conduct anti - gang enforcement initiatives , and respond to evolving threats posed by ms - 13 and its affiliates .

