t he congressional review act ( cra ) allows congress to review certain types of federal agency actions that fall under the statutory category of "rules. .

enacted in 1996 as part of the small business regulatory enforcement fairness act , the cra requires agencies to report the issuance of "rules" to congress and provides congress with special procedures under which to consider legislation to overturn those rules .

a joint resolution of disapproval will become effective once both houses of congress pass a joint resolution and it is signed by the president , or if congress overrides the president's veto .

for an agency's action to be eligible for review under the cra , it must qualify as a "rule" as defined by the statute .

the class of rules covered by the cra is broader than the category of rules that are subject to the administrative procedure act's ( apa's ) notice - and - comment requirements .

as such , some agency actions , such as guidance documents , that are not subject to notice - and - comment rulemaking procedures may still be considered rules under the cra and thus could be overturned using the cra's procedures .

the 115 th congress used the cra to pass , for the first time , a resolution of disapproval overturning an agency guidance document that had not been promulgated through notice - and - comment procedures .

the resolution was signed into law by the president on may 21 , 2018 .

in all of the previous instances in which the cra was used to overturn agency actions , the disapproved actions were regulations that had been adopted through apa rulemaking processes .

congress's use of the cra in this instance raised questions about the scope of the cra and congress's ability to use the cra to overturn agency actions that were not promulgated through apa notice - and - comment procedures .

under the cra , the expedited procedures for considering legislation to overturn rules become available only when agencies submit their rules to congress .

in many cases in which agencies take actions that meet the legal definition of a "rule" but have not gone through notice - and - comment rulemaking procedures , however , agencies fail to submit those rules .

thus , questions have arisen as to how members can use the cra's procedures to overturn agency actions when an agency does not submit the action to congress .

this report first describes what types of agency actions can be overturned using the cra by providing a close examination and discussion of the statutory definition of "rule. .

the report then explains how members can use the cra to overturn agency rules that have not been submitted to congress .

under the cra , before a rule can take effect , an agency must submit to both houses of congress and the government accountability office ( gao ) a report containing a copy of the rule and information on the rule , including a summary of the rule , a designation of whether the rule is "major," and the proposed effective date of the rule .

for most rules determined to be "major," the agency must allow for an additional period to elapse before the rule can take effect — primarily to give congress additional time to consider taking action on the most economically impactful rules — and gao must write a report on each major rule to the house and senate committees of jurisdiction within 15 days .

the report is to contain gao's assessment of the agency's compliance with various procedural steps in the rulemaking process .

after a rule is received by congress , members have the opportunity to use expedited procedures to overturn the rule .

a member must submit the resolution of disapproval and congress must take action on it within certain time periods specified in the cra to take advantage of the expedited procedures , which exist primarily in the senate .

those expedited , or "fast track," procedures include the following: a senate committee can be discharged from the further consideration of a cra joint resolution disapproving the rule by a petition signed by at least 30 senators ; any senator may make a nondebatable motion to proceed to consider the disapproval resolution , and the motion to proceed requires a simple majority for adoption ; and if the motion to proceed is successful , the cra disapproval resolution would be subject to up to 10 hours of debate , and then voted upon .

no amendments are permitted and the disapproval resolution requires a simple majority to pass .

if both houses pass the joint resolution , it is sent to the president for signature or veto .

if the president were to veto the resolution , congress could vote to override the veto under normal veto override procedures .

if a joint resolution of disapproval is submitted and acted upon within the cra - specified deadlines and signed by the president ( or if congress overrides the president's veto ) , the cra states that the "rule shall not take effect ( or continue ) . .

in other words , if part or all of the rule had already taken effect , the rule would be deemed not to have had any effect at any time .

if a rule is disapproved , the status quo that was in place prior to the issuance of the rule would be reinstated .

in addition , when a joint resolution of disapproval is enacted , the cra provides that a rule may not be issued in "substantially the same form" as the disapproved rule unless it is specifically authorized by a subsequent law .

the cra does not define what would constitute a rule that is "substantially the same" as a nullified rule .

the cra governs "rules" promulgated by a "federal agency," using the definition of "agency" provided in the apa .

that apa definition broadly defines an agency as "each authority of the government of the united states , ... but does not include ... congress ; ... the courts of the united states ; ... courts martial and military commissions. .

accordingly , the cra generally covers rules issued by most executive branch entities .

in the context of the apa , however , courts have held that this definition excludes actions of the president .

the more difficult interpretive issue is what types of agency actions should be considered "rules" under the cra .

the cra adopts a broad definition of the word "rule" from the apa , but then creates three exceptions to that definition .

this apa definition of "rule" encompasses a wide range of agency action , including certain agency statements that are not subject to the notice - and - comment rulemaking requirements outlined elsewhere in the apa: "[r]ule" means the whole or a part of an agency statement of general or particular applicability and future effect designed to implement , interpret , or prescribe law or policy or describing the organization , procedure , or practice requirements of an agency and includes the approval or prescription for the future of rates , wages , corporate or financial structures or reorganizations thereof , prices , facilities , appliances , services or allowances therefor or of valuations , costs , or accounting , or practices bearing on any of the foregoing[. .

the cra narrows this definition by providing that the term "rule" does not include ( a ) any rule of particular applicability , including a rule that approves or prescribes for the future rates , wages , prices , services , or allowances therefor , corporate or financial structures , reorganizations , mergers , or acquisitions thereof , or accounting practices or disclosures bearing on any of the foregoing ; ( b ) any rule relating to agency management or personnel ; or ( c ) any rule of agency organization , procedure , or practice that does not substantially affect the rights or obligations of non - agency parties .

determining whether any particular agency action is a rule subject to the cra therefore entails a two - part inquiry: first , asking whether the statement qualifies as a rule under the apa definition and , second , asking whether the statement falls within any of the exceptions noted above to the cra's definition of rule .

these two steps are illustrated below in figure 1 .

this section of the report walks through the two elements of this inquiry in more detail .

first , while the apa's definition of "rule" is expansive , courts have held that "congress did not intend that the ... definition ... be construed so broadly that every agency action" should be encompassed under this provision .

as a preliminary matter , courts have distinguished agency rulemaking actions from adjudicatory and investigatory functions .

and under the statutory text , to qualify as a rule , an agency statement must meet three requirements: it must be "of general ... applicability," have "future effect," and be "designed to implement , interpret , or prescribe law or policy. .

second , even if an agency statement does qualify as an apa "rule," the cra expressly exempts three categories of rules from its provisions: rules "of particular applicability," rules "relating to agency management or personnel," and "any rule of agency organization , procedure , or practice that does not substantially affect the rights or obligations of non - agency parties. .

both inquiries are heavily fact specific , and require looking beyond a document's label to the substance of the agency's action .

the cra requires that agencies submit actions that fall within the cra's definition of a rule to both houses of congress and to gao before the actions may take effect .

thus , the submission requirement applies generally to rules that are promulgated through apa notice - and - comment procedures , as well as to other types of agency statements , as discussed above .

specifically , section 801 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) of the cra requires the agency to submit a report containing a copy of the rule to each house of congress and the comptroller general ; a concise general statement relating to the rule , including whether it is a major rule ; and the proposed effective date of the rule .

the agency is also required to submit additional information pertaining to any cost - benefit analysis the agency conducted , along with information on the agency's actions resulting from other regulatory impact analysis requirements , including the regulatory flexibility act and the unfunded mandates reform act .

for major rules , after receiving this information , gao is then required to assess the agency's compliance with these additional informational requirements and include its assessment in the major rule report .

the report is required to be submitted to the house and senate committees of jurisdiction within 15 calendar days of the submission of the rule or its publication in the federal register , whichever date is later .

the "report" that agencies are required to submit along with the rule , in practice , is a two - page form on which they provide the information required under section 801 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) and , for major rules , most of the information required to be included in gao's major rule report .

in fy1999 appropriations legislation , congress required the office of management and budget ( omb ) to provide agencies with a standard form to use to meet this reporting requirement .

omb issued the form in march 1999 as part of a larger guidance to agencies on compliance with the cra .

a copy of the form is provided in appendix a of this report .

when final rules are submitted to congress , notice of each chamber's receipt and referral appears in the respective house and senate sections of the daily congressional record devoted to "executive communications. .

notice of each chamber's receipt is also entered into a database that can be searched using congress.gov .

when the rule is submitted to gao , a record of its receipt at gao is noted in a database on gao's website as well .

once the rule is received in congress and published in the federal register , the time periods during which the cra's expedited procedures are available begin , and members can use the procedures to consider a resolution of disapproval .

thus , submission of rules to congress under the cra is critical because the receipt of the rule in congress triggers the cra's expedited procedures for introduction and consideration of a joint resolution disapproving the rule .

in other words , if an agency fails to submit a rule to congress , the house and senate are unable to avail themselves of the special "fast track" procedures to consider a joint resolution striking down the rule .

because submission of rules is key to congress's ability to use the cra , if an agency does not submit a rule to congress , this could potentially frustrate congress's ability to review rules under the act .

to avoid congress being denied its opportunity for review of rules in this way , however , the senate appears to have developed a practice that allows it to employ the cra's review mechanism even when an agency does not submit a rule for review .

that practice has involved seeking an opinion from gao on whether an agency action should have been submitted under the cra ( i.e. , whether the action is covered by the cra's definition of "rule" ) .

in several instances since the enactment of the cra in 1996 , members of congress sought an opinion from gao as to whether certain agency actions were covered by the cra , despite the agency not having undertaken notice - and - comment rulemaking or having submitted the action to congress .

gao has issued 21 opinions of this type as of march 5 , 2019 .

in many of these opinions , gao has defined the term "rule" as used in the cra expansively .

in 11 of the 21 opinions , gao opined that the agency statement in question was a rule under the cra that should have been submitted to the house and senate for review .

these opinions are summarized below in this report and are listed in a table in appendix b .

in recent years , the senate has considered publication in the congressional record of a gao opinion classifying an agency action as a rule as the trigger date for the initiation period to submit a disapproval resolution and for the action period during which such a joint resolution qualifies for expedited consideration in the senate .

thus , the question of whether congress may use the cra's expedited parliamentary disapproval mechanism generally hinges upon the nature of gao's opinion in such cases .

by allowing the gao opinion to serve as a substitute for the actual submission of a rule , the senate can still avail itself of the cra's expedited procedures to overturn rules .

in responding to these requests from members for opinions on whether certain agency actions are covered , gao has played an important role in determining the applicability of the cra , although the specific role that gao has played in this regard is not explicitly outlined in the statute .

but a review of the history of the early implementation of the cra , and a consideration of gao's other activities under the cra , suggests that the role gao currently plays with regard to determining whether a specific agency action is a "rule" is linked to other activities gao has engaged in regarding the cra .

as has been noted , gao's primary statutory requirement under the cra is to provide a report to the committees of jurisdiction on each major rule , and to include in the report information about the agency's compliance with various steps of the rulemaking process for each major rule .

for non - major rules , soon after the cra was enacted , gao voluntarily created an online database of rules submitted to it under the cra , suggesting that it was willing to go beyond what was required of it by the statute to facilitate implementation .

as gao's general counsel explained in congressional testimony in 1998 , "although the law is silent as to gao's role relating to the nonmajor rules , we believe that basic information about the rules should be collected in a manner that can be of use to congress and the public .

to do this , we have established a database that gathers basic information about the 15-20 rules we receive on the average each day. .

the database can be used to search for rules by elements such as the title , issuing agency , date of publication , type of rule ( major or non - major ) , and effective date .

the website also contains links to each of gao's major rule reports .

perhaps most notably , however , gao's determination of whether agency actions are considered "rules" under the cra appears to be closely linked to its monitoring of agency compliance with the submission requirement as discussed above .

the question of whether an agency action is a rule under the cra is also a question of whether it should be submitted ; arguably , then , gao is addressing a very similar question in its opinions on whether certain agency actions are covered as it was in its initial reports to oira on agency compliance with the submission requirement .

a discussion of gao's role in a congressional hearing on the tongass land management plan in 1997 provides some evidence of the voluntary and , initially , ad hoc nature of gao's role in this regard .

one of the issues that was addressed at the hearing was whether the plan should be considered a rule under the cra ; gao's general counsel was invited to testify at the hearing .

six days before the hearing , gao issued its second opinion on the applicability of the cra , in which it stated that the tongass land management plan should have been submitted as a rule under the cra .

former senator larry craig , who had requested the opinion , asked gao's general counsel at the hearing about gao's role: it is our understanding of your testimony and our own reading of the regulatory flexibility act that the general accounting office has been given the role of advising congress and perhaps agencies on whether their policy decisions constitute rules .

it is our understanding that the gao's independent opinion is generally given considerable weight by the agencies .

is this also the gao's understanding of its role ? .

in response , gao's general counsel , robert murphy , stated that the cra does not provide any identification of who is to decide what a rule is , unlike the issue of whether a rule is a major rule or not , which , as [oira administrator] ms. katzen pointed out , has been assigned to her .

so in that sense , i cannot say that gao has a special role under the statute for making that determination .

the decision , the opinion , that we issued last week on the question [of whether the tongass land management plan was a rule under the cra] was done in our role as adviser to the congress in response to the request of three chairmen of congressional committees .

thus , gao acknowledged that its opinion was provided not pursuant to any specific provision of the statute , but in a more general , advisory capacity .

in the years following , members continued to request gao opinions advising congress on the matter of whether an agency action should have been submitted .

although gao has issued 21 opinions on the applicability of the cra since 1996 , congress's response to those opinions has varied over time .

initially , the gao opinions finding that the agency actions in question were rules under the cra did not lead to the introduction of joint resolutions of disapproval — members appear not to have introduced any joint resolutions of disapproval following a gao opinion until 2008 .

in 2008 , gao issued an opinion stating that a letter from the centers for medicare & medicaid services to state health officials concerning the state children's health insurance program was a rule for the purposes of the cra ; in response , senator john d. rockefeller introduced s.j.res .

44 to disapprove the guidance provided in the letter .

according to a press release from the committee on finance at the time , however , the committee did not take further action on the resolution of disapproval because it had missed the window during which the action would have been required to be taken under the cra to use its expedited procedures .

the first time either chamber took action on a resolution of disapproval introduced following a gao opinion was in 2012 , when the house passed h.j.res .

118 ( 112 th congress ) , a resolution of disapproval that would have overturned an information memorandum issued by the department of health and human services relating to the implementation of the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) program .

the first time the senate took action on such a resolution of disapproval was on april 18 , 2018 , when it passed s.j.res .

57 , overturning guidance from the bureau of consumer financial protection ( cfpb ) pertaining to indirect auto lending and the equal credit opportunity act .

the house passed s.j.res .

57 on may 8 , 2018 , and the president signed it into law on may 21 , 2018 .

standing alone , a gao opinion deciding whether an agency action is a "rule" covered by the cra does not have legal effect .

as discussed , gao's role in determining whether actions are subject to the cra is not provided for in the cra , and its opinions are , in essence , advisory .

the opinions do not have any immediate effect other than advising congress as to whether gao considers an agency action to meet the definition of "rule" under the cra .

as a matter of course , however , it appears that the senate has chosen to treat the gao opinions as dispositive on the issue .

in several cases , individual senators have stated that once a gao opinion determining that an agency action is a rule is published in the congressional record , the time periods under the cra commence and the agency action in question becomes subject to the cra disapproval mechanism .

the enactment in may 2018 of a joint resolution of disapproval that was introduced following a gao opinion regarding a 2013 cfpb bulletin that had not been submitted by the agency further indicates that congress , in at least some cases , is willing to consider the gao opinion as a substitute for the agency's submission of a rule to congress .

gao described this practice in november 2018 in one of its opinions relating to the applicability of the cra: "congress has opted to treat the receipt of a gao opinion concluding that an agency action is a rule as triggering the statutory provisions that otherwise would have been triggered by the agency's submission .

thus , congress has used gao opinions to cure the impediment created by the agency's failure to submit the rule , protecting its review and oversight authorities. .

in sum , gao opinions facilitate congressional review of rules that were not — but should have been — submitted under the cra .

a cra provision barring judicial review makes it unlikely that a gao opinion or any other congressional determination stating that a rule is subject to the cra would be subject to challenge in court .

this provision states that "[n]o determination , finding , action , or omission under this chapter shall be subject to judicial review. .

accordingly , most courts have refused to review any claims arguing that an agency action should have been submitted to congress as a rule under the cra .

as a result , the question of whether an agency action is subject to the cra and its fast - track procedures will likely be settled in the political arena rather than in the courts , and , if congress continues to treat gao opinions as determinative , those opinions likely will be the final word on the issue .

the provision barring judicial review may mean that one other critical aspect of the cra may be addressed outside of the courts and through gao opinions: whether a rule has taken effect .

as discussed previously , the cra states that agencies must submit covered rules to congress and the comptroller general "before a rule can take effect," suggesting that a rule may not become operative until the report required by the cra is submitted to congress .

indeed , the post - enactment statement inserted into the congressional record by the cra's sponsors stated that , barring two exceptions listed in the cra , "any covered rule not submitted to congress and the comptroller general will … not [take] effect until it is submitted pursuant to subsection 801 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) . .

however , courts have refused to adjudicate claims arguing that various rules are not in effect because an agency has failed to submit the rules to congress .

accordingly , it is unlikely that a court would be willing to enforce this provision and declare that a rule lacks effect because it was not submitted to congress .

if an agency has not submitted a disputed action to congress , it is possible that this inaction was the result of the agency's view that the rule was not subject to the cra .

a gao opinion stating that an agency action does constitute a rule , while not itself rendering a rule ineffective , may be the first indication to the agency that the rule did not "take effect" because the agency did not fulfill the cra submission requirement .

but in the context of agency rules that inherently lack legal effect , the determination that they lack "effect" under the cra may not have much practical impact .

in the context of rulemaking , to "take effect" usually means that something has become legally effective .

as noted , however , the cra encompasses some non - legislative rules that inherently lack legal effect .

the fact that the cra requires agencies to submit some agency statements that lack legal effect suggests that the term "effect," as used in the cra's submission requirement , means something other than legal effect .

while reviewing notice - and - comment rulemakings , some courts have held that the cra suspends a rule's operation notwithstanding the fact that a rule may technically have become effective .

with respect to rules such as general policy statements that generally lack legal force , however , even if an agency failed to comply with the cra's submission requirement and erroneously regarded the rule as being operative , it is less likely that the operation of the statement had a discernible and independent effect on the agency's actions .

this section briefly summarizes each of the 21 gao opinions to date on whether certain agency actions were rules and , thus , eligible for disapproval under the cra .

when gao appeared to consider one or more of the cra exceptions to the definition of "rule" as fundamental to its analysis , the summaries identify which exception gao focused on in its opinion .

the opinions are listed in chronological order by the date on which gao issued the opinion .

for a more concise summary of each of these opinions , see the table in appendix b .

the emergency sale timber program was enacted as part of the emergency supplemental appropriations and rescissions act of 1995 .

the program was intended to "increase the sales of salvage timber in order to remove diseased and damaged trees and improve the health and ecosystems of federally owned forests. .

on july 2 , 1996 , the secretary of agriculture sent a memorandum entitled "revised direction for emergency timber salvage sales conducted under section 2001 ( b ) of p.l .

104-19 " to the chief of the forest service , containing "clarifications in policy" for the program .

gao concluded that the memorandum was a rule under the cra because some of its contents "clearly are of general applicability and future effect in interpreting section 2001 of p.l .

104-19 " and because , contrary to the argument the department of agriculture made to gao when gao requested its views on the matter , the memorandum "does not fall within the agency procedure or practice exclusion [in 5 u.s.c .

§804 ( 3 ) ( c ) ]. .

on may 23 , 2007 , the department of agriculture's forest service issued the tongass national forest land and resource management plan , which "sets forth the management direction for the tongass forest and the desired condition of the forest to be attained through forest - wide multiple - use goals and objectives. .

gao concluded that the plan was a rule under the cra and was not excepted under 5 u.s.c .

§804 ( 3 ) because "decisions made in the plan substantially affect non - agency parties and are , therefore , not 'agency procedures.' .

president william clinton signed executive order 13061 on september 11 , 1997 , announcing policies related to the american heritage river initiative ( ahri ) .

the ahri was intended to support american communities' efforts to restore and protect their rivers ; the president was to designate , by proclamation , 10 rivers that would take part in the program .

gao concluded that executive order 13061 was not a rule under the cra because the president is not an "agency" for the purposes of the cra ( or , for that matter , under the apa ) .

as such , actions taken by the president are not subject to the cra .

on february 5 , 1998 , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) issued its "interim guidance for investigating title vi administrative complaints challenging permits. .

according to epa , the intent of the guidance was to update epa's procedural and policy framework regarding complaints alleging discrimination in the environmental permitting context .

gao concluded that "considered as a whole , the interim guidance clearly affects the rights of non - agency parties" and thus was a rule under the cra and not exempt under 5 u.s.c .

§804 ( 3 ) .

on may 3 , 2000 , the farm credit administration ( fca ) issued a booklet entitled "national charters," and then the fca published the booklet in the federal register on july 20 , 2000 .

the booklet "provide[d] guidance on the national charter application process and the national charter territory .

specifically , the booklet explain[ed] how a direct lender association can apply for a national charter ; what the territory of a national charter will be ; and what conditions the fca will impose in connection with granting a national charter. .

gao concluded that "we find that the booklet , while labeled a statement of policy by the fca , in actuality , meets the requirements of a legislative rule — which should have been issued using informal rulemaking procedures , including notice and comment. .

gao then concluded that the booklet constituted a rule under the cra and was not exempt under 5 u.s.c .

§804 ( 3 ) because the policies established in the booklet would have an effect on non - agency parties , and because statements made within the booklet clearly indicate that "the fca recognizes the effect of the booklet and national charters on other parties. .

the trinity river record of decision ( rod ) was issued in december 2000 and documented the department of the interior's selection of the actions that it deemed necessary to "restore and maintain the anadromous fish in the trinity river. .

the rod identified the department's selected courses of action for addressing the decreased river flows in the trinity river basin .

gao concluded that the rod was a "rule" under the cra because "its essential purpose is to set policy for the future," it was not a rule of agency procedure or practice under 5 u.s.c .

§804 ( 3 ) , and "it will have broad effect on both rivers' ecosystems and potentially significant economic effect within the sacramento and trinity river basins. .

on july 18 , 2002 , the department of veterans affairs ( va ) issued a memorandum to network directors regarding the va's marketing activities to enroll new veterans in the va health care system .

specifically , the memorandum directed the network directors to no longer engage in trying to enroll new veterans through the use of certain types of activities , such as health fairs , veteran open houses , and enrollment displays at vso meetings .

gao concluded that the memorandum was not a rule under the cra because it "is clearly excluded from the coverage of the cra by one of the enumerated exceptions found in 5 u.s.c .

§804 ( 3 ) " — specifically , gao considered the memorandum to be a statement of agency procedure or practice that did not affect the rights or obligations of non - agency parties .

rather , the memorandum governed internal agency procedures and did not affect the ability of veterans to enroll in the va health care system .

on january 23 , 2003 , the va issued a memorandum terminating the vendee loan program , a program that allowed the va to make loans for the sale of foreclosed va - loan - guaranteed property .

in the memorandum , which was addressed to all directors and loan guarantee officers , the va secretary announced that it would no longer finance the sale of acquired properties .

gao concluded that the memorandum was not a rule under the cra because it was a rule relating to agency management ( i.e. , excepted under 5 u.s.c .

§804 ( 3 ) ( b ) ) or a rule of agency organization , procedure , or practice that does not substantially affect the rights or obligations of non - agency parties ( i.e. , excepted under 5 u.s.c .

§804 ( 3 ) ( c ) ) .

gao noted that "this is the type of management decision left to the discretion of the secretary of va in order to maintain the effective functioning and long - term stability of the program," and that "since the vendee loans were a purely discretionary method for va to use to dispose of foreclosed properties , the change in the agency's 'organization' or 'practice' does not affect any party's right or obligation. .

on august 17 , 2007 , the centers for medicare & medicaid services issued a letter to state health officials concerning the state children's health insurance program ( schip ) .

the letter "purports to clarify the statutory and regulatory requirements concerning prevention of crowd out for states wishing to provide schip coverage to children with effective family incomes in excess of 250 percent of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) and identifies a number of particular measures that these states should adopt. .

gao concluded that the letter was a rule for the purposes of the cra because it was a "statement of general applicability and future effect designed to implement , interpret , or prescribe law or policy with regard to the schip program," and because gao did "not believe that the august 17 letter comes within any of the exceptions to the definition of rule contained in the review act. .

on july 12 , 2012 , the department of health and human services' administration for children and families issued an information memorandum concerning the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) program .

the memorandum notified states that hhs was willing to exercise waiver authority over some of the program's work requirements .

gao concluded that the information memorandum was a rule for the purposes of the cra because it was a "statement of general applicability and future effect , designed to implement , interpret , or prescribe law or policy with regard to tanf," and it did not fall within any of the three exceptions to the definition of a rule .

as gao stated , the memorandum applied to states and therefore was of general applicability , rather than particular applicability ; it applied to the states and not agency management or personnel ; and it established "the criteria by which states may apply for waivers from certain requirements of the tanf program .

these criteria affect the obligations of the states , which are non - agency parties. .

on january 8 , 2014 , the environmental protection agency issued a proposed rule entitled "standards of performance for greenhouse gas emissions from new stationary sources: electric utility generating units. .

the proposed rule was intended to establish "standards for fossil fuel - fired electric steam generating units ( utility boilers and integrated gasification combined cycle ( igcc ) units ) and for natural gas - fired stationary combustion turbines. .

gao concluded that the proposed rule in question was not an action that was covered by the cra , because the cra was intended to apply only to final rules: "the issuance of a proposed rule is an interim step in the rulemaking process intended to satisfy apa's notice requirement , and , as such , is not a triggering event for cra purposes. .

furthermore , gao stated "the precedent provided in our prior opinions underscores that proposed rules are not rules for cra purposes , and gao has no role with respect to them. .

on march 22 , 2013 , the office of the comptroller of the currency , board of governors of the federal reserve system , and federal deposit insurance corporation , issued interagency guidance on leveraged lending .

the guidance "outline[d] for agency - supervised institutions high - level principles related to safe - and - sound leveraged lending activities , including underwriting considerations , assessing and documenting enterprise value , risk management expectations for credits awaiting distribution , stress - testing expectations , pipeline portfolio management , and risk management expectations for exposures held by the institution. .

gao concluded that the leveraged - lending guidance was a rule under the cra because it was a general statement of policy that had future effect and because gao could "readily conclude that the guidance does not fall within any of the three exceptions in the cra. .

gao's opinion , which was issued on october 19 , 2017 , was silent on the matter of the timing of its opinion relative to the guidance , which was issued in 2013 .

on december 9 , 2016 , the u.s. department of agriculture's forest service approved an amendment to the tongass land and resource management plan .

the plan identified the uses that may occur in each area of the forest .

the forest service is required under the national forest management act of 1976 to update forest plans at least every 15 years and potentially more frequently .

gao concluded that the amendment to the plan was a rule under the cra because the amendment "has a substantial impact on the regulated community such that it is a substantive rather than a procedural rule for purposes of cra. .

as such , the plan could not be considered to fall within the exception in 5 u.s.c .

§804 ( 3 ) ( c ) , despite the argument presented by usda when gao asked the agency its views on the matter .

on december 30 , 2016 , the department of the interior's bureau of land management issued its resource management plan for four areas in alaska: the draanjik planning area , the fortymile planning area , the steese planning area , and the white mountains planning area .

land management plans such as these are intended to provide specific information for the use of public lands and are required under the federal land policy and management act of 1976 .

gao concluded that the plan was a rule under the cra because it was of general applicability , had future effect , and was designed to implement , interpret , or prescribe law or policy , and because it did not fit into any of the three exceptions .

of particular relevance appeared to be the exception in 5 u.s.c .

§804 ( 3 ) ( c ) : "because the eastern interior plan designates uses by nonagency parties that may take place in the four areas it governs , it is not a rule of agency organization , procedure or practice. .

on march 21 , 2013 , the consumer financial protection bureau issued a bulletin on "indirect auto lending and compliance with the equal credit opportunity act. .

the bulletin "provide[d] guidance about indirect auto lenders' compliance with the fair lending requirements of the equal credit opportunity act ( ecoa ) and its implementing regulation , regulation b. .

gao concluded that the bulletin was a rule under the cra because it "is a statement of general applicability , since it applies to all indirect auto lenders ; it has future effect ; and it is designed to prescribe the bureau's policy in enforcing fair lending laws," and because the bulletin "does not fall within any of the [cra's] exceptions. .

gao's opinion , which was issued on october 19 , 2017 , was silent on the matter of the timing of its opinion relative to the bulletin , which was issued in 2013 .

on january 23 , 2017 , president donald j. trump released a presidential memorandum establishing his administration's policy on global health assistance funding , often referred to as the "mexico city policy. .

the policy prohibited assistance to foreign nongovernmental organizations and other entities that perform or promote abortion as a method of family planning .

to implement this policy , the department of state issued a fact sheet entitled "protecting life in global health assistance" on may 15 , 2017 , and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) issued revisions to its "standard provisions for u.s. nongovernmental organizations" on march 2 , 2017 .

gao concluded that the two agency actions in question were not rules for the purposes of the cra because , although the fact sheets were issued by federal agencies , they were merely implementing a decision of the president , under a statute that specifically granted broad policymaking authority to the president .

gao based this decision on a 1989 d.c .

circuit case , dkt memorial fund v. agency for international development , which held that agency actions implementing the decision of president ronald reagan to establish the mexico city policy were not reviewable under the apa .

the court held that the disputed decision involved "not a rulemaking by an agency , but rather a policy - making at the highest level by the executive branch," concluding that it did not have authority under the apa "to review the wisdom of policy decisions of the president" where the relevant statute granted the president broad discretion in the area of foreign affairs .

gao determined that in accordance with this precedent , the agency actions implementing president trump's policy decision were not subject to the cra .

in guidance for the 2018 tax filing season , irs announced on its website that it "would not accept electronically filed individual income tax returns where the taxpayer does not meet aca reporting requirements , specifically to report full - year health coverage , claim a coverage exemption , or report a shared responsibility payment ( known as 'silent returns' ) . .

gao concluded that the agency statement was not a rule under the cra because it "is a rule of agency procedure or practice that does not substantially affect taxpayers' rights or obligations," thus falling into the exception in 5 u.s.c .

§804 ( 3 ) ( c ) .

in effect , according to gao , the "statement changes the timing of irs compliance measures , but it does not change irs's basis for assessing taxpayers' compliance with existing law — namely , the requirement to file a complete tax return and to meet aca reporting requirements. .

the social security administration's ( ssa ) hearings , appeals , and litigation law manual ( hallex ) describes how ssa will process and adjudicate claims for disability benefits under the social security act .

two sections of the manual stated a policy under which an ssa adjudicator could not rely on information from the internet , including from social media networks , in deciding a claim for benefits ( with two exceptions ) .

gao concluded that these two sections of hallex were not rules under the cra because they were merely "procedures that govern the use of evidence from the internet during those proceedings" and they "do not impose new burdens on claimants or alter claimants' rights or obligations during the ssa appeal process. .

thus , gao concluded that "the hallex sections are procedural rules that meet the [5 u.s.c .

§804 ( 3 ) ( c ) ] exception. .

on july 26 , 2018 , the irs issued revenue procedure 2018-38 , which "modifies the information certain tax - exempt entities are required to report to irs on their annual returns. .

on july 30 , 2018 , the irs submitted revenue procedure 2018-38 to congress under the cra .

on september 7 , 2018 , then - senator orrin hatch submitted a request to gao seeking its opinion on whether the revenue procedure was covered by the cra's definition of "rule. .

the irs had apparently made the determination , despite having submitted the document under the cra , that the document was not covered by the cra .

rather , the irs argued that it had submitted the rule "out of an abundance of caution" and to "allow congress to decide whether it is a rule by consulting gao. .

the circumstances surrounding this gao opinion were somewhat unique , because the irs had already submitted the revenue procedure to congress under the cra by the time the question was raised as to whether the revenue procedure was covered by the definition of "rule. .

this appeared to be the first time that gao had considered the application of the cra when an agency submitted a rule and later made the argument that the rule was not covered .

in its opinion , gao primarily addressed the issue of whether the submission of the rule was sufficient to trigger the cra's timelines rather than whether the revenue procedure met the statutory definition of "rule. .

gao stated in its opinion that the purpose of the gao opinions is "to cure the impediment created by the agency's failure to submit the rule , protecting [congress's] review and oversight authorities," and , therefore , because the irs had already submitted the rule , a gao opinion on the cra's applicability would be unnecessary .

furthermore , gao confirmed that the irs revenue procedure was available for congressional review under the cra because the irs had already submitted it: "irs's submission triggered congress's review and oversight powers under cra , starting with the transmittal of the rule to the committees of jurisdiction. .

gao also stated , "as congress is not deprived of exercising its powers under cra , there is no impediment to those powers that a gao opinion might cure .

we , therefore , take no position on whether the revenue procedure is a rule otherwise. .

on april 6 , 2018 , the attorney general issued a memorandum directing federal prosecutors to adopt a zero - tolerance policy for illegal border crossings at the southwestern border of the united states .

gao concluded that the april 2018 memorandum was not a rule under the cra because it was a rule of agency organization , procedure , or practice , and it did not change individuals' rights or obligations: "the rights and obligations in question are prescribed by existing immigration laws and remain unchanged by the agency's internal enforcement procedures at issue here. .

thus , gao concluded that the memorandum was covered by the exception in 5 u.s.c .

§804 ( 3 ) ( c ) .

in march 2018 , the secretary of commerce issued a memorandum to the under secretary of commerce for economic affairs justifying the secretary's decision to add a citizenship question to the 2020 census .

according to gao , the memorandum "described a december 12 , 2017 request from the department of justice ( doj ) that the census bureau include a citizenship question on the 2020 census" and directed the under secretary to include such a question .

soon after the secretary issued the memorandum , pursuant to statutory requirements , the census bureau delivered a report to congress containing its planned questions for the 2020 census , including the citizenship question .

gao concluded that the memorandum was not a rule under the cra , stating that "it was direction from a supervisor to a subordinate in conjunction with the statutory process whereby the secretary informs congress of the questions that will be on the census.… as such , the memorandum does not meet cra's definition of a rule because it was not designed to implement , interpret , or prescribe law or policy. .

because the memorandum did not meet the definition of "rule" under section 551 of the apa , gao did not discuss whether the memorandum would have been covered by any of the exceptions .

appendix a. submission form for rules under the cra appendix b .

summary of gao opinion .

