t he federal government pays benefits to coal miners affected by coal workers' pneumoconiosis ( cwp , commonly referred to as black lung disease ) and other lung diseases linked to coal mining in cases where the responsible mine operators are not able to pay .

benefit payments and related administrative expenses are paid out of the black lung disability trust fund .

the primary source of revenue for the trust fund is an excise tax on coal produced and sold domestically .

if excise tax revenue is not sufficient to finance black lung program benefits , the trust fund may borrow from the general fund of the treasury , which contains federal receipts not earmarked for a specific purpose .

for 2018 , the tax rates on coal were $1.10 per ton of underground - mined coal or $0.55 per ton of surface - mined coal , limited to 4.4% of the sales price .

starting in 2019 , under current law , these tax rates are $0.50 per ton of underground - mined coal or $0.25 per ton of surface - mined coal , limited to 2% of the sales price .

this decline in the excise tax rates will likely put additional financial strain on a trust fund that already borrows from the general fund to meet obligations .

the decline in domestic coal production , recent increases in the rate of cwp , and bankruptcies in the coal sector also contribute to the financial strain on the trust fund .

this report provides background information and policy options to help inform the debate surrounding the coal excise tax rate , and other considerations related to the black lung disability trust fund .

the report begins with an overview of the federal black lung program , providing information on black lung disease and benefits under the program .

the report proceeds to examine black lung disability trust fund revenues , focusing on the coal excise tax and its history .

the report closes with a discussion of policy options , evaluating various revenue - and benefits - related policy options that could improve the fiscal outlook of the black lung disability trust fund .

the black lung disability trust fund is used to finance the payment of federal black lung program benefits under part c of the black lung benefits act ( blba ) when a responsible coal operator does not meet its obligations under the law to pay benefits .

the primary revenue source for the black lung disability trust fund is a per - ton excise tax on coal .

historically , the coal excise tax has not generated enough revenue to meet the trust fund's obligations .

thus , additional funds have been provided from the general fund of the treasury .

the general fund includes governmental receipts not earmarked for a specific purpose , the proceeds of general borrowing , and is used for general governmental expenditures .

various factors have contributed to the ongoing situation of trust fund expenditures exceeding trust fund revenues .

throughout the 1980s , black lung benefit payments and administrative expenditures exceeded trust fund revenue .

as a result , the trust fund accumulated debt .

as discussed above , over time , various efforts have been made to improve the fiscal condition of the trust fund .

however , as of the end of fy2017 , the trust fund remains in debt .

the trust fund's cumulative debt at the end of fy2017 was $3.1 billion .

the trust fund also borrowed $1.3 billion from the general fund that same year .

projections suggest that borrowing from the general fund will increase over the next few years , even as cumulative ( or legacy ) debt is paid down .

under the current excise tax rates , benefit payments and administrative expenses will be approximately equal to trust fund revenues in fy2020 through fy2022 ( see figure 5 ) .

however , revenues are not projected to be sufficient to repay debt , and expenses are projected to rise over time when debt and interest expenses are included .

specifically , by fy2022 , it is projected that the trust fund will borrow $2.6 billion in repayable advances from the general fund .

there are various policy options that congress might consider to improve the fiscal condition of the black lung disability trust fund .

broadly , increasing taxes on the coal industry ( or maintaining 2018 rates ) would pass the costs associated with paying black lung benefits onto the coal industry .

alternatively , forgiving trust fund interest or debt or financing black lung benefits out of general fund revenues would pass the costs of federal black lung benefits onto taxpayers in general .

another option would be to reduce federal black lung benefits .

additional revenue would likely need to be provided to the trust fund if the trust fund is to pay for past black lung benefits and maintain current benefit levels .

additional revenue may be needed even if past debt is forgiven ( or assumed by the general fund ) , as anticipated trust fund revenues are not likely to be sufficient to cover anticipated trust fund expenditures .

as discussed above , in the past , congress and the president have opted to increase the excise tax on coal to address shortfalls in the black lung disability trust fund .

these increased rates have been temporary , and scheduled to revert back to the reduced rate if the trust fund's debt is eliminated .

congress has chosen to extend the increased rates beyond their scheduled expiration when the trust fund is in debt .

one option would be to extend 2018 rates. .

the gao projects that if 2018 coal excise tax rates are extended , the trust fund will have a debt of $4.5 billion in 2050 ( see "gao options for improving trust fund finances" below ) .

gao projections suggest that increasing 2018 tax rates by 25% would eliminate the trust fund's debt , leaving the trust fund with a surplus of $0.6 billion in 2050 .

an alternative way to raise revenue from the coal industry is to scale back or eliminate various tax expenditures , or tax preferences , from which the coal industry benefits .

for example , coal producers benefit from being able to expense exploration and development costs and are able to recover costs using percentage depletion ( depletion based on revenue from the sale of the mineral asset ) instead of cost depletion ( depletion based on the amount of the mineral asset exhausted and the amount invested in the asset ) .

the obama administration regularly proposed repealing these tax incentives as part of the administration's annual budget .

it could be difficult to assign the revenues raised via the repeal of tax benefits to the trust fund .

with an excise tax , it is straightforward to identify the revenue generated by the tax and earmark the revenue for a trust fund .

it is not as straightforward to determine the amount of revenue that is raised through the repeal of an income tax expenditure , or direct the additional revenue raised because a certain preference is no longer in the code to a trust fund .

repeal of coal - industry tax benefits could , however , be used to offset the cost of a one - time transfer from the general fund to the trust fund .

revenue from various sources , including the general fund , could be used to supplement trust fund revenue generated from current sources .

general fund revenues are not earmarked for a specific purpose , and there is generally no direct link between the source of general fund revenue and the government good or service provided .

black lung benefits were paid out of general revenue before the trust fund was established in 1977 .

trust funds are generally established when there is a link between the government benefits or services being provided and the revenue source funding those benefits or services .

the black lung disability trust fund was established because congress believed that the costs of the part c black lung program should be borne by the coal industry .

financing black lung benefits with general fund revenue would weaken the link between the industry and black lung benefits , while reducing the burden on the industry associated with paying for black lung benefits .

in the past the black lung disability trust fund's fiscal outlook has been improved through interest and debt forgiveness .

as discussed above , in the late 1990s , there was a five - year forgiveness of interest on debt owed to the treasury's general fund .

more recently , debt was forgiven as part of the 2008 restructuring of the trust fund's debt .

the gao projects that if all current debt were forgiven , the trust fund would accumulate $2.3 billion in new debt by 2050 .

if all interest were forgiven , the trust fund debt is projected to be $5.8 billion by 2050 .

forgiving the trust fund's interest or debt obligations would shift the burden of paying for black lung disability benefits from the coal industry to general taxpayers .

however , a one - time appropriation to forgive interest or debt is a transparent option for satisfying the trust fund's obligations to the general fund .

the primary expenditures of the trust fund are for the payment of part c benefits to miners in cases in which there is no responsible operator .

in order to reduce expenditures and improve the long - term financial health of the trust fund , congress could consider several options to reduce the generosity and scope of benefits or increase the ability of the federal government to ensure that coal operators , even those who are in the bankruptcy process , pay benefits for their miners .

a reduction in the amount of part c benefits would result in lower part c expenditures from both responsible coal operators and the trust fund .

however , as compared to other workers' compensation benefits , part c benefits are relatively low .

the basic part c benefit rate for a single miner is equal to 37.5% of the base rate of pay for federal employees at the gs - 2 , step 1 level .

for 2019 this benefit is just over $660 per month , or under $8,000 per year .

in the majority of state workers' compensation programs , the basic benefit rate is set at two - thirds of the worker's pre - disability wage , subject to statutory minimums and maximums .

the other workers' compensation programs administered by dol , the lhwca , and the federal employees' compensation act ( feca ) use two - thirds of a worker's pre - disability wage as the basis for their benefits .

a federal worker with a spouse or dependent in the feca program is entitled to 75% of his or her pre - disability wage .

the minimum benefit for total disability or death in the feca program , 75% of gs - 2 , step 1 , is twice the amount of the part c benefit rate .

in addition , unlike the other federal workers' compensation programs and many state programs , there is no automatic adjustment to part c benefits to reflect increases in the cost of living .

part c benefits instead increase only when federal pay rates are increased .

the eligibility of miners and survivors to part c benefits could be restricted to reduce expenditures from responsible operators and the trust fund .

in 1981 , congress enacted several eligibility restrictions to miners and survivors as part of the black lung benefits revenue act of 1981 , to address concerns about the financial insolvency of the trust fund .

specifically , this law removed the following three eligibility presumptions for new claims going forward: a rebuttable presumption that the death of a miner who worked in mining for at least 10 years and who died of any respirable disease , was due to pneumoconiosis ( listed as presumption 2 in table 1 ) .

a rebuttable presumption that a miner employed in mining for at least 15 years , and who has a chest x - ray that is interpreted as negative with respect to certain statutory standards but who has other evidence of a totally disabling respiratory or pulmonary impairment , is totally disabled due to pneumoconiosis , or died due to pneumoconiosis .

this presumption may only be rebutted by the secretary of labor establishing that the miner does not or did not have pneumoconiosis or that the miner's respiratory or pulmonary impairment did not arise out of connection to mine employment ( presumption 4 in table 1 ) .

a presumption that a miner who died on or before march 1 , 1978 , and who was employed in mining for at least 25 years before june 30 , 1971 , died due to pneumoconiosis , unless it is established that at the time of the miner's death , he or she was not at least partially disabled due to pneumoconiosis ( presumption 5 in table 1 ) .

in addition to removing three of the five existing eligibility presumptions , the 1981 law also removed the right of the survivors of a miner who is determined to be eligible for part c benefits at the time of his or her death to receive survivors' benefits without filing a new claim , thus permitting the payment of survivors' benefits in the case of a current beneficiary , even if the beneficiary's death is not proven to be linked to pneumoconiosis .

two of the restrictions put in place by the 1981 legislation were later removed by the aca .

the aca reinstated the fourth eligibility presumption and expanded rights for survivors' benefits , thus expanding eligibility for both miners and certain survivors .

under part c of the blba , the federal government may recover the costs of benefits , and interest accrued on those benefits , paid by the trust fund from identified responsible operators .

in addition , part c allows the federal government to place a lien on the property and rights to property of an operator that refuses to pay the benefits and interest it owes to the trust fund .

in the case of a bankruptcy or insolvency proceeding , this lien is to be treated in the same manner as a lien for taxes owed to the federal government .

however , in a 2016 letter to the comptroller general requesting a gao review of the trust fund , representatives bobby scott , ranking member of the house committee on education and the workforce , and sander levin , ranking member of the house committee on ways and means , claimed that the number of current and potential bankruptcies among coal operators is placing stress on the trust fund .

representatives scott and levin cited the example of patriot coal which , according to their letter , transferred $62 million in part c liabilities to the trust fund when it became insolvent .

in addition , this letter claims that insolvent coal operators may be able to avoid trust fund liens by continuing to make benefit payments until after the court in their bankruptcy cases has approved the sale of their assets to another company .

because the original company was never in default of its payments , no lien was filed , and these assets were able to be purchased by another company without any lien or future liability to the trust fund .

congress may examine the issue of the impact of coal operator bankruptcies and the interaction of bankruptcy law and the blba's lien provisions , to strengthen both the federal government's ability to ensure that responsible operators are paying for benefits and reduce the benefit expenditures of the trust fund .

