in recent years , central american migrant families have been arriving at the u.s. - mexico border in relatively large numbers , many seeking asylum .

while some request asylum at u.s. ports of entry , others do so after attempting to enter the united states illegally between u.s. ports of entry .

on may 7 , 2018 , then - attorney general jeff sessions announced that the department of justice ( doj ) implemented a "zero tolerance" policy toward illegal border crossing , both to discourage illegal migration into the united states and to reduce the burden of processing asylum claims that administration officials contend are often fraudulent .

under the zero tolerance policy , doj prosecuted 100% of adult aliens apprehended crossing the border illegally , making no exceptions for whether they were asylum seekers or accompanied by minor children .

illegal border crossing is a misdemeanor for a first time offender and a felony for anyone who has previously been "denied admission , excluded , deported , or removed , or has departed the united states while an order of exclusion , deportation or removal is outstanding and thereafter enters , attempts to enter or is found in the u.s." both such criminal offenses can be prosecuted by doj in federal criminal courts .

doj's "100% prosecution" policy represented a change in the level of enforcement of an existing statute rather than a change in statute or regulation .

the recent bush and obama administrations prosecuted illegal border crossings relatively infrequently , in part to avoid having doj resources committed to prosecuting sizeable numbers of misdemeanors .

at different times during those administrations , illegal entrants would be criminally prosecuted in an attempt to reduce illegal migration , but exceptions were generally made for families and asylum seekers .

illegal border crossers who are prosecuted by doj are detained in federal criminal facilities .

because children are not permitted in criminal detention facilities with adults , detaining adults who crossed illegally requires that any minor children under age 18 accompanying them be treated as unaccompanied alien children ( uac ) and transferred to the care and custody of the department of health and human services' ( hhs's ) office of refugee resettlement ( orr ) .

the widely publicized family separations were therefore a consequence of the administration's policy of 100% prosecution of illegal border crossing , and not the result of a direct policy or law mandating family separation .

since the policy was implemented , "under 3,000" children may have been separated from their parents , including at least 100 under age 5 .

the family separations have garnered extensive public attention .

the trump administration and immigration enforcement advocates maintain that the zero tolerance policy was necessary to dis - incentivize migrants from coming to the united states and clogging immigration courts with fraudulent requests for asylum .

immigrant advocates contend that migrant families are fleeing legitimate threats of violence and that family separations resulting from the zero tolerance policy were cruel and violated fundamental human rights .

this report briefly reviews the statutory authority for prosecuting persons who enter the united states illegally between u.s. ports of entry , and the policies and procedures for processing apprehended illegal border entrants and any accompanying children .

it explains enforcement policies under past administrations and then discusses the trump administration's zero tolerance policy on illegal border crossers and the attendant family separations .

the report concludes by presenting varied policy perspectives on the zero tolerance policy and briefly reviews recent related congressional activity .

an appendix examines recent trends in the apprehension of family units at the u.s. southwest border .

this report describes policies and circumstances that continue to change .

information presented in it is current as of the publication date but may become outdated quickly .

aliens who wish to enter the united states may request admission legally at a u.s. port of entry or may attempt to enter illegally by crossing the border surreptitiously between u.s. ports of entry .

aliens who wish to request asylum may do so at a u.s. port of entry before an officer with the department of homeland security ( dhs ) customs and border protection ( cbp ) office of field operations or upon apprehension between u.s. ports of entry before an agent with cbp's u.s. border patrol .

dhs has broad statutory authority both to detain aliens not legally admitted , including asylum seekers , and to remove aliens who are found to be either inadmissible at ports of entry or removable once in the united states .

aliens requesting asylum at the border are entitled to an interview assessing the credibility of their asylum claims .

prior to the trump administration , aliens apprehended between ports of entry who were not considered enforcement priorities ( eg , a public safety threat , repeat illegal border crosser , convicted felon , or suspected child trafficker ) were typically not criminally prosecuted for illegal entry but would be placed directly into civil removal proceedings for unauthorized u.s. presence .

in addition , aliens apprehended at and between ports of entry who sought asylum and were found to have credible fear generally were not held in immigration detention if dhs did not assess them as public safety risks .

rather , they were administratively placed into removal proceedings , instructed by dhs to appear at their immigration hearings , and then released into the u.s. interior .

this policy became more prevalent after 2015 when a federal judge ruled that children could not be kept in immigration detention for more than 20 days .

dhs officials justified the "catch and release" approach in the past because of the lack of detention bed space and the considerable cost of detaining large numbers of unauthorized aliens and family units for the lengthy periods , often stretching to years , between apprehension by cbp and removal hearings before an eoir judge .

immigration enforcement advocates criticized the catch and release policy because of the failure of many apprehended individuals to appear subsequently for their immigration hearings .

according to some observers , prior administrations made more use of alternatives to detention that permitted dhs to monitor families who were released into the u.s. interior .

such practices are needed to monitor the roughly 2 million aliens in removal proceedings given that ice's current budget funds less than 50,000 beds , which are prioritized for aliens who pose public safety or absconder risks .

data are not available on the rate and / or absolute number of family separations resulting from illegal border crossing prosecutions under prior administrations , limiting the degree to which comparisons can be made with the trump administration's zero tolerance policy .

dhs states that the agency referred an average of 21% of all illegal border crossing "amenable adults" for prosecution from fy2010 through fy2016 .

dhs maintains that it has an established policy of separating children from adults when it cannot determine the family relationship or otherwise verify identity , determines that the child is being smuggled or trafficked or is otherwise at risk with the parent or legal guardian , or determines that the parent or legal guardian may have engaged in criminal conduct and refers them for criminal prosecution .

on april 6 , 2018 , then - attorney general jeff sessions announced a "zero tolerance" policy under which all illegal border crossers apprehended between u.s. ports of entry would be criminally prosecuted for illegal entry or illegal reentry .

this policy made no exceptions for asylum seekers and / or family units .

to facilitate this policy , the attorney general announced that he would send 35 additional prosecutors to u.s. attorney's offices along the southwest border and 18 additional immigration judges to adjudicate cases in immigration courts near the southwest border .

consequently , if a family unit was apprehended crossing illegally between ports of entry , the zero tolerance policy mandated that cbp refer all illegal adult entrants to doj for criminal prosecution .

accompanying children , who are not permitted to be housed in adult criminal detention settings with their parents , were to be processed as unaccompanied alien children in accordance with the tvpra .

they were transferred to the custody of orr , which houses them in agency - supervised , state - licensed shelters .

if feasible given the circumstances , orr attempted to place them with relatives or legal guardian sponsors or place them in temporary foster care .

orr has over 100 shelters in 17 states , and during the implementation of the zero tolerance policy they were reportedly at close to full capacity .

consequently , at one point , the agency was evaluating options for housing children on department of defense ( dod ) installations to handle the surge of separated children resulting from increased prosecution of parents crossing between ports of entry .

as noted earlier , after adults have been tried in federal courts for illegal entry — and if convicted , have served their criminal sentences — they are transferred to ice custody and placed in immigration detention .

typically , parents are then reunited in ice family detention facilities with their children who have either remained in orr custody or have been placed with a sponsor .

requests for asylum can also be pursued at this point .

perspectives on the zero tolerance policy generally divide into two groups .

those who support greater immigration enforcement point to recent surges in family unit migration and a substantial backlog of asylum cases that are straining dhs and doj resources , potentially compromising the agencies' abilities to meet their outlined missions .

those who advocate on behalf of immigrants decry the administration's treatment of migrants as unnecessarily harsh and counterproductive .

given that this topic is developing rapidly , bills discussed below do not reflect all legislation or amendments introduced to date , or more recent developments .

instead , the bills presented here are intended to illustrate the range of legislative proposals to address family separation in the current context .

bills introduced during the 116 th congress that are related to family separation are intended to prevent or limit the practice .

these include h.r .

883 / s. 271 , the families belong together act , which would grant humanitarian parole and / or lpr status to separated parents and children upon request .

likewise , h.r .

541 / s. 292 , the keep families together act ( similar to h.r .

6135 / s. 3036 introduced in the 115 th congress ) contains provisions to keep families together during all stages of processing following apprehension at a u.s. border , plus protections against the prosecution for illegal border crossing of asylum seekers and grantees .

h.r .

1012 , the reunite act , includes provisions that would facilitate the expeditious reunification of separated families .

h.j.res .

31 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2019 , included additional funding to increase the number of participants in alternatives to detention ( atd ) programs ; additional ice staffing dedicated to the management of atd immigration cases , particularly those of asylum applicants ; and the family case management program ( fcmp ) , an alternative to family detention .

the legislation directs ice to prioritize both the use of atd programs for families and the adjudication timeline for cases of individuals enrolled in atd , particularly those of families and asylum seekers .

a number of bills were introduced in the 115 th congress in response to family separation resulting from the administration's zero tolerance policy regarding the prosecution of illegal border crossing .

with the exception of h.r .

6136 , which failed to pass in the house by a vote of 121-301 , none of the bills introduced saw congressional action .

bills that emphasized immigration enforcement included h.r .

6182 , the codifying president trump's affording congress an opportunity to address family separation executive order act , which would have provided statutory authority for president trump's executive order within the ina ; h.r .

6173 , which would have clarified standards for family detention ; and section 3102 of h.r .

6136 , the border security and immigration reform act of 2018 , which would have permitted children accompanied by parents to remain in dhs custody during the pendency of a parent's criminal prosecution , rather than being referred to orr and treated as uac .

on july 11 , 2018 , similar amendment language was included in an appropriations bill to fund the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , that was approved by the house appropriations committee .

h.r .

6204 , the families first act of 2018 , included similar provisions , asylum reforms , and provided increased funding for family unit facilities , personnel , and judges , among other provisions .

bills that intended to prevent or limit family separation included h.r .

6135 / s. 3036 , the keep families together act , and h.r .

6236 , the family unity rights and protection act , both of which contained provisions to keep families together during all stages of processing following apprehension at a u.s. border ; h.r .

6232 , the preventing family separation for immigrants with disabilities act , which would have prohibited family separation for individuals with developmental disabilities ; and h.r .

6172 , the reunite children with their parents act , which would have required dhs and doj to reunite minor children already separated from their parents .

other bills , such as h.r .

6181 / h.r .

6190 / s. 3093 , the keep families together and enforce the law act , would have maintained family unity by making the flores settlement agreement and related laws and regulations inapplicable to children who are accompanied by adults when they are apprehended at a u.s. border .

h.r .

6195 / s. 3091 , the protect kids and parents act , would have limited the separation of families seeking asylum by mandating that they be housed together , and facilitated asylum processing ( eg , by adding additional immigration judges and dhs personnel and establishing asylum processing deadlines ) , among other provisions .

increasing numbers of apprehensions of central american families and children are occurring within the context of relatively low historical levels of total alien apprehensions ( figure a - 1 ) .

apprehensions at the southwest border had peaked at 1.62 million in 1986 , the year congress enacted the immigration reform and control act ( irca ) , which gave legal status to roughly 2.7 million unauthorized aliens residing in the united states .

after dropping for multiple years , apprehensions increased again , climbing from 0.85 million in fy1989 to an all - time high of 1.64 million in fy2000 .

apprehensions generally fell after that ( with the exception of fy2004-fy2006 ) , reaching a 40-year low of 327,577 in fy2011 .

they have fluctuated since that point , declining even further in some years .

for the first four months of fy2019 , apprehensions at the southwest border reached 201,497 .

the national origins of apprehended aliens have shifted considerably during the past two decades ( figure a - 2 ) .

in fy2000 , for example , almost all aliens apprehended at the southwest border ( 98% ) were mexican nationals .

as recently as fy2011 , mexican nationals made up 84% of all apprehensions .

however , beginning in fy2012 , foreign nationals from countries other than mexico made up a growing percentage of total apprehensions and for most years after fy2013 , they made up the majority .

in the first four months of fy2019 , "other - than - mexicans" comprised most ( 78% ) of total alien apprehensions on the southwest border .

among demographic categories , persons in family units and unaccompanied children currently make up the largest share of total alien apprehensions at the southwest border ( figure a - 3 ) .

according to cbp commissioner kevin mcaleenan , single adult males made up over 90% of arriving aliens in the past .

however , in the first four months of fy2019 , family units and unaccompanied children comprised roughly 60% of all apprehended aliens .

cbp data on family unit apprehensions at the southwest border are publicly available starting in fy2012 , when they numbered just over 11,000 .

since then , family unit apprehensions have increased considerably , reaching a peak of 107,212 in fy2018 .

in the first four months of fy2019 , cbp apprehended 99,901 family units , which , if extrapolated to the remainder of fy2019 , yields a projected estimate of almost 300,000 family unit apprehensions , exceeding the annual levels of all prior fiscal years .

cbp data on apprehensions of unaccompanied alien children at the southwest border from fy2012 onward indicate a peak of 68,541 apprehensions in fy2014 and 20,123 apprehensions in the first four months of fy2019 .

since fy2012 , the composition of family unit apprehensions by origin country has shifted from mostly mexican ( 80% ) to mostly el salvadoran , guatemalan , and honduran ( 96% ) ( figure a - 4 ) .

among these three northern triangle countries , the percentage of apprehensions from el salvador , after increasing for several years , has recently declined , from 35% of all family unit apprehensions in fy2016 to 9% in the first four months of fy2019 , while the percentage from guatemala has increased steadily from 3% in fy2012 to 51% in fy2019 .

among unaccompanied alien children apprehended at the southwest border , a similar country - of - origin compositional shift has also occurred .

the percentage of apprehended unaccompanied children originating from mexico declined from 57% in fy2012 to 15% in the first four months of fy2019 , while the percentage of apprehended unaccompanied children from the northern triangle countries increased from 42% to 82% over the same period .

