by the end of 2017 , the people's republic of china ( prc ) had the world's largest number of internet users , estimated at over 750 million people .

at the same time , the country has one of the most sophisticated and aggressive internet censorship and control regimes in the world .

prc officials have argued that internet controls are necessary for social stability , and are intended to "enhance people's cultural taste" and "strengthen spiritual civilization. .

the prc government employs a variety of methods to control online content and expression , including website blocking and keyword filtering ; regulating and monitoring internet service providers ; censoring social media ; and arresting "cyber dissidents" and bloggers who broach sensitive social or political issues .

the government also monitors the popular mobile app wechat .

wechat began as a secure messaging app , similar to whatsapp , but it is now used for much more than just messaging and calling ( eg , mobile payments ) — and all the data shared through the app is also shared with the chinese government .

during the 2017 communist party congress , censors took steps to "restrict with one hand and disseminate with the other. .

censors using a variety of tools sought to eliminate certain words and expressions from appearing on social media ( eg , attempts to protest or ridicule senior political figures ) , while disseminating information supportive of the government and its leaders .

in its 2017 annual report , reporters without borders ( reporters sans frontières , rsf ) called china the "world's biggest prison for journalists" and warned that the country "continues to improve its arsenal of measures for persecuting journalists and bloggers. .

china ranks 176 th out of 180 countries in rsf's 2017 world press freedom index , surpassed only by turkmenistan , eritrea , and north korea in restrictions on press freedom .

at the end of 2017 , rsf asserted that china was holding 52 journalists and bloggers in prison .

this report describes the current state of internet freedom in china , u.s. government and private sector activity to support internet freedom around the world , and related issues of congressional interest .

the u.s. government continues to advocate policies to promote internet freedom in china's increasingly restrictive environment and to mitigate the global impact of chinese government censorship .

the department of state , the broadcasting board of governors ( bbg ) , and congress have taken an active role in fighting global internet censorship .

in response to criticism , particularly of their operations in china , a group of u.s. information and communications technology ( ict ) companies , along with nongovernmental organizations , investors , and universities , formed the global network initiative ( gni ) in 2008 .

the gni aims to promote best practices related to the conduct of u.s. companies in countries with poor internet freedom records .

the gni uses a self - regulatory approach to promote due diligence and awareness regarding human rights .

for example , gni has adopted a set of principles and supporting mechanisms to provide guidance to the ict industry and its stakeholders on how to protect and advance freedom of expression and the right to privacy when faced with pressures from governments to take actions that infringe upon these rights .

participating companies voluntarily agree to undergo third - party assessments of their compliance with gni principles .

while some human rights groups have criticized the gni's guidelines for being weak or too broad , gni's supporters argue that the initiative sets realistic goals and creates real incentives for companies to uphold free expression and privacy .

in may 2018 , the gni continued its participation in rightscon , a yearly summit that explores issues affecting free expression and protection of global journalism , gender diversity and digital inclusion , encryption and cybersecurity , and other topics related to internet freedom .

for many years , the development of the internet and its use in china have raised u.s. congressional concerns , including those related to human rights , trade and investment , and cybersecurity .

congressional interest in the internet in china has been tied to human rights concerns in a number of ways , including the use of the internet as a u.s. tool for promoting freedom of expression and other rights in china ; the use of the internet by political dissidents in the prc , and the political repression that such use often provokes ; and the role of u.s. internet companies in both spreading freedom in china and complying with or enhancing prc censorship and social control efforts .

congress has funded a variety of activities to support global internet freedom , including censorship circumvention technology development , internet and mobile communications security training , media and advocacy skills , and public policy .

china and iran have been the primary targets of such efforts , particularly circumvention and secure communications programs .

in past years , u.s. congressional committees and commissions have held hearings on the internet and china , including the roles of u.s. internet companies in china's censorship regime , cybersecurity , free trade in internet services , and the protection of intellectual property rights .

freedom on the net 2017 : manipulating social media to undermine democracy freedom house november 2017 https: / / freedomhouse.org / report / freedom - net / freedom - net - 2017 how to circumvent online censorship electronic frontier foundation updated august 10 , 2017 https: / / ssd.eff.org / en / module / how - circumvent - online - censorship the impact of media censorship: evidence from a field experiment in china yuyu chen david y. yang january 4 , 2018 https: / / stanford.edu / ~dyang1 / pdfs / 1984bravenewworld_draft.pdf china's g reat f irewall i s r ising: how h igh w ill i t g o ? .

the economist january 4 , 2018 https: / / www.economist.com / news / china / 21734029-how - high - will - it - go - chinas - great - firewall - rising online c ensorship: w ho a re the g atekeepers of o ur d igital l ives ? .

engineering and technology magazine the institution of engineering october 11 , 2017 https: / / eandt.theiet.org / content / articles / 2017 / 10 / online - censorship - who - are - the - gatekeepers - of - our - digital - lives / .

