since at least the 18 th century , governments , industry , philanthropic organizations , and other nongovernmental organizations throughout the world have offered prizes as a way to reward accomplishments in science and technology ( s&t ) .

napoleon's government offered a 12,000 franc prize ( worth more than four years of a french captain's pay in 1803 ) for a technology that would enhance the preservation of food and help the government feed advancing military troops .

in 1809 , the prize was awarded to nicolas françois appert , whose method of heating , boiling , and sealing food in airtight jars was published as a condition of the reward and serves as the basis for the modern process of canning foods .

in 1919 , businessman raymond orteig offered $25,000 ( more than $375,000 today ) for the first nonstop flight between new york and paris .

charles lindbergh , in the spirit of st. louis , won the prize in 1927 .

the success of the orteig prize in advancing commercial aviation is cited as inspiring the ansari x - prize more than 70 years later to lower the risk and cost of commercial space travel .

prizes generally fall into two main categories: innovation inducement prizes , which are designed to encourage the achievement of scientific and technical goals not yet reached , and recognition prizes such as the national medal of science , national medal of technology and innovation , or the nobel prizes , which reward past s&t accomplishments and do not have a specific scientific or technical goal .

the prize competitions and legislation discussed in this report refer to innovation inducement prizes .

according to some experts , prize competitions should be viewed as "a potential complement to , and not a substitute for , the primary instruments of direct federal support of research and innovation — peer - reviewed grants and procurement contracts. .

furthermore , prizes are not always considered to be the most appropriate mechanism to address all research and innovation objectives ; for example , a 2014 report by the u.s. chamber of commerce foundation specifically states that prizes are not a substitute for long - term basic research .

the comparative strengths of prize competitions in relation to the use of federal grants and contracts , as described by the national academy of sciences in a 1999 report , include ( 1 ) the ability to attract a broader spectrum of participants and ideas by reducing costs and bureaucratic barriers to participation ; ( 2 ) the potential leveraging of a sponsor's financial resources ; ( 3 ) the ability of federal agencies to shift the technical and other risks to contestants ; and ( 4 ) the capacity to educate , inspire , and potentially mobilize the public around scientific , technical , and societal objectives .

similarly , during the obama administration , the office of management and budget ( omb ) and the office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) described prize competitions as having the benefit of allowing the federal government to pay only for success and identify novel approaches , without bearing high levels of risk ; establish ambitious goals without having to predict which team or approach is most likely to succeed ; increase the number and diversity of individuals , organizations , and teams tackling a problem , including nonscientists and individuals who have not previously received federal funding ; increase cost effectiveness , stimulate private - sector investment , and maximize the return on taxpayer dollars ; further a federal agency's mission while motivating and inspiring others and capturing the public imagination ; and establish clear success metrics and validation protocols that themselves become defining tools and standards for the subject , industry , or field .

some experts have indicated that while prize competitions have more uncertainty in terms of program outputs and outcomes than more traditional instruments ( i.e. , grants and contracts ) , the potential payoffs to federal agencies can be higher if properly designed and implemented .

specifically , determining the correct size of the cash prize ; transparent , simple , and unbiased contest rules ; and the proper treatment of intellectual property rights are considered important aspects of a successful prize competition .

in 2010 , congress passed the america competes reauthorization act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-358 ) providing the head of a federal agency with the authority to carry out prize competitions "to stimulate innovation that has the potential to advance the mission of the respective agency. .

specifically , p.l .

111-358 added section 24 to the stevenson - wydler technology innovation act of 1980 ( 15 u.s.c .

§3719 ) defining what activities constitute a prize competition and detailing how a federal agency should address liability issues , intellectual property rights , the judging of a prize competition , and other topics .

in 2017 , the american innovation and competitiveness act ( p.l .

114-329 ) made a number of technical and clarifying amendments to this broad prize competition authority , including language authorizing the head of a federal agency to request and accept funds for the design and administration of a prize competition or for the cash prize itself from other federal agencies , state and local governments , private - sector for - profit entities , and nonprofit entities .

the general provisions of the law , as amended , are as follows: prize competitions are defined as being one or more of the following: ( 1 ) a competition that rewards and spurs the development of a solution to a well - defined problem ; ( 2 ) a competition that helps identify and promote a broad range of ideas and facilitates development of such ideas by third parties , especially in an area that may not otherwise receive attention ; ( 3 ) competitions that encourage participants to change their behavior or develop new skills during and after the competition ; and ( 4 ) any other competition the head of an agency considers appropriate to stimulate innovation and advance the agency's mission .

federal agencies must advertise a competition widely to encourage broad participation , including publishing a notice of the competition on a publicly accessible government website ( eg , http: / / www.challenge.gov / ) .

the notice must describe the subject of the prize competition , rules for participating , the registration process , the amount of the prize purse , and how the winner will be selected .

to be eligible to win a federal prize competition , an individual , participating singly or within in a group , must be a united states citizen or permanent resident , cannot be a federal employee acting within the scope of their employment , and must be registered and in compliance with all the requirements and rules of the prize competition .

similarly , to be eligible to win a federal prize competition , a private entity must be incorporated in and maintain a primary place of business within the united states and must be registered and in compliance with the requirements and rules of the prize competition .

federal agencies must require all participants to register , assume any and all risks , and waive claims against the government .

registered participants must also obtain liability insurance or demonstrate financial responsibility ; however , an agency can waive the insurance requirement .

the federal government cannot gain an interest in intellectual property developed by a participant without written consent of the participant .

the head of a federal agency must appoint one or more judges using guidelines that are transparent and promote balance .

additionally , a judge cannot have a personal or financial conflict of interest with any of the registered participants .

funding for a prize competition , including the design and administration of a competition , may consist of federally appropriated funds and / or funds provided by a state or local government or a private - sector for - profit or nonprofit entity .

a federal agency can solicit and accept funds from other federal agencies , state and local governments , private - sector for - profit entities , and nonprofit entities .

a prize competition cannot be announced until all of the funds have been appropriated or committed in writing .

federal agencies can enter into an agreement with a private - sector for - profit or nonprofit entity or a state or local government agency to administer a federal prize competition .

a prize in excess of $50 million cannot be offered unless 30 days have elapsed after written notice is provided to congress .

the head of a federal agency must approve any award of more than $1 million .

the director of the office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) must submit a biennial report to congress detailing the use of the prize competition authority provided by p.l .

111-358 .

over the years , congress has provided some federal agencies with additional explicit authority to conduct prize competitions .

federal agencies with specific prize competition authorities are as follows: department of defense ( dod ) : in 1999 , congress provided prize competition authority to the defense advanced research projects agency through the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2000 ( p.l .

106-65 ) .

in 2006 , the authority was extended to the military departments through the john warner national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2007 ( p.l .

109-364 ) .

specifically , the authority states that the secretary of defense can award prizes " in basic , advanced , and applied research , technology development , and prototype development that have the potential for application to the performance of the military missions of the department of defense . .

department of energy ( doe ) : in 2005 , through the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) , the secretary of energy was authorized to carry out a program "to award cash prizes in recognition of breakthrough achievements in research , development , demonstration , and commercial application that have the potential for application to the performance of the mission of the department. .

p.l .

109-58 also authorized the freedom prize with the goal of advancing technologies that will reduce america's dependence on foreign oil .

in 2007 , through the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-140 ) , congress authorized doe to conduct the hydrogen prize and the bright tomorrow lighting prize to stimulate innovation and advancement in hydrogen energy technologies and solid - state lighting products , respectively .

in 2011 , through p.l .

111-358 , congress authorized the director of the advanced research projects agency - energy to provide awards in the form of cash prizes , among other mechanisms .

national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) : in 2005 , through the national aeronautics and space administration authorization act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-155 ) , the administrator of nasa was granted the authority to award cash prizes "to stimulate innovation in basic and applied research , technology development , and prototype demonstration that have the potential for application to the performance of the space and aeronautical activities of the administration. .

department of health and human services ( hhs ) : in 2006 , through the pandemic and all - hazards preparedness act ( p.l .

109-417 ) , the secretary of hhs was authorized "to award contracts , grants , cooperative agreements , or enter into other transactions , such as prize payments" to promote innovation and research and development on biodefense medical countermeasures .

in 2016 , through the 21 st century cures act ( p.l .

114-255 ) , the director of the national institutes of health was directed to support prize competitions that would realize significant advancements in biomedical science or improve health outcomes , especially as they relate to human diseases or conditions .

national science foundation ( nsf ) : in 2007 , the america competes act ( p.l .

110-69 ) authorized nsf "to receive and use funds donated by others" for the specific purpose of creating prize competitions for basic research .

department of transportation ( dot ) : in 2012 , through the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century act ( p.l .

112-141 ) , the secretary of transportation was authorized to use up to 1% of the funds made available from the highway trust fund for research and development to carry out a prize competition program "to stimulate innovation in basic and applied research and technology development that has the potential for application to the national transportation system. .

department of commerce ( doc ) : in 2018 , through the consolidated appropriations act for fiscal year 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) , the secretary of commerce , subject to the availability of funds , was directed to conduct prize competitions that will accelerate the development and commercialization of technologies to improve spectrum efficiency .

the use of prize competitions by federal agencies has grown since the enactment of the america competes reauthorization act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-358 ) and its inclusion of a broad prize competition authority as described above .

as shown in figure 1 , the number of active prize competitions conducted under the authority provided in p.l .

111-358 grew from 7 in fy2011 to 63 in fy2016 .

the number of active prize competitions conducted under other authorities has also increased , peaking at 70 in fy2015 .

the number of federal agencies conducting active prize competitions has increased from 7 federal agencies in fy2011 to 26 in fy2016 , with a high of 41 federal agencies conducting prize competitions in fy2015 .

the total amount of prize money offered by federal agencies has also increased over time .

in fy2011 , the active prize competitions conducted by federal agencies under p.l .

111-358 offered a total of $247,000 and in fy2016 the total amount of prize money offered exceeded $30 million ( figure 2 ) .

the average value of the prize money offered by competitions under p.l .

111-358 increased from $35,286 in fy2011 to $527,947 in fy2016 .

however , an examination of the median amount of prize money offered per prize indicates that the size of federal prizes has remained relatively steady over time with a median value of $34,500 in fy2011 compared to $41,590 in fy2016 .

more than half of all prize competitions in fy2014-fy2016 were conducted in partnership with other federal agencies , nonprofit and for - profit private - sector entities , or others .

according to ostp , a clear distinction of the prize competitions that use the authority provided by p.l .

111-358 is "the broad partnerships that agencies are able to leverage. .

specifically , in a 2017 report , ostp found that 73% of the prize competitions conducted under p.l .

111-358 engaged in formal partnerships compared to 30% conducted under other authorities .

overall , the u.s. general services administration ( gsa ) estimates that since 2010 federal agencies have conducted more than 840 prize competitions and offered more than $280 million in prize money .

federal agencies have increased the use of prize competitions to spur innovation and advance the mission of their respective agencies ; however , there is limited information on the effectiveness and impact of prize competitions generally .

according to experts , only a small number of prize competitions have been systematically evaluated .

members of congress may conduct oversight through hearings ( or other means ) to gain insight into existing federal prize competitions and related programs to inform potential changes in the use of prizes by federal agencies .

questions for congressional consideration might include the following: would the technology or innovation have been developed in the absence of a prize competition ? .

did the prize competition shorten the timeframe for the development of the technology or innovation ? .

was the prize competition cost effective ? .

what , if any , other benefits were gained from conducting the prize competition ? .

would the use of a more traditional policy tool such as a grant or contract have resulted in the development of a similar technology or innovation ? .

if the prize competition were designed differently , would a more effective or revolutionary technology or innovation have been developed ? .

what are the appropriate metrics for determining the success of a prize competition ? .

are the metrics different when evaluating the near - term and long - term impacts of a prize competition ? .

what are the best practices of successful prize competitions ? .

according to a 2017 report , "if measurement , assessment , and learning become standard parts of innovation challenges , the challenge community will have a growing evidence base with which to move ahead quickly in applying approaches best able to achieve funders' objectives , in terms of social impact and on other metrics. .

the awarding of a prize may be considered by some as evidence of the success of a prize competition ; however , experts generally agree that both quantitative and qualitative information is necessary to assess success .

members of congress may examine what metrics and other data and information federal agencies collect on federal prize competitions , including any effort by ostp or others to standardize data collection across the federal government .

the design and implementation of a prize competition is held by many to be critical to the success of the competition .

specifically , in a 1999 report , the national academy of engineering stated that "if prize contests are not designed or administered with care , they may discourage prudent risk taking or unorthodox approaches to particular scientific or technological challenges , or scare away potential contestants with excessive bureaucracy. .

increased interest in the use of prize competitions by congress and the current and previous administrations has resulted in federal agencies developing more in - house expertise in the design and administration of prize competitions .

for example , in fy2016 , 8 federal agencies had department - wide policy and guidance on the use of prize competitions ; 5 agencies had dedicated , full - time prize competition personnel ; 10 agencies enabled a distributed network of prize managers and points of contact ; and 5 agencies were providing centralized training and design support to agency staff .

additionally , gsa fostered the development of a federal community of practice in prize competitions , and in 2016 , published a prize and challenges toolkit to assist federal agencies .

on the other hand , innocentive , a company that performs prize competition services for public and private organizations , has argued for increased outsourcing of the design and administration of publicly funded prize competitions , stating governments and international public institutions should be actively seeking to improve their own innovation systems expertise , but they should also support the development of a strong , vibrant , and bold innovation management industry in the private sector .

ultimately , it is this vibrant marketplace of independent organizations , with their global diversity of perspectives and ideas , that will best drive forward the evolution and progress of innovation using challenges .

members of congress may examine the capability and expertise of federal agencies in the design and administration of prize competitions , in addition to federal agencies' use of partners and paid vendors to create teams with the ability and experience needed to run successful prize competitions .

in addition to examining current federal prize competitions and federal agency expertise , some members of congress may want to establish new federal prize competitions through legislation .

in developing such legislation , policymakers may consider some of the following questions: should the legislation be general and flexible , providing federal agencies with an overview of the prize goals , or specific , detailing instructions to the agency regarding the prize competition ? .

such details may include timeframe , award amount , participant eligibility , administration , contest rule determination , competition judges , intellectual property rights , liability , and program evaluation .

what should be the prize topic ? .

who should select it ? .

what should be the goals of the program ? .

what are the relative importance of technological advancement , education , and public awareness ? .

should there be a time limit for the prize ? .

should a monetary award be part of the prize ? .

if so , how much ? .

if not , is the publicity associated with winning the prize sufficient to encourage quality contestant participation ? .

should there be intermediary prizes ( eg , should partial prizes be awarded to participants that achieve certain milestones ) ? .

who should be eligible to participate in the competition ? .

for example , should employees of federal agencies or federally funded research and development centers ( ffrdcs ) be allowed to compete ? .

if so , should they be able to use federal funds and facilities ? .

should foreign entities , such as non - u.s. citizens , corporations , or u.s. subsidiaries of foreign - owned corporations , be allowed to compete ? .

who should administer the program ? .

for example , should a federal agency administer the program independently , do so in partnership with another federal agency or nonfederal organization , or act as a financial or nonfinancial partner in a competition administered by a nonfederal organization ? .

who should judge the competition ? .

should there be an appeal process ? .

what are the criteria for the program to be considered successful ? .

answering some of these questions may require the guidance and input of the science and technology community , federal agencies , and those experienced in the administration of prize competitions .

the constantly changing state of the art of science and engineering due to new discoveries and innovation may lead observers to suggest providing flexibility in prize legislation .

in the 115 th congress , as of the date of this report , more than 20 bills have been introduced to authorize or establish prize competitions within various federal agencies .

see table a - 1 in the appendix for a list of the proposed legislation , a brief summary , and the most recent action .

