the term stem education refers to teaching and learning in the fields of science , technology , engineering , and mathematics .

it typically includes educational activities across all grade levels — from pre - school to post - doctorate — in both formal ( eg , classrooms ) and informal ( eg , afterschool programs ) settings .

federal policymakers have an active and enduring interest in stem education , and the topic is frequently raised in federal science , education , workforce , national security , defense , and immigration policy debates .

although many observers cite the launch of the soviet union's sputnik satellite in the 1950s as a key turning point for stem education policy in the united states , federal interest in scientific and technological literacy writ large is long - standing and dates to at least the 1 st congress .

for example , in the first state of the union address , president george washington called upon congress to promote scientific knowledge for the sake of the republic and the polity: nor am i less persuaded that you will agree with me in opinion that there is nothing which can better deserve your patronage than the promotion of science and literature .

knowledge is in every country the surest basis of public happiness .

in one in which the measures of government receive their impressions so immediately from the sense of the community as in ours it is proportionably [sic] essential .

more recent concerns about scientific and technological proficiency of the population of the united states have focused on the relationship between stem education and national prosperity and power .

since world war ii , the united states has benefitted from the social , economic , health , and military advances made possible , in part , by a highly skilled stem workforce .

today , a wide range of u.s. occupations — in stem and non - stem fields — either require or benefit from workers with stem skills and knowledge .

most observers would likely argue that science and technology skills will continue to be as important in the future as they were in the past , if not more so .

as such , many observers consider widespread stem literacy , as well as specific stem expertise , to be critical human capital competencies for the 21 st century .

the education system is one major source of stem skills and knowledge among the u.s. population .

federal legislators have paid close attention to the stem - related outputs of that system — such as the number of college graduates with degrees in stem fields or the performance of u.s. students on international mathematics tests — and have sought to increase its functioning and capacity through federal policy and investments .

for example , over 300 bills containing just the term "science education" were introduced in the 20 years between the 105 th ( 1997-1998 ) and 115 th ( 2017-2018 ) congresses .

agency reauthorization bills often contain stem education - related provisions , and at least 14 federal agencies conduct stem education programs or activities .

the annual federal investment in stem education programs , while difficult to estimate , is typically considered to be around $3 billion .

given policymakers' ongoing interest in the scope and scale of the federal stem education effort , this report aims to provide an overview of the current and historical landscape of programs and issues in stem education .

the first section of this report examines federal agencies , programs , and funding for stem education .

the second section examines the performance of the u.s .

stem education system and outstanding issues that may be of interest to congress .

the final section of the report includes a list of major acts dealing with stem education and provides a history of recent legislative efforts .

appendix a contains links to sources of stem education data , and appendix b includes descriptions of the federal stem education effort from selected historical inventories .

no single fact or statistic can wholly capture the condition of stem education in the united states , and for a variety of reasons , the question "what is the condition of stem education in the united states ? .

may be unanswerable .

however , some trends appear to have held over time , and in the most general sense , based upon some commonly examined indicators , the condition of stem education in the united states may be characterized as having more or less held constant , and improved in some areas , over the course of the last four decades .

this is not the entirety of the story , though .

looking at stem education from this broad perspective disguises trends that raise concerns and drive policy in this area .

among these concerns are persistent achievement gaps between various demographic groups across both secondary and postsecondary education levels , u.s. k - 12 student performance on international mathematics and science tests , u.s. k - 12 stem teacher quality , and the u.s .

stem labor supply .

depending on how broadly the term is defined , federal interest in stem education may be traced to the 1 st congress .

several institutions that would become central parts of the federal stem education effort — such as hhs ( 1798 , 1 stat .

605 ) , the smithsonian institution ( 1846 , 9 stat .

103 ) , the national academy of sciences ( a private nonprofit chartered by congress in 1863 , 12 stat .

806 ) , and ed ( originally the office of education , 1867 , 14 stat .

434 ) — were in place before the united states celebrated its first centennial .

federal stem education policymaking intensified after world war ii .

the desire to maintain the scientific achievements of the war led to the creation of nsf in 1950 .

by 1952 , nsf was issuing graduate research fellowship awards to promising stem graduate students .

the soviet union's launch of the first artificial satellite , sputnik , triggered fears that the united states was falling behind in mathematics and science education and led to the national defense education act of 1958 , which some cite as the first federal foray into stem education policy in the modern era .

the 114 th and 115 th congresses saw some legislative action that will have an effect on the federal effort in stem education .

for example , the every student succeeds act , reauthorizing the elementary and secondary education act of 1965 , was enacted in december 2015 , significantly changing the federal involvement in stem education at the elementary and secondary education levels .

the following section discusses selected historical federal stem education measures , as well as legislative efforts in the 114 th and 115 th congresses that are relevant to stem education policy .

the land ordinance of 1785 was one of a series of three measures providing for the political and geographic incorporation of the northwest territories in the union .

these measures were passed by the continental congress after the revolutionary war and prior to the adoption of the constitution .

drafted primarily for the purpose of disposing of land in the territories , the land ordinance of 1785 directed surveyors to establish townships in the territories .

these townships were to be subdivided into lots , one of which ( lot number 16 ) was to be preserved for the maintenance of a public school .

the land ordinance's more famous cousin , the northwest ordinance of 1787 , established governments in the territories and provided for the civil liberties of the inhabitants .

on the question of education the northwest ordinance said , "religion , morality and knowledge , being necessary to good government and the happiness of mankind , schools and the means of education shall forever be encouraged. .

congress established the marine hospital service ( mhs ) in 1798 to provide medical care for merchant seamen .

many federal health agencies trace their origin to the establishment of the mhs , including nih , which began as the hygienic laboratory within the mhs in 1887 .

the ransdell act of 1930 ( p.l .

71-251 ) re - designated the hygienic laboratory as the nih and authorized fellowships at the institute .

although nih education and training funding in the 1930s , 1940s , and 1950s primarily focused on post - doctoral researchers and clinical traineeships for physicians , in 1948 the national cancer institute began awarding funds to institutions to improve undergraduate education .

in 1974 congress established the nrsa at nih .

the national research service award act ( p.l .

93-348 ) consolidated and established under a single authority existing research and fellowship authorities .

p.l .

107-206 renamed the nrsa the "ruth l. kirschstein national research service award" in 2002 .

the morrill act of 1862 authorized the sale of federal lands and distribution of the proceeds to the states for the purpose of establishing land - grant colleges in the "mechanic arts" ( eg , engineering , manufacturing , inventions ) , agriculture , and military tactics .

the 1890 morrill act expanded the purposes of the colleges to include "agriculture , the mechanic arts , the english language , and the various branches of mathematical , physical , natural , and economic science. .

these provisions were repealed in 1981 and replaced with "food and agricultural sciences. .

colleges funded by these acts include the massachusetts institute of technology , clemson university , and many u.s .

historically black colleges and universities .

nsf was established in 1950 — in part — to "develop and encourage the pursuit of a national policy for basic research and education in the sciences. .

nsf distributed its first fellowships to pre - and post - doctoral stem students in 1952 .

as early as 1953 , nsf began supporting teacher institutes as a means of improving stem education in the lower grades .

although both congress and the president have made changes to nsf since its founding , stem education has remained a core function of the agency .

passed in 1958 in response to the soviet union's launch of sputnik , the national defense education act ( ndea ) sought to address concerns about "existing imbalances in our educational programs which have led to an insufficient proportion of our population educated in science , mathematics , and modern foreign languages and trained in technology. .

among its many provisions , the ndea authorized the first federal student loan program ; provided funds to states for science , mathematics , and modern foreign language instruction ; and authorized grants to states for programs to identify and encourage gifted students .

the primary source of federal aid to k - 12 education is the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) .

esea was initially enacted in 1965 and was most recently amended and reauthorized by the every student succeeds act ( p.l .

114-95 ) .

stem education was not central to the esea as originally constructed in 1965 , but stem - specific provisions have been added in subsequent reauthorizations .

see the passage below on the every student succeeds act under "recent legislative efforts. .

the higher education act ( hea ) authorized a series of programs ( not limited to stem education ) that provide federal aid and support to institutions of higher education , as well as a broad array of federal student aid programs that assist students and their families with paying the costs of obtaining a postsecondary education .

the hea student aid programs are the primary source of direct assistance to students , supporting postsecondary pursuits in stem and other fields .

the hea was most recently amended in 2008 by the higher education opportunity act ( p.l .

110-315 ) .

however , the only major explicitly stem - focused postsecondary program administered by ed was enacted by the higher education reconciliation act of 2005 ( hera ; p.l .

109-171 ) .

the hera amendments included authorization of appropriations for the smart grant program , which provided for $4,000 grants to students majoring in stem fields .

congress provided that the program sunset at the end of the 2010-2011 academic year .

approximately $1.4 billion in grants were awarded between fy2006 and fy2010 .

the department of education organization act established ed as an independent federal agency .

section 304 of the act transferred science education programs established at nsf to ed .

excluded from this directive were programs that related to scientific career development , continuing education of scientific personnel , career - focused broadening participation programs , research and development in science learning , and programs to inform the general public about the nature of science and technology and related policy issues .

the conference report on the final bill included two specific examples of nsf programs to be transferred to ed: elementary and pre - school science teacher training and minority institutions science improvement .

the act provided only for the transfer of programs in existence at the time of enactment and included a provision affirming nsf's authority to initiate and conduct programs under its originating act ( p.l .

81-507 ) .

the education for economic security act of 1984 authorized teacher institutes and mathematics and science education development programs at nsf , directed ed to provide grants to states and local educational agencies for stem teacher training and development , and authorized presidential awards for teaching in mathematics and science , among other things .

the act was enacted following publication of several reports — most notably a nation at risk — that were highly critical of the u.s. education system and amid growing concerns about international competitiveness in the wake of the 1970s recession and apparent ascendancy of the japanese and german economies .

the america competes act and its 2010 reauthorization authorize a variety of stem education programs at several federal science agencies and ed .

most of the specified stem education authorizations of appropriations in these acts are at nsf , but the acts also contain stem education provisions for the department of energy , nasa , and the national oceanic and atmospheric administration .

among other things , the 2010 reauthorization established a federal government - wide stem education coordinating committee under nstc .

the american innovation and competitiveness act ( aica ; p.l .

114-329 ) reauthorized portions of the competes acts .

see the section " the american innovation and competitiveness act " under recent legislative efforts for a description of aica .

the every student succeeds act ( essa ; p.l .

114-95 ) reauthorized the esea and was signed into law by president obama in december 2015 .

it made changes to stem education provisions that had been contained in previous reauthorizations of the esea .

the biggest change with respect to stem education programs was the elimination of the math and science partnerships program .

instead , stem education is an allowable use of funds in the new title iv block grant that provides aims to "provide all students with access to a well - rounded education. .

additionally , essa authorized the stem master teacher corps program that would provide salary bonuses and professional development opportunities to outstanding teachers of stem subjects .

the carl d. perkins career and technical education act of 2006 ( perkins act ; p.l .

109-270 ) is the main federal law supporting the development of career and technical skills among students in secondary and postsecondary education .

the perkins act aims to improve academic outcomes and preparedness for higher education or the labor market among students enrolled in career and technical education programs , which often include stem occupational fields such as advanced manufacturing or information technology .

total appropriations for the perkins act have averaged approximately $1.1 billion over the last 10 years .

in the 115 th congress , the house of representatives undertook efforts to reauthorize the perkins act , which expired in fy2013 .

the house passed the career and technical education for the 21 st century act ( h.r .

2353 ) , which would provide more flexibility for the states with respect to setting annual performance targets and the consequences of not meeting those targets .

the american innovation and competitiveness act ( aica ; p.l .

114-329 ) was signed into law in january 2017 .

the aica reauthorized portions of the america competes act and had a number of provisions related to federal investments in stem education .

in particular , the aica directed nsf to award grants to increase the participation of underrepresented populations in stem fields .

it also created an interagency advisory panel and working group on stem education to advise nstc's committee on stem education and ostp .

it directed nsf to expand grant programs for research into computer science education , encouraged the creation of a grant program supporting stem apprenticeship opportunities , and promoted efforts to expand undergraduate research opportunities and recognize outstanding mentors in stem fields .

this act , known as the inspire women act ( p.l .

115-7 ) was signed into law in february 2017 .

it directs nasa to encourage women and girls to study stem fields and pursue careers in aerospace through support of nasa's existing programs , including nasa girls and nasa boys , aspire to inspire , and summer institute in stem .

appendix a .

data sources and major publications a number of sources and major publications provide data about the federal stem education effort and the condition of stem education in the united states and around the globe .

this appendix includes links to sources and publications where readers can find stem education data and information .

national and international assessments national assessment of educational progress ( naep ) .

the naep is the largest nationally representative and continuing assessment of u.s. k - 12 students , usually taken by students in grades 4 , 8 , and 12 .

there are two naep assessments: main naep and long - term trends ( ltt ) .

the main naep administers assessments in 12 subject areas , including mathematics and science .

the ltt assesses mathematics and reading .

in 2013 , ed launched a pilot naep assessment in technology and engineering literacy .

the first such assessment was carried out in 2014 .

trends in international mathematics and science study ( timss ) .

timss is an international test that assesses the mathematics and science achievements of u.s. 4 th and 8 th grade students in a manner designed to be comparable across countries .

the most recent timss assessment was administered in 2015 .

program for international student assessment ( pisa ) .

pisa assesses the reading , mathematics , and science literacy of 15-year - old students in dozens of industrialized and developing nations .

data collection for the most recent pisa assessment was completed in fall 2015 .

federal programs and inventories u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) , science , technology , engineering , and mathematics education : actions needed to better assess the federal investment ( gao - 18 - 290 ) .

this 2018 gao report on federal stem education programs includes an inventory of federal stem education programs and policy recommendations .

national science and technology council , a report from the federal inventory of stem education fast - track action committee ( nstc - 11 ) and a report from the federal coordination in stem education task force ( nstc - 12 ) .

these reports provide an inventory of federal stem education investments from fy2008 to fy2010 actual ( in the 2011 report ) and an update with information from fy2011 enacted to fy2013 requested ( in the 2012 report ) .

u.s. department of education , academic competitiveness council ( acc ) , report of the academic competitiveness council — the 2007 acc report provides an inventory of federal stem education programs with funding data from fy2005 actual to the fy2007 president's budget request .

it also includes policy recommendations and an assessment of stem education program evaluations from across the federal enterprise .

gao , higher education: federal science , technology , engineering , and mathematics programs and related trends ( gao - 06-114 ) .

this 2005 gao report includes an inventory of federal stem education programs and assesses program goals and constituencies served .

condition of stem education national science board , science and engineering indicators 201 6 .

this publication provides , among other things , one of the most comprehensive collections of key stem indicators .

it is published every two years .

nsf , national center for science and engineering statistics ( ncses ) .

ncses compiles and analyzes a variety of stem data .

much of this data may be found in science and engineering indicators , but the ncses website includes separate , detailed , and timely publications on various stem education data .

stem education and the workforce gao , science , technology , engineering , and mathematics education: assessing the relationship between education and the workforce ( gao - 14-374 ) .

this 2014 gao report assesses the trends in stem degrees awarded in the united states and available jobs over the course of a decade .

appendix b .

inventories at the request of congress , five inventories of federal stem education programs and activities have been published since 2005: three by gao , one by the academic competitiveness council ( acc ) , and one by the nstc .

the first gao study , in 2005 , found 207 distinct federal stem education programs funded at about $2.8 billion in fy2004 .

in 2007 , the acc found 105 stem education programs funded at about $3.1 billion in fy2006 .

a 2011 report by the nstc identified 252 distinct investments in stem education funded at about $3.4 billion in fy2010 .

that nstc report has been updated annually and identified 125 distinct investments in fy2016 ( see table 3 above ) .

a second gao study , published in 2012 , reported 209 programs funded at about $3.1 billion in fy2010 .

a follow - up to that gao report , published in 2018 , found 163 programs funded at about $2.9 billion in fy2016 .

the discrepancies between these inventories indicate that measuring and categorizing the federal effort in stem education is complex and subject to methodological challenges .

differences between the inventories are due , in part , to the lack of a common definition of what constitutes a stem education program or activity .

auditors have also found stem education activities performed by science mission agencies difficult to capture because such activities tend to be fiscally and organizationally integrated into what are otherwise primarily scientific research programs .

funding calculations and program identification become even more intricate when broad - purpose education programs with a stem goal are considered ( eg , teacher training programs that focus on mathematics in addition to other fields such as reading ) .

finally , some estimates of federal stem education activities depend on agency self - reporting , which is a less reliable auditing method .

