the united states exports agricultural products to nearly every country in the world .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) reports that u.s. agricultural exports reached nearly $139 billion in fy2017 ( figure 1 ) .

to successfully ship agricultural products , exporters must conform to importer requirements .

usda's animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) is the u.s. government authority tasked with regulating most animal and plant product exports .

export health certificates are commonly necessary for the export of horticultural products ( eg , fruits and vegetables ) and livestock , which represent over one - third ( $53 billion ) of u.s. agricultural exports in fy2017 ( figure 2 ) .

aphis is also responsible for informing the international community of u.s. animal or plant disease outbreaks .

to meet the health standards required by u.s. trading partners , aphis and other u.s. federal agencies negotiate "export health certificates" with each partner country ( figure 3 ) .

export health certificates are also part of broader agreements between the united states and its trading partners on the world trade organization's ( wto ) established "sanitary and phytosanitary" ( sps ) measures .

these measures protect against diseases , pests , toxins , and other contaminants .

aphis technical personnel , often working with other federal agencies , negotiate with their foreign counterparts on sps measures .

aphis maintains a public website with import requirements by product and country to assist u.s exporters .

without these certificates , shipments could be delayed or rejected .

neither aphis nor any other u.s. agency enforces or requires the usage of export health certificates , but failure to obtain an importer - required specific certificate would likely lead to a rejected shipment by the importing country .

this report discusses aphis's role in export health certificate issuance to facilitate agricultural trade .

aphis is not the sole issuer of export health certificates ; many food and agricultural products ( i.e. , that are not horticultural products or livestock ) have oversight by other federal agencies that are outside the scope of this report .

many of the u.s. agricultural and food products for export fall under aphis's jurisdiction .

an aphis export health certificate informs the importing country that the u.s. product is free of certain diseases , and it includes additional information required by the importer .

in fy2017 , aphis issued close to 675,000 federal export health certificates for international agricultural shipments .

aphis manages programs on a national basis through two regional offices and 433 field offices .

aphis performs work in all u.s. states and territories , mexico , central america , south america , the caribbean , western europe , asia , and africa .

in particular , aphis has jurisdiction over the following agricultural products: live animals , animal products , veterinary biologics ( vaccines , bacterins , antisera , diagnostic kits , and other products of biological origin ) , and biotechnology permits for genetically engineered organisms .

live plants , plant products ( nursery stock ; small lots of seed ; fruits and vegetables ; timber ; cotton ; cut flowers ; and protected , threatened , and endangered plants ) , organisms ( arthropods and mollusks , fungi , bacteria , nematodes , mycoplasma , viroids and viruses , biological control agents , bees , plant pest diagnostic laboratories , federal noxious weeds , and parasitic plants ) , and soil .

aphis is not the only issuer of export health certificates .

for example , the department of commerce has jurisdiction over the administration of health certificates for fish and seafood .

a listing of agencies and their commodity responsibilities is provided in table 1 .

depending on a trade agreement's sps chapter , more than one type of certificate could accompany a particular agricultural product .

for example , an importing country may require two certificates from a u.s. exporter of hatching eggs , including one requiring the exporter to participate in the agricultural marketing service's "export verification program" and a second requiring the exporter to obtain an aphis export health certificate .

an exporter must collaborate with aphis to obtain a plant or animal export health certificate .

aphis's plant production quarantine ( ppq ) and veterinary services ( vs ) oversee the health certificate endorsement process for a "plant health certificate" or "animal health certificate," respectively ( figure 4 ) .

aphis cooperates with many federal agencies , including ams , centers for disease control and prevention , customs and border protection , fish and wildlife service , fda , and fsis to facilitate the verification process ( figure 5 ) .

export health certificates facilitate trade by verifying that u.s. agricultural exports meet importers' health and safety standards .

aphis , in collaboration with the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) , is primarily responsible for resolving disputes that arise between u.s. exporters and importing countries over health - certificate - related issues .

in fy2017 , aphis negotiated or renegotiated 110 export protocols for animal products involving 24 new markets , three expanded markets , and 83 retained markets .

aphis also negotiated 126 export protocols for live animals .

in particular , export health certificate discussions among scientific authorities contributed to opening markets for beef to china , poultry to korea , and potatoes to japan in fy2017 .

export health certificates and the process underlying them may help facilitate trade in certain animal health situations .

for example , following an outbreak of particular cases of highly pathogenic avian influenza ( hpai ) , or "bird flu," member countries of the world organization for animal health ( oie ) are obligated to report particular such incidents to oie .

the hpai - affected country is expected to alert the international community and follow the oie's disease control guidelines .

in addition , they would likely have an altered relationship with their trading partners concerning poultry and poultry product exports ( including certain eggs ) following notification of the outbreak .

typically , importers would either ban poultry imports from the affected country or ban poultry from certain regions from the country — a negotiated "regionalization agreement. .

in this situation , regionalization protocols in the agreement may facilitate exports by limiting the ban to a particular region .

export health certificates may facilitate market - opening opportunities for u.s. exports , as in the case of u.s. pork exports to argentina .

until 2017 , the united states had for over 25 years neither access to export pork to argentina nor a pork health certificate for argentina because of animal health concerns argentina cited in u.s. pork production .

after argentine food safety officials conducted an on - site verification of the u.s. meat inspection system in late 2017 , the united states finalized a pork sps agreement and export health certificate with argentina .

according to usda , argentina is a potential $10 million per year market for u.s. pork producers .

congress has direct interest in export health certificates — both through annual appropriations for aphis activities and through congressional oversight .

examples of potential oversight issues include preparation for animal disease outbreaks , export - market openings , and potential u.s. agricultural trade barriers .

in terms of annual appropriations , aphis's mission is carried out in their budget: ( 1 ) safeguarding and emergency preparedness / response , ( 2 ) agency wide programs , ( 3 ) safe trade and international technical assistance , and ( 4 ) animal welfare ( figure 7 ) .

the safeguarding and emergency preparedness / response portion of the aphis budget is responsible for monitoring animal and plant health in the united states and throughout the world , representing roughly 85% of aphis's budget .

most of the export health certificate activities are housed in this mission area .

in february 2018 , the office of management and budget released the president's fy2019 proposed budget .

the fy2019 aphis proposed budget totaled $742 million , down 25% from fy2018 funding .

this proposed reduction would affect all major area activities , particularly safeguarding and emergency preparedness / response .

the president's fy2019 aphis budget proposal for this line item is $623.6 million , a decrease of nearly $200 million from fy2018 .

this proposed budget reduction for fy2019 could affect aphis's ability to issue health certificates for both exports and imports of agricultural products .

limiting aphis's ability to issue export health certificates could negatively impact u.s. agricultural exports .

likewise , aphis funding for this budget line item also supports aphis's ability to enforce animal and / or plant health requirements that protect the united states against the unintended introduction of animal and / or plant pests and diseases .

as such , a reduction in funding to support these aphis activities could slow the agency's ability to respond to a disease or pest outbreak in the future while also negatively impacting trade .

these aphis activities also administer certain u.s. commitments to the wto .

in contrast to the president's budget proposal for fy2019 , both the house and the senate proposed roughly $1 billion for the fy2019 aphis budget , or roughly $260 million over the administration's request and an increase from fy2018 ( table 2 ) .

on may 16 , 2018 , the house appropriations committee reported h.r .

5961 with an increase of $16 million ( +1.7% ) year - over - year .

on may 24 , 2018 , the senate appropriations committee reported s. 2976 with an increase of $19 million ( +1.9% ) year - over - year .

finally , as the united states has entered into , or is currently negotiating or renegotiating , certain regional and bilateral free trade agreements that address agricultural trade , aphis's health certificates would be expected to be a component of any sps chapter included as part of a free trade agreement or trade negotiation that includes agriculture .

these sps chapters adhere to wto guidelines and generally include additional specific importer requirements .

each importing country is allowed to have different import requirements — and some are stricter than others — which sometimes result in "non - tariff measures," as explained in the text box below .

sps requirements by individual countries can become the source of a trade dispute and may be used by some countries as a way to protect local markets , thereby discouraging u.s. exports .

in these instances aphis typically seeks to address u.s. exporters' concerns with the importing country's scientific authorities .

