f ederal budget decisions express the priorities of congress and reinforce its influence on federal policies .

making budgetary decisions for the federal government is a complex process and requires the balance of competing goals .

the great recession adversely affected federal budget outcomes through revenue declines and spending increases from fy2008 through fy2013 .

the federal budget recorded a deficit of 9.8% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) in fy2009 , the largest value since world war ii .

subsequent improvement of the economy and implementation of policies designed to lower spending have improved the short - term budget outlook , though federal deficits remain at relatively high levels .

in fy2017 , the federal budget recorded a deficit of 3.5% of gdp , which was higher than the average deficit since fy1947 ( 2.7% of gdp ) .

over the next several years , projections of a continued decline in discretionary spending are more than offset by increases in mandatory spending , increases in net interest payments , and reductions in revenues , leading to a rise in federal deficits .

increases in the long - term cost of federal retirement and health care programs and debt servicing costs each contribute to upward pressure on federal spending levels .

operating these programs in their current form may pass on substantial economic burdens to future generations .

revenues are projected to decline as a percentage of gdp over the next several years before increasing later in the 10-year budget window as provisions enacted by the 2017 tax revision ( p.l .

115-97 ) are scheduled to expire .

congress and the president may consider proposals for deficit reduction if fiscal issues remain a key item on the legislative agenda .

this report summarizes issues surrounding the federal budget , examines policy changes relevant to the budget framework for fy2019 , and discusses recent major policy proposals included in the president's fy2019 budget .

it concludes by addressing major short - and long - term fiscal challenges facing the federal government .

each fiscal year congress and the president engage in a number of practices that influence short - and long - run revenue and expenditure trends .

this section describes the budget cycle and explains how budget baselines are constructed .

budget baselines are used to measure how legislative changes affect the budget outlook and are integral to evaluating these policy choices .

the 115 th congress has adopted legislation with short - and long - term effects on the federal budget .

the 2017 tax revision included major changes to the federal tax code , including changes to individual and corporate income taxes , international taxes , and a variety of tax expenditures ( deductions , exclusions , and credits available to taxpayers ) .

bba 2018 enacted a two - year revision to the discretionary spending caps imposed by the bca and also suspended the statutory debt limit until march 2019 .

congress has also enacted several pieces of legislation with ramifications for the appropriations process and statutory debt limit .

the trump administration submitted its fy2019 budget to congress on february 12 , 2018 .

the president's budget lays out the administration's views on national priorities and policy initiatives .

congress has also begun consideration of the fy2019 budget .

ongoing federal budgetary challenges remain which may lead to congressional action .

issues related to deficit reduction and the long - term budget outlook may continue to arise in policy discussions .

increased spending on entitlement programs , as currently structured , will likely contribute to rising deficits and debt , placing ever - increasing focus on how to achieve fiscal sustainability over the long term .

various budget issues may feature prominently in near - term congressional debates .

discussions over fy2019 discretionary appropriations legislation may be held in advance of the beginning of the fiscal year ( or afterwards in the case of supplemental or continuing appropriations ) .

congress may elect to revisit the deficit reduction measures imposed by the bca as amended , which include discretionary caps on defense and nondefense budget authority through fy2021 and spending reduction measures on certain mandatory programs through fy2027 .

as discussed earlier , congress has already lifted the discretionary caps ( to allow for more spending ) in each year from fy2013 through fy2019 relative to their values established in the bca .

congress may also choose to modify the statutory debt limit .

the debt limit is currently suspended through march 2019 , at which time it is to be reinstated to accommodate federal borrowing levels .

if faced with a nearly binding debt limit , treasury may choose to enact extraordinary measures to postpone when the debt limit binds .

short - run budget surpluses in march and april of that year ( primarily from the receipt of annual income tax returns ) mean that extraordinary measures enacted in march will likely postpone a binding debt limit by several months .

the latest cbo budget forecast projects a larger nominal budget deficit in fy2019 ( $981 billion ) than the federal deficit in fy2017 ( $665 billion ) , which was the last year extraordinary measures were enacted in march .

such an increase may reduce the length of time extraordinary measures would postpone a binding debt limit relative to what was experienced in 2017 .

the federal government faces long - term budget challenges .

occasional budget deficits are not necessarily problematic .

deficit spending can allow governments to smooth outlays and revenues to shield taxpayers and program beneficiaries from abrupt economic shocks in the short term , while also temporarily boosting gdp when the economy is underperforming .

persistent deficits , however , lead to growing levels of federal debt that may lead to higher interest payments and may also have adverse macroeconomic consequences in the long term , including slowing investment and lowering economic growth .

indefinite growth of real debt will eventually lead to a borrowing crisis , though the timing of such an event is subject to great uncertainty .

reducing large deficits will require increases in taxes , reductions in spending , or both .

some measures of fiscal solvency in the long term indicate that , under current policy , the united state faces major future imbalance , specifically as it relates to rising retirement and health care costs and the likely impact on government - financed health care spending .

existing deficit reduction policies like the bca had improved recent and near - term deficits but do not make significant changes to the parts of the budget that are projected to grow the fastest in the long run .

therefore , many budget analysts believe that additional deficit reduction is required to put the budget on a sustainable path over the long term .

cbo's current law baseline projects inflation - adjusted deficits ( equal to 4.9% of gdp ) from fy2019 through fy2028 despite a real economic growth rate averaging 1.8% per year over the same period: that combination of sustained economic growth and large federal deficits would be unprecedented in the postwar era .

cbo , gao , and the trump administration agree that the current mix of federal fiscal policies is unsustainable in the long term .

the nation's aging population , combined with rising health care costs per beneficiary , may keep federal health costs rising faster than per capita gdp .

cbo projected in march 2017 that under current policy , federal spending on health programs ( including medicare , medicaid , chip , and exchange subsidies ) would grow from 5.5% of gdp in fy2017 to 8.8% of gdp in fy2047 .

a 2017 gao report on fiscal health also cited health spending as a source of concern .

though these forecasts are highly uncertain , it seems probable that spending on these programs will rise as a share of gdp over time .

in addition , growing debt and rising interest rates are projected to cause interest payments to consume a greater share of future federal spending .

cbo projects that under current law , spending to service the federal debt ( net interest payments ) will grow rapidly , from 1.4% of gdp in fy2017 to 5.2% of gdp in fy2047 .

gao's recent long - term fiscal simulations , under an alternative policy scenario , projected that debt held by the public as a share of gdp would exceed the post - world war ii historical high in the next 15 to 25 years .

keeping future federal outlays at 20% of gdp , or approximately at their historical average , and leaving fiscal policies unchanged , according to cbo projections , would require drastic reductions in all spending other than that for medicare , social security , and medicaid , or reining in the costs of these programs .

under cbo's extended baseline , maintaining the debt - to - gdp ratio at today's level ( 77% ) in fy2047 would require an immediate and permanent cut in non interest spending , increase in revenues , or some combination of the two in the amount of 1.9% of gdp ( or about $380 billion in fy2018 alone ) in each year .

maintaining this debt - to - gdp ratio beyond fy2047 would require additional deficit reduction .

if policymakers wanted to lower future debt levels relative to today , the annual spending reductions or revenue increases would have to be larger .

for example , in order to bring debt as a percentage of gdp in fy2047 down to its historical average over the past 50 years ( 40% of gdp ) , spending reductions or revenue increases or some combination of the two would need to generate net savings of roughly 3.1% of gdp ( or $620 billion in fy2018 ) in each year .

the alternative to decreased spending as a means of deficit reduction is to increase revenues through modifications to the federal tax system .

the 2017 tax revision represented the latest major change to the federal tax code , and was estimated by cbo and jct to reduce revenues over the fy2018-fy2027 period .

cbo's latest budget and economic forecast projects that revenues as a percentage of gdp will be at or below their postwar average ( 17.2% of gdp ) from fy2018 through fy2023 before reaching 18.5% of gdp in fy2028 .

federal revenue levels toward the end of the 10-year baseline window will depend in part on whether the temporary tax provisions enacted as part of the 2017 tax revision expire as scheduled .

in the long run , increases in federal debt are constrained by the amount of remaining "fiscal space," which is the amount of government borrowing that creditors are willing to finance .

the amount of fiscal space available depends on the current size of the debt , how fast it is increasing relative to gdp , and the attractiveness of federal debt to investors relative to other market instruments .

changes in debt relative to gdp depend on the size of deficits , the government's borrowing rate , and how quickly the economy is growing .

with continuously increasing debt levels , at some point debt would become so large that investors would no longer be willing to finance deficits and fiscal space would be exhausted .

exactly when investors would stop financing federal borrowing is uncertain .

because interest rates are presently lower than their historical averages , there is little current concern that the federal government is in danger of running out of fiscal space in the short run .

cbo documents the congressional budget office ( cbo ) provides data and analysis to congress throughout the budget and appropriations process .

each january , cbo issues a budget and economic outlook that contains current - law baseline estimates of outlays and revenues .

in march , cbo typically issues an analysis of the president's budget submission with revised baseline estimates and projections .

these documents can be delayed as a result of the legislative agenda or if the president's budget is off schedule .

in late summer , cbo issues an updated budget and economic outlook with new baseline projections .

in these documents , cbo sets a current - law baseline as a benchmark to evaluate whether legislative proposals would increase or decrease outlays and revenue collection .

baseline estimates are not intended to predict likely future outcomes , but to show what spending and revenues would be if current law remained in effect .

cbo typically evaluates the budgetary consequences of most legislative proposals and the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) evaluates the consequences of revenue proposals .

cbo also releases other periodic publications focusing on the future fiscal health of the united states .

in its publication the long - term budget outlook , cbo makes projections on the state of the federal budget over the next 30 years .

cbo discusses spending and revenue levels and the related issues that it expects will arise under different policy assumptions .

in its budget options volumes , cbo provides specific policy options and the impact they will have on spending and revenues over a 10-year budget window .

cbo also provides arguments for and against enacting each policy .

omb documents the president's budget contains five major volumes: ( 1 ) the budget , ( 2 ) historical tables , ( 3 ) analytical perspectives , ( 4 ) appendix , and ( 5 ) supplemental materials .

these documents lay out the administration's projections of the fiscal outlook for the country , along with spending levels proposed for each of the federal government's departments and programs .

the historical tables volume also provides significant amounts of budget data , much of which extend back to 1962 or earlier .

along with the administration's budget documents , the department of the treasury also releases its green book , which provides further detail on the revenue proposals that are contained in the budget .

