buprenorphine is one of three medications currently used in medication - assisted treatment of opioid use disorders .

as such , buprenorphine's effectiveness , safety , and availability are of considerable interest to policymakers seeking to address the ongoing opioid crisis in the united states .

during the 115 th congress , committees held hearings on opioid - related topics such as implementation of the comprehensive addiction and recovery act of 2016 ( cara , p.l .

114-198 ) , the effects of the opioid crisis on families , and opioid use among veterans .

members have introduced more than 150 bills related to opioids .

on october 24 , 2018 , president trump signed into law h.r .

6 , the substance use - disorder prevention that promotes opioid recovery and treatment for patients and communities act ( the support act ; p.l .

115-271 ) , a broad measure designed to address widespread overprescribing and abuse of opioids in the united states .

congressional actions taken in recent years to address the opioid crisis , including the support act , have included attempts to increase access to buprenorphine .

among the u.s. population aged 12 or older , an estimated 11.4 million individuals ( 4.2% ) used heroin , misused prescription pain relievers , or did both in 2017 .

this includes over 2 million people ( 0.8% of the u.s. population aged 12 or older ) who met full diagnostic criteria for an opioid use disorder .

a minority of those with a substance use disorder receive specialty treatment .

in 2016 , 21.1% of those with any opioid use disorder received specialty substance use treatment , including 37.5% of those with heroin use disorder and 17.5% of those with prescription pain reliever use disorders .

whether buprenorphine ( or any medication ) is effective is not a simple "yes" or "no" answer , for several reasons .

buprenorphine comes in different formulations , each of which has been evaluated separately .

studies may define effectiveness in different ways and may compare buprenorphine to different treatments ( eg , another medication or a nonpharmacological treatment ) .

also , effectiveness is weighed against safety risks .

finally , buprenorphine may be more effective for some people , or in some circumstances , than in others .

the following sections address these topics .

buprenorphine is one of three medications currently used to treat adults addicted to opioids .

the precipitous rise in opioid misuse in the last decade and increasing financial burden of this epidemic highlight the need for effective treatments .

despite marked increases in opioid abuse , deaths attributed to opioids , and related hospital admissions , the majority of individuals in need of treatment do not receive it .

buprenorphine is regulated differently when used for opioid use disorder than when used for pain .

the controlled substances act ( csa ) limits who may prescribe ( or administer or dispense ) buprenorphine to treat opioid use disorder , and the circumstances under which they may do so .

these limits have implications for how patients gain access to buprenorphine and how they pay for buprenorphine .

the different forms of buprenorphine ( eg , implants vs. sublingual , etc. ) .

also have implications for how patients gain access to buprenorphine and how they pay for it .

buprenorphine is one of three medications currently used to treat adults addicted to opioids .

the rise in opioid abuse in the last decade and substantial financial burden of this epidemic highlight the need for effective treatments .

overall , buprenorphine appears to be an effective medication for treatment of opioid dependence .

despite marked increases in opioid abuse , related hospital admissions , and overdose deaths , the majority of individuals in need of treatment do not receive it .

prescribing practices for buprenorphine as a treatment for opioid use disorder are carefully regulated and include provisions that limit the number of patients certain providers can treat simultaneously .

congress and the executive branch have made efforts to increase access to buprenorphine treatment while balancing potential risks of this opioid - replacement therapy .

congress is likely to continue grappling with the opioid crisis for some time , as policymakers and medical and public health professionals wait for new data to indicate whether existing efforts have changed the trajectory of the opioid epidemic .

striking a balance between providing access to buprenorphine and maintaining quality standards for those who prescribe or dispense it may prove challenging .

report methodology much of the information in this crs report is based on a systematic review of the scientific literature on buprenorphine , undertaken in august 2017 .

a systematic review is a single comprehensive report collating all of the relevant empirical evidence on a specific topic .

systematic reviews use explicit , systematic methods to identify studies that fit pre - specified eligibility criteria .

systematic reviews have become an increasingly important source of information for clinical practice and policymaking .

they synthesize large amounts of information and provide better estimations of performance and generalizability than individual studies .

crs' systematic review aimed to determine how well buprenorphine works in the treatment of opioid dependence compared to other treatments ( such as methadone ) or no treatment at all .

studies were included if they were comparisons of buprenorphine with other interventions in outpatient community settings in the united states and were published in the past five years .

these included primary and secondary analyses of randomized control trials , quasi - experimental studies , and cohort studies .

the crs review concentrated on effectiveness rather than efficacy ( see textbox under " how well does buprenorphine maintain people in treatment ? .

" ) .

therefore , studies were excluded from this review if they examined efficacy , occurred in inpatient settings , focused on withdrawal , or occurred outside the united states .

to identify original articles that met the inclusion criteria , we developed a search strategy for each of the three scientific databases used .

we searched pubmed life science and biomedical database , pyscinfo behavioral sciences and mental health database , and cinahl nursing journal database through july 21 , 2017 .

article summaries table a - 1 provides full citations and abbreviated references to the 16 articles identified above .

table a - 2 summarizes each article , including its participants , study design and aims , and conclusions .

