health savings accounts ( hsas ) were first authorized in the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernizati on act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-173 ) .

hsas are one type of health - related tax - advantaged account that individuals can use to pay for unreimbursed medical expenses ( eg , deductibles , co - payments , coinsurance , and services not covered by insurance ) .

generally , individuals are eligible to establish and contribute to an hsa if they have coverage solely under an hsa - qualified high - deductible health plan ( hdhp ) .

the hsa is tied to the individual , and account holders retain access to their hsas if they change employers , insurers , or subsequently obtain coverage under a non - hsa qualified plan .

eligible individuals may make direct contributions to their hsas , and employers , family members , and other individuals may make contributions to an individual's hsa on the individual's behalf .

unused balances may accumulate without limit , be invested , and carry over from year to year .

individuals do not need to be enrolled in an hsa - eligible hdhp to make withdrawals from the account ; however , any withdrawals that are not spent on qualified medical expenses for the account holder , the account holder's spouse , or the account holder's dependents are subject to a penalty tax , with some exceptions .

hsas have several tax advantages: individual contributions are tax deductible unless made through a pretax salary reduction agreement ( see " allowable contributors " ) ; employer contributions ( and pretax salary reductions ) are excluded from taxable income and from social security , medicare , and unemployment insurance taxes ; withdrawals are not taxed if used for qualified medical expenses ; and account earnings are tax exempt .

this report summarizes the principal rules governing hsas , covering such matters as eligibility , qualifying health insurance , contributions , withdrawals , and tax advantages .

it concludes with a discussion of hsa data limitations and recent research findings on hdhp enrollment and hsa utilization trends .

individuals are eligible to establish and contribute to an hsa if they have coverage under an hsa - qualified hdhp , do not have disqualifying coverage ( disqualifying coverage is discussed in the section , " disqualifying coverage " ) , and cannot be claimed as a dependent on another person's tax return .

whether someone qualifies for an hsa is determined as of the first of each month ; thus , a person might be eligible to contribute to an hsa in some months but not in others .

for example , if someone first enrolled in an hdhp on september 15 , his or her hsa eligibility period would begin on october 1 of that year .

individuals may keep their hsas and withdraw funds if they become ineligible but cannot make contributions until they become eligible once again .

all eligible individuals have the flexibility to establish an hsa with an institution other than their insurer , if at all .

accounts may be established with banks , insurance companies , or other entities approved by the internal revenue service ( irs ) to hold individual retirement accounts ( iras ) or archer medical savings accounts ( archer msas ) .

additional nonbank entities may become an hsa trustee or custodian but first must request approval from the irs .

an account holder may withdraw hsa funds at any time .

generally , withdrawals must be used for qualified medical expenses for the account holder , the account holder's spouse , or the account holder's dependents .

any withdrawals for nonqualified expenses must be included in the account holder's gross income when determining federal income taxes and are subject to an additional 20% penalty .

neither the account holder nor the account holder's spouse or dependents need to be covered under the same or separate hsa - qualified hdhps for the account holder to withdraw funds .

likewise , having disqualifying coverage would not prohibit an account holder from withdrawing hsa funds .

for example , an account holder who enrolls in medicare parts a and b becomes ineligible to establish or contribute to an hsa , but the account holder may continue to withdraw funds from a previously established hsa .

hsas often are referred to as having a triple tax advantage : ( 1 ) contributions reduce taxable income , ( 2 ) earnings on the account grow tax free , and ( 3 ) withdrawals for qualified medical expenses are not subject to taxation .

qualified individuals who contribute to their hsas may claim a deduction on their federal income tax return and thus reduce their tax burden , as shown in table 3 .

the deduction is above the line ; that is , it is made in determining adjusted gross income and may be taken by taxpayers regardless of whether they claim the standard deduction or the itemized deduction .

individuals may claim the tax deduction for all amounts contributed to their hsas that were made either by the individual or on behalf of the individual ( not including employer amounts or contributions made through a pretax salary reduction agreement ) over the course of the year through the subsequent tax filing deadline .

for individuals claiming the deduction , the total tax effect of the eligible hsa contributions depends on an individual's marginal tax rate and the amount of nonemployer contributions to the individual's hsa .

no deduction may be claimed for a once - in - a - lifetime contribution from an ira ( though the ira distribution is not penalized , as it otherwise might be ) or for archer msa or other hsa rollovers .

these amounts do not count as gross income in determining income tax liability .

an employer's contributions to an hsa cannot be deducted by employees as hsa contributions or as medical expense deductions ; however , they are excluded from employees' gross income in determining their income tax liability .

in addition , the employer's contributions are excluded from social security and medicare taxes for both employers and employees and are excluded from federal unemployment insurance taxes .

if an employee contributes to his or her hsa through a pretax salary reduction agreement , the contributions are considered to be made by the employer and are excluded from the employee's gross income in determining his or her income tax liability and are exempt from the three employment taxes ( social security , medicare , and unemployment insurance taxes ) .

an employee cannot deduct amounts contributed to an hsa through a pretax salary reduction agreement .

hsa balances can be invested similar to iras ( eg , annuities , stocks , mutual funds , bonds , etc .

 ) , and any associated earnings can accumulate tax free .

state income taxes generally follow federal rules with respect to deductions and exclusions .

however , some states may choose to provide different treatment .

for example , california does not recognize hsas as tax - advantaged accounts .

therefore , a california taxpayer who contributed to an hsa is required to increase his or her california adjusted gross income by an amount equal to the sum of the taxpayer's hsa deduction on his or her federal return , the interest earned on the hsa , and the contributions made by the taxpayer's employer .

this increase results in a larger state tax burden ( or a smaller state tax refund ) for the taxpayer .

although it would be beneficial to study the entire hsa population , which is the population that is eligible to establish and contribute to an hsa ( i.e. , enrolled in an hsa - eligible hdhp ) and the population that has an hsa , few available data sources provide a comprehensive understanding of the entire hsa population .

the lack of available data stems in part from the fact that hsas and hsa - qualified hdhps are two separate products .

although these two product populations overlap , they are not entirely identical , since not all hsa - qualified hdhp enrollees have established an hsa and not all hsa holders currently are enrolled in an hsa - qualified hdhp .

furthermore , these products often can be administered by two separate institutions .

some individuals have their hsa established with their insurer , whereas others have their hsa administered by another type of institution , such as a bank .

in the latter case , the insurer would not have any information regarding the individuals' hsas ( i.e. , contributions , investments , or withdrawals ) .

inversely , the hsa holding institution likely would not be aware of the individuals' enrollment in or disenrollment from an hsa - qualified hdhp .

as a result , hsa research tends to focus on one of two populations , hsa - qualified hdhp enrollees or hsa holders .

in light of these and other methodological limitations , existing hsa studies that rely on surveys of insurers , businesses , or hsa administrators or aggregate irs tax data can often produce discrepancies in findings and make direct data comparisons difficult .

in addition , there may be no data sources to answer key questions of interest , for example , how many individuals eligible to open an hsa or eligible to make an hsa contribution do so .

although exact point estimates for the entire hsa / hsa - qualified hdhp population are difficult to determine , current research , when referenced collectively , can highlight various trends .

the next section highlights selected findings related to enrollment and contributions from a variety of commonly cited data sources .

multiple different sources have demonstrated continued increases in hsa - qualified hdhp enrollment and hsas since the mid - 2000s .

with respect to hsa - qualified hdhp enrollees , a report using survey data from insurers has shown a continued increase in enrollment in hsa - eligible hdhps sold by commercial insurers in the individual and the small - and large - group markets from 2005 through 2017 .

a report using survey data from employers with three or more workers has shown an increase in the percentage of covered employees in hsa - eligible hdhps between 2006 and 2017 .

this survey of employers also revealed that larger employers are more likely than smaller employers to offer hsa - eligible hdhps to employees .

specifically , in 2017 , employers with 200 or more workers were more likely than employers with 3 to 199 workers to offer hsa - eligible hdhps to employees .

similar to hdhp enrollment , multiple sources have indicated an increase in the number of hsa accounts .

irs tax return filer data have shown an increase in the number of tax filers reporting hsa contributions or withdrawals from 2004 to 2012 , and hsa account administrator data have shown an increase in the number of accounts from 2011 to 2016 .

with respect to hsa contributions , the aforementioned sample of hsa account administrator data reveals that around half of account holders individually contributed to their hsas in 2016 and around half received an employer contribution .

with respect to employer contributions , two studies using hsa account administrator data from 2016 showed that hdhp - enrolled employees ( who made contributions to hsas ) made an average employee contribution equal to roughly twice the average amount made by employers ( that made contributions ) .

the study of irs tax filings from 2004 to 2012 indicated that the likelihood of contributing to an hsa increased with tax filer's age from 20 to about 45 .

the study also showed that , across all ages , the likelihood of tax filers contributing to an hsa and the likelihood of tax filers with an hsa maximizing their contributions ( both individual and employer ) increased across each income quintile .

finally , the analysis of hsa administrator data revealed that very few hsas ( fewer than 4% in 2016 ) have investments other than cash within the account , with older accounts being more likely than newer accounts to have invested funds .

