on march 8 , 2018 , president trump issued two proclamations imposing tariffs on u.s. imports of certain steel and aluminum products , respectively , using presidential powers granted under section 232 of the trade expansion act of 1962 .

section 232 authorizes the president to impose restrictions on certain imports based on an affirmative determination by the department of commerce ( commerce ) that the targeted products are being imported into the united states "in such quantities or under such circumstances as to threaten to impair the national security. .

section 232 investigations and actions are important for congress , as the constitution gives it primary authority over international trade matters .

in the case of section 232 , congress has delegated to the president broad authority to impose limits on imports in the interest of u.s. national security .

the statute does not require congressional approval of any presidential actions that fall within its scope .

in the crude oil windfall profit tax act of 1980 , however , congress amended section 232 by creating a joint disapproval resolution provision under which congress can override presidential actions in the case of adjustments to petroleum or petroleum product imports .

section 232 is one of several tools the united states has at its disposal to address trade barriers and other foreign trade practices .

these include investigations and actions to address import surges that are a "substantial cause of serious injury" or threat thereof to a u.s. industry ( section 201 of the trade act of 1974 ) , those that address violations or denial of u.s. benefits under trade agreements ( section 301 of the trade act of 1974 ) , and antidumping and countervailing duty laws ( title vii of the tariff act of 1930 ) .

trade is an important component of the u.s. economy , and members often hear from constituents when factories and other businesses are hurt by competing imports , or if exporters face trade restrictions and other market access barriers overseas .

section 232 actions may affect industries , workers , and consumers in congressional districts and states ( both positively and negatively ) .

following the steel and aluminum section 232 actions , commerce initiated section 232 investigations into imports of automobiles and automobile parts in may 2018 , uranium ore and product imports in july 2018 , and titanium sponges in march 2019 .

commerce submitted the auto investigation report to the president on february 17 , 2019 , but the report has not been made public or shared with congress ; the uranium report is expected by mid - april 2019 , and the titanium sponges report is due in late november 2019 .

the current investigations have raised a number of economic and broader policy issues for congress .

this report provides an overview of section 232 , analyzes the trump administration's section 232 investigations and actions , and considers potential policy and economic implications and issues for congress .

to provide context for the current debate , the report also includes a discussion of previous section 232 investigations and a brief legislative history of the statute .

the trade act of 1962 , including section 232 , was enacted during the cold war when national security issues were at the forefront .

section 232 has been used periodically in response to industry petitions , as well as through self - initiation by the executive branch .

the trade expansion act establishes a clear process and timelines for a section 232 investigation , but the executive branch's interpretation of "national security" and the potential scope of any investigation can be expansive .

in april 2017 , two presidential memoranda instructed commerce to give priority to two self - initiated investigations into the national security threats posed by imports of steel and aluminum .

in conducting its investigation , commerce held public hearings and solicited public comments via the federal register and consulted with the secretary of defense and other agencies , as required by the statute .

in addition to the hearings , stakeholders submitted approximately 300 comments regarding the section 232 investigation and potential actions .

some parties ( mostly steel producers ) supported broad actions to limit steel imports , while others ( mostly users and consuming industries such as automakers ) opposed any additional tariffs or quotas on imports .

the u.s. aluminum industry held differing views of the global aluminum tariff , with most parties opposing it .

some stakeholders in the steel and aluminum industries sought a middle ground , endorsing limited actions to target the underlying issues of overcapacity and unfair trade practices .

still others focused on the process , voicing caution in the use of section 232 authority and warning against an overly broad definition of "national security" for protectionist purposes .

the commerce investigations analyzed the importance of certain steel and aluminum products to national security , using a relatively broad definition of "national security," defining it to include "the general security and welfare of certain industries , beyond those necessary to satisfy national defense requirements , which are critical for minimum operations of the economy and government. .

the scope of the investigations extended to current and future requirements for national defense and to 16 specific critical infrastructure sectors , such as electric transmission , transportation systems , food and agriculture , and critical manufacturing , including domestic production of machinery and electrical equipment .

the reports also examined domestic production capacity and utilization , industry requirements , current quantities and circumstances of imports , international markets , and global overcapacity .

commerce based its definition of national security on a 2001 investigation on iron ore and semi - finished steel .

section 232 investigations prior to 2001 generally used a narrower definition considering u.s. national defense needs or overreliance on foreign suppliers .

in 2018 , u.s. imports of steel and aluminum products covered by the section 232 tariffs totaled $29.5 billion and $17.6 billion , respectively ( see appendix d ) .

over the past decade , steel imports have fluctuated significantly , by value and quantity , while imports of aluminum have generally increased .

u.s. imports of both metals increased slightly by value from 2017 to 2018 ( section 232 tariffs became effective at different times for different countries ) , but imports of both decreased by more than 10% in quantity terms ( - 3.8 million metric tons for steel and - 0.9 million metric tons for aluminum ) .

u.s. imports from individual countries fluctuated to an even greater degree over the past year ( figure 3 ) .

the largest declines in u.s. steel imports , by value , were from south korea ( - $430 million , - 15% ) , turkey ( - $413 million , - 35% ) , and india ( - $372 million , - 49% ) , with significant increases from the eu ( +$567 million , +22% ) , mexico ( +$508 million , +20% ) , and canada ( +$404 million , +19% ) .

the largest declines in aluminum imports were from china ( - $729 million , - 40% ) , russia ( - $676 million , - 42% ) , and canada ( - $294 million , - 4% ) , with major increases from the eu ( +$395 million , 9% ) , india ( +$221 million , 58% ) , and oman ( $186 million , +200% ) .

the countries with permanent exclusions from the tariffs ( all except australia are instead subject to quotas ) accounted for 18.4% of u.s. steel imports in 2018 and 4.4% of u.s. aluminum imports .

in 2018 , u.s. steelmakers employed 140,100 workers ( figure 4 ) , accounting for 1.1% of the nation's 12.7 million factory jobs .

employment in the steel industry has declined for many years as new technology , particularly the increased use of electric arc furnaces to make steel , has reduced the demand for workers .

according to the bureau of labor statistics , labor productivity in steelmaking nearly tripled since 1987 and rose 20% over the past decade .

hence , even a significant increase in domestic steel production is likely to result in a relatively small number of additional jobs .

in 2018 , for the first time since 2014 , steel manufacturers added 2,700 jobs , a rise of 2% from a year earlier .

aluminum manufacturers employed 58,100 workers in 2018 , a figure that has changed little since the 2007-2009 recession .

domestic smelting of aluminum from bauxite ore , which requires large amounts of electricity , has been in long - term decline , and secondary aluminum produced from recycled scrap melted in a smelter now accounts for the majority of domestic aluminum production .

imports of secondary unwrought aluminum are not covered by the section 232 aluminum trade action .

steelmaking and aluminum smelting are both extremely capital intensive .

as a result , even small changes in output can have major effects on producers' profitability .

domestic steel producers have operated at 80% or less of production capacity in recent years , with a shift in recent months to a capacity utilization rate at u.s. steel mills of more than 80% .

primary aluminum producers in the united states have operated at about 78% of production capacity in december 2018 , up from around 43% in december 2017 .

a stated aim of the metals tariffs is to enable u.s. producers in both sectors to use an average of 80% of their production capacity , which the section 232 reports deem necessary to sustain adequate profitability and continued capital investment .

section 232 tariffs on steel and aluminum imports into the united states raise a number of issues for congress .

the economic repercussions of u.s. and foreign actions may be felt not only by domestic steel and aluminum producers , but by downstream manufacturers or other industries targeted for retaliation , and consumers .

the response by other countries can have implications for the u.s. economy and multilateral world trading system .

also , other countries may be hesitant in the future to cooperate with the united states to address broader global issues , including steel and aluminum overcapacity , if their exports are subject to u.s. tariffs .

u.s. trading partners' responses to section 232 actions have varied based on the country's relationship with the united states .

some countries are pursuing direct negotiations , while keeping other countermeasures in reserve , and raising actions at the wto ( see below ) .

others have proposed or pursued retaliation with their own tariffs .

some companies have pursued litigation , and may also seek alternative markets for their own products to avoid u.s. tariffs .

as congress debates the administration's section 232 actions it may consider the following issues , many of which include potential legislative responses .

in enacting section 232 of the trade expansion act , congress delegated aspects of its authority to regulate international commerce to the executive branch .

use of the statute to restrict imports does not require any formal approval by congress or an affirmative finding by an independent agency , such as the usitc , granting the president broad discretion in applying this authority .

should congress disapprove of the president's use of the statute , its current recourse is limited to passing new legislation or using informal tools to pressure the administration ( eg , putting holds on presidential nominee confirmations in the senate ) .

some members and observers have suggested that congress should require additional steps in the section 232 process .

in the 116 th congress , a variety of proposals have been introduced to amend section 232 , in various ways , such as by requiring an economic impact study by the usitc , congressional consultation , or approval of any new tariffs , allowing for a resolution of disapproval of trade actions , or revisiting the delegation of its constitutional authority more broadly , such as by requiring congressional approval of executive branch trade actions more generally .

some members , including senate finance chair grassley , seek to draft a consensus bill to restore congressional authority that would gain sufficient bipartisan support to withstand a possible presidential veto .

issues under debate include whether any changes would be retroactive , potentially affecting the steel and aluminum tariffs , or whether they would only apply to future actions , and whether congress's role should be consultative or decisive ( eg , requiring congressional approval ) .

for a list of proposals in the 116th congress , see appendix c .

several major u.s. trading partners have proposed or are currently imposing retaliatory tariffs in response to the u.s. actions .

in the 115 th congress , some members of congress proposed legislation to respond to the potential economic impact of these foreign retaliatory tariffs .

some proposals expand programs like trade adjustment assistance to include assistance for workers , firms , and farmers harmed by foreign retaliation .

other measures propose increased funding and programming for certain agricultural export programs to help farmers find new markets for their exports .

for a list of proposals from the 115 th congress , see appendix c .

it is relatively easy for a stakeholder to prompt the section 232 investigation process .

the statute states that "upon request of the head of any department or agency , upon application of an interested party , or upon his own motion , the secretary of commerce ... shall immediately initiate an appropriate investigation. .

to limit the volume of section 232 petitions and ensure that any requests are sufficiently justified , congress may consider establishing criteria or a threshold that a request must meet before commerce and defense agencies invest resources in conducting a section 232 investigation .

similarly , congress may consider limiting the types of imported articles that may be considered under section 232 ( eg , s. 287 ) .

congress created the section 232 process to try to ensure that u.s. imports do not cause undue harm to u.s. national security .

some observers have raised concerns that restrictions on u.s. imports under section 232 , however , may harm u.s. allies , which could also have negative implications for u.s. national security .

for example , canada is considered part of the u.s. defense industrial base according to u.s. law and is also a top source of u.s. imports of steel and aluminum .

national security is not clearly defined in the statute , allowing for ambiguity and alternative interpretations by an administration .

international trade commitments both at the multilateral and fta level generally include broad exceptions on the basis of national security .

the trump administration argues its section 232 actions are permissible under these exceptions , while many u.s. trading partners claim the actions are unrelated to national security .

if the united states invokes the national security exemption in what may be perceived to be an arbitrary way , it could similarly encourage other countries to use national security as a rationale to enact protectionist measures and limit the scope of potential u.s. responses to such actions .

congress may consider amending section 232 to address these concerns .

for example , some members have proposed to narrowly defin e "national security" under section 232 and the factors to be considered in a section 232 investigation .

one bill limits it to protection against foreign aggression ( s. 287 ) .

addressing the specific market - distorting practices that are the root causes of steel and aluminum overcapacity ( eg , government intervention , subsidization ) may require updating or amending existing trade agreements .

broad wto negotiations for new multilateral rules , which may have offered opportunity to address some of these issues , have stalled .

recent u.s. fta negotiations , including the recently concluded usmca , include related disciplines ( eg , by establishing rules on state - owned enterprises or anticorruption ) , and the united states is engaged in negotiations with china on overcapacity and other trade barriers .

to address these issues , congress could consider establishing specific or enhanced new negotiating objectives for trade agreement negotiations , potentially through new or modified trade promotion authority ( tpa ) legislation .

congress could also consider directing the executive branch to prioritize engagement in such negotiations , by , for example , endorsing the current oecd discussions or the trilateral negotiations announced by ustr with the eu and japan to address nonmarket practices , including subsidies , state - owned enterprises , and technology transfer requirements , mostly aimed at china .

some analysts argue that the united states risks undermining the international system it helped create when it invokes unilateral trade actions that may violate core commitments and with regard to broad use of national security exemptions .

these observers fear that disagreements at the wto on these issues may be difficult to resolve through the existing dispute settlement procedures given the concerns over national sovereignty that would likely be raised if a wto dispute settlement panel issued a ruling relating to national security .

furthermore , actions by the united states that do not make use of the multilateral system's dispute settlement process may open the united states to criticism and could impede u.s. efforts to use the multilateral system for its own enforcement purposes .

for example , china called on other parties such as the eu to join it in opposition to the u.s. actions on section 232 , while simultaneously promoting domestic policies often seen as undermining wto rules .

congress could potentially address these concerns by conducting increased oversight of the administration's actions by inviting testimony from multiple parties , considering legislation to establish more stringent criteria , or requiring congressional approval of any use of section 232 , among other possible actions .

the u.s. unilateral actions under section 232 have raised the level of tension with u.s. trading partners and could pose risks to broader international economic cooperation .

for example , trade tensions between the united states and its traditional allies contributed to the lack of consensus at the conclusion of the g - 7 summit in june 2018 .

the strain on international trading relationships also could have broader policy implications , including for cooperation between the united states and allies on foreign policy issues .

appendix a .

amendments to and past uses of section 232 ( 19 u.s.c .

§1862 ) concern over national security , trade , and domestic industry was first raised by the trade agreements extension act of 1954 ( p.l .

83-464 §2 ) .

the 1954 act prohibited the president from decreasing duties on any article if the president determined that such a reduction might threaten domestic production needed for national defense .

in 1955 , the provision was amended to also allow the president to increase trade restrictions , in cases where national security may be threatened .

the trade agreements extension act of 1958 ( p.l .

85-686 §8 ) expanded the 1955 provisions , by outlining specific factors to be considered during an investigation , allowing the private sector to petition for relief , and requiring the president to publish a report on each petition .

the factors to be considered during an investigation included ( 1 ) the domestic production capacity needed for u.s. national security requirements , ( 2 ) the effect of imports on domestic production needed for national security requirements , and ( 3 ) "the impact of foreign competition on the economic welfare of individual domestic industries. .

section 232 of the trade expansion act of 1962 ( p.l .

87-794 ) continued the provisions of the 1958 act .

section 232 has been amended multiple times over the years , including ( 1 ) to change the time limits for investigations and actions ; ( 2 ) to change the advisory responsibility from the secretary of the treasury to the secretary of commerce ; and ( 3 ) to limit presidential authority to adjust petroleum imports .

in 1980 , congress amended section 232 to create a joint disapproval resolution provision under which congress could override presidential actions to adjust petroleum or petroleum product imports .

the bill was signed into law on april 2 , 1980 , the same day that president carter proclaimed a license fee on crude oil and gasoline pursuant to section 232 in proclamation 4744 .

on april 15 , 1980 , two weeks after the president's proclamation on the crude oil and gasoline license fee , representative james shannon introduced house joint resolution 531 to disapprove and effectively nullify the presidential action .

the house ways and means subcommittee on trade voted 14 to 4 to disapprove the presidential action ; the resolution was favorably reported out of the full committee on a 27 to 7 vote .

dissenting views were voiced by members who supported the fee program and were concerned about u.s. dependence on foreign oil .

while the measure passed the house , it was indefinitely postponed in the senate .

multiple joint resolutions of disapproval were introduced in congress in 1980 , but none passed both chambers .

in addition to the disapproval mechanism created in the crude oil windfall profit tax act of 1980 , president carter's action in proclamation 4744 was also challenged in court and through separate legislation in congress .

on may 13 , 1980 , a federal district court struck down the president's action on petroleum imports as unlawful , thereby preventing the government from implementing the program .

the court's decision , however , was appealable to the higher courts .

before a court could consider an appeal , congress enacted an amendment to a bill to extend the public debt limit ( p.l .

96-264 , section 2 ) on june 6 , 1980 , which terminated proclamation 4744's petroleum import program .

section 2 of p.l .

96-264 did not use the disapproval mechanism established in the crude oil windfall profit tax act of 1980 ; it was a separate piece of legislation that was attached as an amendment to an unrelated bill .

on june 19 , 1980 , the president formally rescinded proclamation 4744 "in its entirety , effective march 15 , 1980. .

appendix b .

section 232 investigations appendix c. proposals concerning section 232 appendix d. 2018 u.s. steel and aluminum import .

