congress faces decisions about prioritizing lock construction projects on the inland waterway system ( figure 1 ) .

it has authorized 20 such projects for construction , and has authorized preconstruction studies of one other .

as both houses debate differing versions of water resources and development bills ( s. 2800 , h.r .

8 ) and the fy2019 energy and water development appropriations bill ( s. 2975 , h.r .

5895 ) , the decision about which of these projects could be undertaken first will likely be among the most controversial issues .

in recent years , a single project , the olmsted lock and dam project on the ohio river , has absorbed much of the available funding .

as the time and cost to complete the project have far exceeded initial estimates , other lock construction has been deferred .

the olmsted lock and dam is expected to be completed during fy2019 , making it likely that funds will be available to begin some , but not all , of the other 21 lock projects a federal advisory board has identified as priorities .

consideration of which projects should move ahead comes at a time when traffic volumes on inland rivers are changing significantly , likely reducing the economic benefits of some potential projects while increasing the benefits of others .

the fuel - taxed inland waterway system consists of 11,000 miles of navigation channels with 186 lock sites and 225 lock chambers .

river lock sites typically include a dam .

this system is designed to allow for barge transportation , which is particularly useful for transporting heavy raw materials ( eg , grain , coal , petroleum , construction aggregates ) .

on the network shown in figure 1 , barge operators pay a $0.29 / gallon federal fuel tax that covers half the cost of new construction and major rehabilitation projects ( defined as lock repairs costing more than $20 million ) through a special fund in the treasury , the inland waterways trust fund ( iwtf ) .

the other half is covered by general funds .

over the last five years , the trajectory of cargo volume through the locks under consideration has changed significantly .

these recent changes often post - date the initial analyses that were conducted to calculate the expected economic benefits of the individual lock improvement projects .

as individual lock construction projects can take many years , the u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) , which oversees the inland waterways and supervises lock construction , requires that the costs and benefits be reevaluated periodically .

the office of management and budget ( omb ) will not request funding for a project unless the measured economic benefit is at least 2.5 times the expected cost .

the 21 proposed projects are clustered in three regions , each facing different economic conditions that are affecting barge traffic in the agricultural heartland , record corn and soybean harvests have reversed the long - term downward trend of cargo volumes on the upper mississippi river ( seven locks ) ; in the ohio and tennessee river valleys , the closure of coal - fired generating plants has reduced the demand for moving coal by barge to power plants by nearly half ( eight locks ) ; along the texas and louisiana intracoastal waterway , tank barge traffic is in a state of flux as the petrochemical industry makes longer - term investments related to the texas shale oil boom ( six locks ) .

additional factors are relevant when considering project priorities .

preliminary work has already been completed on some of the projects ( see table 1 ) .

for instance , a cofferdam ( a temporary concrete wall ) has been built around one planned construction site so that the river water can be pumped out and construction of a new lock can take place on dry ground .

in some cases this preparatory construction work is already under way or completed , and represents $200 million to $400 million of invested capital .

another consideration is the physical condition of a lock and the likelihood of a major failure that could delay river commerce or even shut it down when a lock must be closed for repair .

a related consideration is a lock's economic importance — how much traffic transits the lock and the commodities involved .

additional capacity is a motivation underlying many lock projects .

congress authorizes new navigation construction projects , modifies existing projects , and sometimes deauthorizes projects in periodic water resources bills .

it also sometimes uses a water resources development act ( wrda ) as a means to require reviews or broader changes in army corps policies .

after a lock project is authorized , construction can begin only when funds have been appropriated .

party rules in both houses that prohibit earmarks restrict legislative proposals that would direct a specific amount to a specific project .

a standard size barge is 195 feet in length and 35 feet in width , and can hold up to 1,570 tons of cargo .

on the busier , main stems of the locked segments of rivers , 15 barges are tied together in a single tow , usually three barges wide and five barges in length .

the barges are pushed by a towboat ( also known as a pushboat ) that is typically between 117 feet and 200 feet in length .

thus , a 15-barge tow is about 105 feet wide and can be just under 1,200 feet in length .

the largest locks on the system , which are 1,200 feet by 110 feet , can accommodate these tows .

however , many of the locks are half this length ( 600 feet ) , requiring a 15-barge tow be broken up into two sections to pass through a lock .

one lockage can take 45 minutes to an hour as the barges enter the lock chamber , the chamber is filled or emptied , and the barges exit .

thus , a 15-barge tow attempting to pass through a 600-foot lock will require two lockages taking about two hours .

after it pushes both segments of the tow through the lock , the towboat will reassemble them into a single tow .

on less busy tributaries , some locks are 360 feet by 56 feet , large enough for only one barge at a time to lock through .

however , on these river segments , tows may consist of only four or six barges .

the width and curvature of rivers also dictates allowable tow sizes .

the 15-barge tows are most often carrying grain or coal .

tows carrying other dry goods often consist of a smaller number of barges and may contain a mix of commodities .

tows of tank barges carrying liquid cargo ( petroleum , chemicals ) typically consist of one to three barges .

"jumbo" barges whose dimensions are 290 feet x 50 feet can also be found on the system .

the mississippi river between st. louis and new orleans has no locks , and 30 to 50 barges are often tied together in tows .

one of these tows carries about as much cargo as an oceangoing ship .

tows travel about 3 to 5 mph .

on multiday voyages , barges operate day and night with two crews rotating six - hour shifts .

a voyage between pittsburgh and st. louis will take about 18 days , a voyage between peoria , il , and new orleans about 16 days .

both drought and floods may limit the size of tows or restrict transport to daylight hours only , causing lengthy delays .

some northern portions of the system are either closed entirely in winter or are open but susceptible to delays due to ice , especially around locks .

winter closure allows the corps to perform major lock repairs without disturbing traffic , although not under ideal weather conditions .

the nature of river transport generally caters to shippers of low - value commodities that ship in large lot sizes and can afford to stockpile their product in anticipation of unfavorable river conditions .

the main competition for barges is railroads , which cost more but generally provide faster and more reliable transport .

for petroleum products , pipelines are the predominant choice on specific routes , but are costly to alter if origin or destination changes .

most barge shippers are committed to river transport , especially insofar as they have located their facilities along a river for this purpose and cannot readily switch to rail or pipeline transport when there are problems with river transport .

the army corps of engineers maintains a depth of at least 9 feet throughout the inland waterway system .

this depth is accomplished by dams that create pools ( lakes ) and that moderate river currents and water supply , as well as by dredging .

deepening is not an element of most of the lock improvement projects .

various "training structures" also funnel the current and help prevent shoaling in the middle of a river .

the corps operates locks 24 hours a day , seven days a week at locations with at least 1,000 commercial lockages per year ( an average of about three per day ) .

below this level , locks may be closed at night .

reliability has been a persistent issue , with both scheduled and unscheduled repair work requiring barge operators to work around lock closures or utilize a typically smaller auxiliary lock .

while age is frequently cited as justification for constructing a new lock , many locks have undergone major rehabilitation since their initial construction .

the rehabilitation work is not always reflected in usace reports .

barge operators and agricultural shippers in the upper midwest have long sought to increase the size of a series of locks above st. louis ( locks 20 , 21 , 22 , 24 , and 25 ) on the mississippi river , as well as the last two locks on the illinois waterway ( peoria and lagrange ) .

this project is now referred to as the navigation and ecosystem sustainability program ( nesp ; see figure 1 ) .

corn and soybeans , and to a lesser extent , wheat , are the dominant commodities in terms of tonnage shipped through these locks ( see figure 2 and figure 3 ) .

once on the river , these products are typically bound for the new orleans region to be loaded on ships for export .

fertilizer , moving upbound , is also a significant commodity being shipped through these locks .

all seven of these locks are currently 600 feet in length and 110 feet in width , which means that the 15-barge tows typically found on the river moving grain for export must be split into two sections to pass through .

by increasing the length of the lock to 1,200 feet , a 15-barge tow could pass through the lock in one lockage .

the two southernmost locks on the mississippi ( melvin price lock and lock 27 , in the vicinity of st. louis ) and lock 19 ( located upriver from locks 20-25 on the mississippi at keokuk , ia ) are already 1,200 feet .

congress authorized expansions of the seven nesp locks in wrda 2007 ( p.l .

110-114 , title viii ) .

it has provided appropriations for their engineering and design work , but not for construction .

tonnage passing through these locks fell by half between 1999 and 2013 , raising questions about the economic justification for enlarging the locks .

the steady decline culminated in the catastrophic drought year of 2012 , when corn production fell 13% ( see figure 2 and figure 3 ) .

a 2012 army corps study found that these river segments had adequate capacity through 2020 .

however , the expansion in corn - based ethanol production , which caused corn to be transported by truck within the midwest rather than being shipped by barge for export , slowed after 2010 as the amount of ethanol blended into gasoline nationally reached the minimum level required by law , limiting further growth in demand .

the more recent increase in barge transport of corn and soybeans ( since 2013 ) coincides with exceptionally large harvests .

annual harvests from 2013 through 2017 were record or near record harvests for both crops .

the slight increase in chemical tonnage , a good portion of which is fertilizer ( moving upbound ) , coincides with the record harvest years .

although army corps data for 2017 are not readily available for all of these locks , preliminary data for the lagrange lock and mississippi lock 25 indicate that record harvests in 2017 resulted in strong volumes of agricultural products through these locks last year also , with tonnage only slightly lower than in 2016 .

will the recent growth in cargo volumes on the mississippi continue ? .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) projects u.s. corn exports , which were essentially flat between 1990 and 2010 , will increase slightly through 2027 .

soybean exports are also projected to increase slightly through 2027 , continuing a trend since 1990 .

a portion of this increase could be shipped through these seven locks .

however , corn and soybean exports also enter the river below these locks , move by rail to gulf coast ports , or move by rail to west coast ports .

if china's recent announcement concerning possible tariffs on u.s. soybeans or other crops leads to the imposition of import restraints , future traffic volumes could be adversely affected .

although the opening of new locks in the panama canal in 2016 allows larger ships to carry grain and soybeans between new orleans and asia , potentially reducing transport costs , freight rates for dry bulk ships are notoriously volatile , and rate increases could make the rail option to the west coast more attractive .

these are just some of the variables that could influence future traffic through these locks .

agricultural products also account for the bulk of the tonnage passing through the last two locks on the illinois waterway , although the commodity mix is more diverse than that through the five mississippi river locks discussed above .

although not indicated in figure 3 , the tonnage through lagrange lock , which is the southernmost lock on the illinois waterway , is about a third larger than through peoria and is more heavily concentrated in corn and soybeans .

although one might expect that seasonal volumes on these two rivers might be heavily concentrated in the fall , after harvest , in actuality tonnages can be more distributed throughout the year .

shipment timing is influenced by corn and soybean prices , and volumes may peak right before the harvest season , as elevators need to make room for the next crop .

during their busiest months , these seven locks each average about 10 tows per day .

in comparison , lock 27 , farther south on the mississippi river , averages about 23 tows per day during its busiest months .

section 8003 of wrda 2007 called on the army corps to develop and test an appointment system to help barge operators avoid bunching their arrivals at the same lock .

barge operators insist that scheduling or a lock appointment system is not practical for river travel , but whether it is even necessary for a lock handling 10 tows per day is unclear .

debate continues over whether more efficient use of the infrastructure already in place would make lock extensions unnecessary .

as important as corn and soybeans are for the mississippi and illinois waterways , coal is the dominant commodity on most of the ohio river system .

the ohio valley is dotted with riverfront coal - fired power plants that are supplied largely from mines within the region .

unlike corn and soybeans on the mississippi / illinois waterway , which typically are moved long distances to export terminals , coal on the ohio river and its tributaries is typically moved for relatively short distances , either upbound or downbound , and requires passage through relatively few locks per trip .

on the ohio river , all 20 lock sites have two parallel lock chambers .

most of the lock sites have both a 1,200-foot chamber and 600-foot chamber , both with widths of 110 feet .

however , three lock sites located on the lower half of the river , mcalpine , smithland , and olmsted , each have two 1,200-foot lock chambers .

the three sites farthest upriver , near pittsburgh , have smaller locks , a 600-foot chamber and an auxiliary 360-foot chamber that is 56 feet wide and fits only a single barge at a time .

the smaller locks are used if the larger lock needs to close for repairs , a common occurrence in recent years particularly at the montgomery lock , where the main chamber was closed for the equivalent of 200 days in 2016 and 320 days in 2015 , much of it for unscheduled repair work .

congress authorized replacement of these three locks , emsworth , dashields , and montgomery , in the water resources development act of 2016 ( p.l .

114-322 , §1401 ) .

the auxiliary locks would be replaced with 600-foot locks , giving each site two 600-foot chambers .

as figure 4 indicates , the availability of natural gas has greatly reduced demand for barge movement of coal through the emsworth , dashields , and montgomery locks .

of the 18 riverfront coal - fired electric plants that utilized these locks , half have closed since 2012 , and the closure of at least a couple of more may be imminent .

limestone is the second largest commodity carried through the locks , but this commodity is also dependent on the existence of the electric generating plants , as it is used in the pollution control units .

there is no indication that other commodities carried through the locks might increase in volume , replacing coal traffic .

barges have not been heavily utilized to carry "frac sand," pipes , or wastewater to support the shale gas drilling activity in the region , nor has a renaissance in energy - intensive manufacturing occurred as of yet .

the decline of coal traffic can affect other commodities , as it could mean more empty backhaul movements of barges on the waterway , reducing overall efficiency .

army corps data indicate that the ratio of empty barges to loaded barges moving on the ohio river has increased from about 50% in the early 2000s to 60% to 65% over the last five years , while the average size of tows passing through the three locks proposed for enlargement has decreased by more than one and a half barges .

this implies that tows now require less time , on average , to pass through these locks , reducing the time savings that would come from lock enlargement .

despite the long - term downward trend in traffic levels , and its downward acceleration since 2013 , a 2016 army corps study calculated the economic benefit of expanding the locks based on a forecast that tonnage would rise from 35 million tons in 2016 to 78 million in 2020 and 98 million in 2040 .

in other words , by 2020 aggregated tonnage through the three locks was projected to more than double from 2016 .

by 2040 , tonnage was projected to be one - fifth higher than in the peak year , 1996 .

this was its "middle range" forecast ; the army corps also calculated higher and lower forecast scenarios that were deemed less likely to occur .

the projection of increased tonnage was based on a 2013 u.s. energy information administration ( eia ) projection of increased coal production in the northern appalachia region , and appears to assume that all coal produced in this region moves by river .

however , only 20% to 25% of pennsylvania and northern west virginia coal moves out by river , with the rest moving by rail .

this year , eia revised its forecast , and now foresees northern appalachia coal production to be about half as much as it projected five years earlier and to decline over the coming decades .

the corps is planning to release an economic update for this project in may 2020 .

two recent transactions may signify the decline of coal shipping on the ohio river system .

in 2015 , american electric power sold its barge line to an independent operator .

in march 2018 , jeffboat inc. , the largest barge builder , which was located on the ohio river across from louisville , ky , shut down its operations .

upriver from pittsburgh , on the monongahela river , usace is in the process of rebuilding structures at lock and dam 2 , 3 , and 4 as authorized in the water resources development act of 1992 ( p.l .

102-580 ) .

this project has received about $1 billion in funding to date .

the need for lock 3 is to be eliminated by raising the depth of the pool .

two new , wider lock chambers ( increasing width from 56 feet to 84 feet ) are to be built at lock 4 , the charleroi locks , to match the width of the six lock sites upriver .

this is designed to allow tows two barges wide to pass through .

completion of the projects at locks 3 and 4 will depend on further funding .

a new dam was completed at lock 2 in 2004 , but a plan to enlarge the smaller of the two lock chambers at this lock site was canceled , as the larger of the two locks is larger than the locks upriver .

coal accounts for about 80% of the tonnage passing through these locks , and as figure 5 indicates , the volume of coal passing through is now about half what it was in the late 1990s .

of the four operating coal - fired electric power plants located on the river , three closed between 2013 and 2017 .

the remaining power plant states that it uses about 2.8 million tons of coal per year ( which passes through lock 4 ) .

although 2017 tonnage data for all three locks is not currently available , preliminary 2017 data for lock 4 indicate that tonnage was down slightly from 2016 , to 7.9 million tons .

this translates to 839 fully loaded six - barge tows ( with each barge loaded to 1,570 tons ) , or an average of 2.3 six - barge tows passing through the locks per day .

the dimensions of the two new locks at lock 4 , 720 feet in length and 84 feet in width , would allow six - barge tows to pass through , providing far more capacity than required based on the current volume of cargo .

the tennessee river is navigable from knoxville and empties into the ohio river at paducah , ky. of the nine lock sites on the river , two are slated for improvements , with preliminary components already constructed or under way: the kentucky lock and the chickamauga lock , authorized in wrda 1996 ( p.l .

104-303 ) .

neither the trump administration nor the obama administration requested funds for these two lock construction projects .

the last lock on the tennessee river is the kentucky lock , 22 miles from the mouth , where a new parallel lock 1,200 feet in length is planned alongside the existing 600-foot lock .

the kentucky lock also attracts barge tows from the nearby cumberland river via the barkley canal , and , as figure 6 indicates , is a fairly busy lock in terms of tonnage .

traffic is somewhat more diversified than on other parts of the ohio navigation system , with both coal and crude materials ( which appear to be mostly limestone and sand and gravel ) making up the two largest commodity groups in terms of tonnage .

of the 10 coal - fired electric plants located on the tennessee and cumberland rivers or on nearby stretches of the ohio river , four closed between 2011 and 2017 .

however , the decline of coal tonnage through the kentucky lock has not been as severe as at other locks , as the two power plants located nearest the lock have remained open ( the four closed plants are located upriver from the lock ) .

sand and gravel shipments have also helped to steady the tonnage through this lock .

the chickamauga lock is about 450 miles upriver from the kentucky lock at chattanooga .

this lock is small , 360 feet in length and 60 feet in width , so only one barge at a time can pass through .

the lock has had a long - standing problem with its concrete , raising concerns about its reliability .

the existing plan is to build a parallel lock 600 feet in length ( a cofferdam is already in place ) .

the lock's present size is suitable for its traffic , with recreational boats outnumbering barge tows by about seven to one .

upriver from the lock and dam site is chickamauga lake .

as figure 7 indicates , the tonnage through this lock is far smaller than through the other locks discussed in this report .

in 2016 , about 900,000 tons of commodities passed through , about half the tonnage of 15 years earlier .

the drop in cargo volume is mostly due to the loss of food and farm product shipments .

barge tows average about one per day .

this is below the corps' threshold for 24-hour lock operation ; the lock is closed from 3-7 a.m .

the gulf intracoastal waterway ( giww ) is the third - busiest inland waterway in terms of tonnage after the mississippi and ohio rivers .

the giww is a coastal waterway from brownsville , tx , to the panhandle of florida that is protected by barrier islands and marshland .

the waterway allows flatwater barges , as opposed to seagoing vessels , to engage in coastal transport in this region .

the traffic is dominated by tows of one to three tank barges carrying liquid petroleum or chemical products .

despite being a tidal waterway , the giww and connecting channel require about 15 locks or gates , usually at intersecting rivers , to provide lift or control river and tide currents entering giww channels .

the three primary proposed iwtf projects on the giww are discussed in more detail below .

s. 2800 ( §3101 ) , reported by the committee on environment and public works , calls on the government accountability office ( gao ) to report on the progress and obstacles to implementing the lock expansions for the seven locks on the upper mississippi river and illinois waterway ( as well as the ecosystem restoration aspect of the project ) .

the bill ( §2312 ) calls on the army corps to expedite a review study for deepening the baptiste collette bayou — the bypass route around the ihnc lock .

the bill ( §1003 ) also asks the gao to review and compare the benefit - cost analysis procedures performed by the army corps with those performed by omb .

the same gao study is called for in the bill ordered to be reported by the house committee on transportation and infrastructure ( h.r .

8 ) .

waterway lock projects have also been discussed and funded in recent annual energy and water development appropriations legislation .

for instance , the fy2017 enacted bill funded construction expenditures for several projects in addition to the olmsted project ( which was still ongoing at the time ) , including kentucky lock and dam ( $39.5 million ) and the locks on the lower mon ( $82 million ) .

allocations under the fy2018 enacted bill ( p.l .

115-141 ) are expected to provide additional funding for waterways projects , but have yet to be made .

in may 2018 , the house committee on appropriations reported a bill ( h.r .

5895 , h.rept .

115-697 ) to fund the army corps civil works program for fy2019 .

the report expresses the desire that an economic update for the nesp project , if conducted , be completed by the end of 2019 .

the senate - reported appropriations bill ( s. 2975 , s.rept .

115-258 ) requests that the army corps report on its plans for updating a benefit - cost analysis of the nesp project and recommends funds for further investigation of the brazos and colorado river floodgates / locks project .

both appropriations bills would make full use of the barge fuel taxes collected for inland waterway construction projects .

