p roposals to index capital gains for inflation have recently reentered the public debate .

the proposed change would eliminate taxes on the part of capital gains that reflects inflation .

it would increase the basis ( the amount subtracted from sales price to determine capital gains ) by inflation occurring since acquisition of the asset .

president trump's head of the white house national economic council , larry kudlow , has long proposed the indexation of capital gains for inflation through regulation , and americans for tax reform has written a letter urging treasury secretary steven mnuchin to index capital gains .

past analyses ( as discussed in " history of proposals to index capital gains " section below ) indicate that the change would require legislation .

senators ted cruz and james inhofe have introduced s. 2688 , the capital gains inflation relief act of 2018 , which would index the basis of assets for purposes of the capital gains tax .

similar bills , h.r .

2017 and h.r .

6444 , have been introduced in the house by representative jack emmer and representative devin nunes .

chairman of the house ways and means committee kevin brady has indicated that some discussion of this issue is ongoing .

under the current system , taxable income from investments is not adjusted for inflation , a treatment applying not only to capital gains , but to dividends , interest , and returns from depreciating assets ( because depreciation is based on original cost ) .

although there is general agreement that measuring real income from capital assets requires an adjustment for inflation , all of these types of income receive other tax benefits that tend to offset the lack of inflation indexing and , in some cases , were explicitly adopted for that purpose .

indexing would increase the basis of the asset ( i.e. , the amount deducted from the sales price to determine gain or loss ) by the change in the price level between the date of acquisition and the date of sale .

for example , if the inflation rate is 2% and the real rate of return is 7% , an asset purchased for $100 would sell for $109.14 a year later if interest is compounded annually .

the nominal gain is 9.14% .

without indexing , the gain if the asset were sold would be $9.14 .

with indexing , the basis would be increased from $100 to $102 , and the gain would be $7.14 , which is a 7% return on $102 .

for assets such as common stock , the basis is the purchase price .

for assets that depreciate , such as machines and buildings , the basis is the purchase price minus cumulative depreciation plus improvements .

for assets that are fully or almost fully depreciated , indexing the basis would increase taxes given the higher recapture tax rate on the gain reflecting depreciation ( unless an exception were made ) .

this section explains the history of proposals to index capital gains beginning with the high inflation rates in the 1970s .

it also discusses the claims made in the early 1990s that capital gains could be indexed for inflation by regulation .

this section compares , using effective tax rates , indexing capital gains to alternative tax benefits ( exclusions or lower rates ) by holding period , using examples of an appreciating asset with deferral such as corporate stock , and a depreciating asset such as real estate , and a fixed asset such as land ( which yields current income ) .

it also estimates the share of nominal gain excluded by indexing by asset type and holding period and discusses other differences between the two approaches .

this section examines issues associated with providing tax benefits to capital gains through inflation indexing either as an addition or a substitute for current provisions .

the history of indexing capital gains for inflation indicates that indexing was considered but eventually an alternative benefit in the form of exclusions and lower rates was enacted .

as a result , the argument that it is fair to index gains because part of the income is unreal may be considered less compelling in the light of current benefits .

alternatively , indexing could be substituted in a revenue - neutral way for existing rates , which would then be increased .

the analysis of a variety of issues depends on whether indexing is an addition or a substitute , not only in the types of assets affected , but in concerns such as revenue cost , distribution , and lock - in effects .

an issue also arises if capital gains are indexed and other elements of the tax law are not .

for that matter , indexing capital gains by regulation to measure the true cost as deemed determined by the tax code would imply indexing a broad range of capital assets , including indexing of the basis for interest deductions and payments , depreciation , and inventory .

in addition , if dividends are paid in excess of real earnings , an adjustment to the portion taxed as dividends versus being treated as a return of capital might be considered .

as mentioned , most of these assets have other benefits in the tax code that offset the effects of inflation , and a broader inflation adjustment approach might consider cutting back on some of those benefits ( such as accelerated depreciation ) .

 ( note , however , that as long as expensing is retained for equipment and research investments , there is no basis to index. ) .

a particular concern is that , absent other changes , tax sheltering may be available by borrowing while deducting nominal interest to invest in capital gains with indexing .

this arbitrage possibility already exists due to the benefits currently available to capital gains , but it would be increased if indexing were an addition to rather than a substitute for the current lower rates .

fundamentally , however , the question is why capital gains should be singled out for indexation , but not other assets ? .

if indexing of capital gains is added to current benefits , then a revenue loss would occur .

one estimate indicated that in 2012 , the last year for which data on the distribution of gains by holding period were available , the revenue loss was a third of capital gains revenue .

in that year , capital gains revenue was $82.8 billion , so the revenue loss was around $27 billion .

the revenue loss would be smaller if losses could not expand or be converted into losses rather than gains , and taxpayers might sell more assets , although there would be more sheltering opportunities .

under these circumstances , the estimated losses were projected at between $10 billion and $20 billion , 12% to 24% of the total revenue .

a second source , using the cpi - u , estimated conservatively a revenue loss of $102 billion over 10 years , which ( given some growth ) would indicate less than $10 billion per year .

another estimate found failure to index resulted in $34 billion in additional taxes ( a quarter of the $134 billion collected in fy2017 ) was from inflation .

because capital gains fluctuate much more than inflation , the share of gain eliminated due to inflation indexing will vary over time , so that the upper limit of the estimates is consistent between the first and third sources at around $30 billion .

the loss due to an indexation proposal would , however , depend on the coverage of assets ( both by type and longevity ) and whether the indexation could be used to produce or expand losses .

the revenue loss might also be reduced ( as noted in the first estimate ) to the extent that lower rates cause more sales ( i.e. , reduce the lock - in effect , which is the payment of tax to sell an asset and acquire another ) .

estimates of the amount of revenue loss offset by increased sales based on statistical studies range widely , from 20% to 70% .

many of these statistical studies , however , appear to find responses that are larger than would be feasible given the ratio of realizations and may be more consistent with a lower end , or a 20% offset .

it is also unclear whether indexing would yield as large an effect on sales as an exclusion or lower rate with the same revenue consequence .

the lock - in effect is largest for assets that have been held for a longer period of time and thus have accumulated gains , and for assets in which gains are larger relative to sales price ( such as stocks with no dividends ) .

these assets , however , are the ones that receive the smallest exclusions and thus may lead to a more modest lock - in reduction .

revenue losses would be smaller in the short and medium term if indexing were confined to future inflation or a more restrictive approach of applying it to newly acquired assets ( the latter was proposed in the past ) .

such a change would lead to an initially small but rapidly growing revenue loss .

allowing gains only for future inflation would do less to reduce the lock - in effect .

allowing indexation only on newly acquired assets would reduce the lock - in effect by making the sale and purchase of new assets desirable in order to qualify for inflation indexing .

an argument has been made that lowering the taxes on capital gains via inflation indexing would boost economic growth .

this growth effect would presumably occur only if indexing were an addition to current tax benefits and not a revenue - neutral substitute .

it is unlikely , however , that a significant , or any , effect on economic growth would occur from a stand - alone indexing proposal .

revenue collected because of the lack of indexing of capital gains , using the largest estimate above , was $34 billion for fy2017 .

two methods are used for projecting the effects of indexation .

the first uses a rule of thumb that capital income is approximately 25% of net national product .

using this approach , the revenue loss amounts to 0.8% of total income from capital , and , assuming a real rate of return of 7% , an increase in the cost of capital ( net of depreciation ) of 0.06% , or about 6 basis points .

the second approach divides the revenue estimate by the estimated capital stock to provide a direct estimate of the change in the cost of capital , which is 0.07% , or 7 basis points .

these effects are quite modest , and they would be smaller still with more restrictive proposals that limited the application to losses , included only some types of assets , or provided minimum holding periods .

in addition , unlike some other tax cuts ( such as expensing or corporate rate cuts ) that occur at the firm level and have the potential to draw capital from abroad as well as potentially increase saving , capital gains are on the savers side , which means their effects operate solely through saving with some of that saving leaking into investments in other countries .

capital gain effects are also limited because of evidence that savings is not very responsive to changes in rates of return .

additionally , the increase in debt from crowding out would lead , in the absence of other changes , to an offsetting effect that would eventually be expected to reduce the capital stock .

although the effects would still be small , larger effects might be retained per dollar of revenue loss by applying indexation to newly acquired assets , thus avoiding a windfall gain from lowering taxes on existing assets .

if enacted as a stand - alone policy , inflation indexation would favor higher - income individuals .

according to the tax policy center , 60.4% of capital gains taxes are paid by the top 0.1% of taxpayers , 80.1% by the top 1% , and 90.2% by the top 5% .

the penn wharton budget model estimate for the effect of indexing shows 63.1% of the tax cut is received by the top 0.1% , 86.1% by the top 1% , and 95.0% by the top 5% of taxpayers .

a measure of how a tax change affects the relative distribution is to consider the percentage change in after - tax income .

penn wharton has a relatively low estimate of the revenue cost and found that for the top 0.1% after - tax income increases by approximately 1% .

for the remainder of the top 1% , the increase is 0.3% , whereas the bottom 95% has virtually no change .

the higher end of the estimates cited above would suggest a magnitude about three times this size , with a 3% increase for the top 0.1% and a 1% increase for the remainder of the top 1% .

note that any reduction in revenue due to unlocking should not reduce this estimate , as individuals who are now induced to sell assets and pay offsetting taxes nevertheless receive a benefit from the tax reduction ( in the form of a more desirable portfolio ) that is at least worth the taxes .

several issues relate to economic efficiency , or the degree to which decisions about the type of investments to make are distorted by taxes .

an argument that can be made for providing relief for capital gains on corporate stocks and dividends is the additional layer of tax due to taxation at both the corporate and the noncorporate levels .

this additional tax discourages investment in the corporate sector in favor of investment in noncorporate business and owner - occupied housing .

that concern has diminished due , in part , to recent tax changes .

while investment in stocks remains more heavily taxed than owner - occupied housing ( generally taxed at close to a relatively low , and in some circumstances , negative rates ) , the tax rate has declined , changing the relative tax position of corporate and noncorporate businesses .

examining the top statutory rates , under prior law , a corporation would pay a tax of 35% and the individual would pay 23.8% on the remaining 65% , for a total rate of 50.5% .

an investment in a passthrough business would pay either 39.6% or 43.4% if subject to the 3.8% tax .

under the new law , the corporate tax is 21% plus 23.8% of the remaining 79% , for a total of 39.8% .

this rate can be compared with several alternative rates .

first , for passthrough businesses that are eligible for the 20% deduction , the new top 37% rate is reduced to 29.6% .

each of these types of businesses may or may not be subject to the 3.8% medicare / net investment tax ; with these taxes , the rates are 40.8% and 33.4% .

in all four cases , the passthrough tax rate has declined relative to the corporate rate ( and for individuals not eligible for the passthrough deduction and subject to the 3.8% tax , the passthrough rate is higher ) .

aside from this change , the tax rate on corporate - sector investments is lower to the extent capital gains are held until death ; assuming a 4% dividend and a 3% real appreciation rate , with half of gains excluded at death , the combined corporate rate falls to 38.2% bringing the passthrough and corporate combined rates closer together .

corporate - sector investments also tend to make intangible ( i.e. , research ) and equipment investments more tax favored than noncorporate - sector investments , which are more concentrated in structures .

taking those effects into account , the corporate sector was taxed at effective rates similar to the noncorporate sector prior to the change , and , at least in the short term , the favorable treatment of equipment was increased .

the corporate sector is also less likely to be subject to property taxes compared with the passthrough sector and owner - occupied housing .

on the whole , there does not appear to be a case for further lowering of the capital gains tax rates based on the tax burden on the corporate sector .

one of the largest distortions in the tax code , which remains even after the tax changes in p.l .

115-97 , although it is somewhat moderated , is the favoritism of debt over equity .

debt - financed investments are generally subject to negative effective tax rates because nominal interest can be deducted at the statutory rate , whereas the investment income it generates is taxed at a lower effective rate .

in addition , whereas interest income is taxed too heavily because of inflation , most interest income is not subject to tax because it is in retirement plans or received as untaxed banking services .

this favoritism has been somewhat reduced in the corporate sector due to the lower corporate rate and tighter restrictions on the deduction of interest , and indexing capital gains for inflation can bring these rates closer together by reducing the tax on equity .

however , there are alternatives that can also accomplish the same purpose , such as indexing interest for inflation , which would raise rather than lose revenue .

another option might be to disallow a percentage of interest deductions in a revenue - neutral package with capital gains indexing .

another distortion that occurs because of taxes is the discouragement of paying dividends .

although dividends and capital gains are taxed at the same rate , capital gains still benefit from being taxed only on realization or not taxed at all .

the result leads to retaining too much income in the firm or using stock buy backs instead of dividend payments ( which prevents those who prefer a steady source of dividend income from receiving it ) .

indexing capital gains for inflation would increase that distortion .

the differential treatment would also favor firms that tend to retain earnings compared with those that are growing more slowly and paying more dividends .

inflation indexing may reduce the lock - in effect , which distorts portfolio choices of individuals .

this issue has already been discussed in the revenue section , and , as indicated there , inflation indexing may be an inferior tool to reduce this effect given that it favors short - lived assets .

over the years , some have expressed concerns about speculation and shortened investment horizons , which may lead to volatility and instability in the market and cause firms to focus too much on short - term earnings rather than long - term objectives .

their concerns have sometimes led to proposals for financial transaction taxes or provided capital gains benefits that rise the longer an asset is held .

it is unclear whether it would be appropriate to intervene in markets for this reason , because speculators ( those concerned about short - term prices rather than underlying fundamentals ) also provide market liquidity .

 ( for example , the commodities market in pork bellies would be highly illiquid if the only participants were farmers and meat processors. ) .

if speculation were a concern , however , general inflation indexing without some holding period would be inferior to a rate reduction because it is more beneficial to short - lived assets .

indexing capital gains for inflation would be more complicated than an exclusion or lower rate , because a different inflation adjustment would have to be applied to each vintage of investments .

if done quarterly , it would require four different adjustments for each year for a dividend reinvestment plan .

this type of complex adjustment is of less concern now than it was in the past , with vastly improved computing facilities so that brokers could be required to make adjustments .

it would , however , increase their compliance burden as well as the internal revenue service's audit burden .

real estate investors would have to adjust basis each year and homeowners would have to adjust original acquisition costs and improvements if these assets were included .

mutual funds with both covered and excluded assets would have to allocate their basis to determine what share could be indexed .

compliance would be easier if applied to future inflation , because those holding older assets may have more difficulties knowing the date of acquisition .

complications could also arise for partnerships in which there is considerable flexibility in allocating income , assets , and in tracing covered and noncovered assets through multiple layers of ownership ; and for corporations ( if included ) in which the basis of stocks in subsidiaries is adjusted after dividend payments .

this appendix provides formulas for estimating effective tax rates and exclusion factors for various assets .

corporate stock with no dividend is a purely appreciating asset , where using continuous compounding for each dollar of investment: ( 1 ) e ( r+p ) t = e ( r+p ) t ( 1-t ) +t , or , with indexing e ( r+p ) t = e ( r+p ) t ( 1-t ) +te pt where e is a natural constant , r is the after - tax real return , p is the inflation rate , r is the pretax return , t is the holding period , and t is the tax rate .

with indexing , the original cost is increased for inflation .

this equation can be solved by rearranging to: ( 2 ) e ( r +p ) r ) = ( e ( r +p ) t - t ) / ( 1-t ) , or with indexing , e ( r +p ) r ) = ( e ( r +p ) t - te pt ) / ( 1-t ) and taking the natural log of both sides , leading to: ( 3 ) r = ln [ ( e ( r +p ) t - t ) / ( 1-t ) ] / t – p , or with indexing , r = ln [ ( e ( r +p ) t - te pt ) / ( 1-t ) ] / t – p the effective tax rate is ( r - r ) / r .

for determining the exclusion , equate an inclusion rate , x , times the tax without indexing with the tax paid with indexing and then subtract from 1 to get an exclusion rate: ( 4 ) xt ( e ( r+p ) t - 1 ) = t ( e ( r+p ) t - e p t ) with a dividend or rent , as is the case with the other assets , the user cost of capital modified to allow for finite life and capital gains taxation is used .

the standard formula for a solution for the user cost of capital for a depreciating asset is: ( 5 ) r = ( r+d ) ( 1-uz ) / ( 1-u ) – d where d is the economic depreciation rate , z is the present value of depreciation , and u is the ordinary tax rate applied to the flow of current earnings .

the assets cover three types of different current yield assets: those that appreciate ( a stock that pays dividends ) , assets that depreciate ( such as a building ) and assets that have no change in real value ( such as land whose value only grows with inflation ) .

land that grows in real value would be similar to a dividend paying stock .

a stock that pays a dividend ( taxed at rate t ) and also appreciates rather than depreciating and has no depreciation can be solved ( replacing the value of d with – g , where the growth rate is g ) as: ( 6 ) r = [ ( r - g ) ( 1-e - ( r - g ) t ( 1-t ) +te - ( r+p ) t ) ] / [ ( 1-e - ( r - g ) t ) ) ( 1-t ) ] +g note that this formula is in present value unlike the one for a completely appreciating asset in ( 1 ) that is in future value , so that the deduction of basis is discounted by the nominal after - tax discount rate , r+p .

with indexing , the relationship is: ( 7 ) r = [ ( r - g ) ( 1-e - ( r - g ) t ( 1-t ) +te - r t ) ] / [ ( 1-e - ( r - g ) t ) ) ( 1-t ) ] +g the extra terms in the equation are to capture the finite dividend period , the gain on sale , and the capital gain tax on the sale .

there is also no z , tax depreciation .

note that without capital gains tax , the pretax return would be ( r - g ) / ( 1-t ) +g , indicating that the dividend part of the return is subject to the full tax rate and the gain is not taxed at all .

indexing causes the return of basis to be discounted at the real rate , r , rather than the nominal rate , r+p .

the exclusion would be determined in a similar manner to ( 4 ) as: ( 8 ) xt ( e - ( r - g ) t - 1 ) = t ( e - ( r - g ) t - e pt ) for a depreciating asset using straight line depreciation as used for buildings that is sold before the depreciation period is completed: ( 9 ) r =[ ( r+d ) ( 1-uz – e - ( r+ d ) t ( 1-t ) - t ( 1-t / t* ) e - ( r+p ) t ) ] / [ ( 1- e - ( r - d ) t ) ( 1-u ) ] – d and with indexing , ( 10 ) r =[ ( r+d ) ( 1-uz – e - ( r - d ) t ( 1-t ) - t ( 1-t / t* ) e - rt ] / [ ( 1- e - ( r - d ) t ) ( 1-u ) ] – d ( 1-t / t* ) , where t* is the depreciation period , is the basis which becomes zero when depreciation is completed .

in this case and with land , u is the ordinary tax rate and t is the capital gains tax rate .

the exclusion equivalent is determined by the inclusion rate x: ( 11 ) xt ( e - ( r+ d ) t - ( 1-t / t* ) e - ( r+p ) t ) ) = t ( e - ( r+ d ) t - ( 1-t / t* ) e - rt ) for land , the formula is: ( 12 ) r =[r ( 1 – e - r t ( 1-t ) - te - ( r+p ) t ) ] / [ ( 1- e - r ) t ) ( 1-u ) ] and with indexing , ( 13 ) r =[r ( 1 – e - r t ( 1-t ) - te - rt ) ] / [ ( 1- e - r ) t ) ( 1-u ) ] the inclusion rate is determined by the include rate x 14 ) xt ( e - r t - e - ( r+p ) t ) ) = t ( e - ( r ) t - e - rt ) .

