a variety of issues related to housing were active during the 115 th congress , including issues related to housing finance , housing - related tax provisions , housing assistance and grant programs ( including in response to presidentially declared major disasters ) , and actions undertaken by the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) as part of its efforts to review existing department regulations .

this report provides a high - level overview of the most prominent housing - related issues during the congress , including brief background on each and discussion of legislative or other relevant activity .

this report is meant to provide a broad overview of major issues and is not intended to provide detailed information or analysis .

however , it includes references to more in - depth crs reports on the issues where possible .

this section provides background on housing and mortgage market conditions to provide context for the housing policy issues discussed later in the report .

this discussion of market conditions is at the national level ; however , it is important to be aware that local housing market conditions can vary dramatically , and national housing market trends may not reflect the conditions in a specific area .

nevertheless , national housing market indicators can provide an overall sense of general trends in housing .

for several years since the housing and financial market turmoil of the late 2000s , housing markets have been recovering from house price declines , high rates of mortgage foreclosures , and other symptoms of the housing crisis .

while some areas of the country have not fully recovered , most housing market indicators have rebounded .

for example , house prices have been increasing for several years , and in many areas have passed their pre - crisis peaks in nominal terms ; foreclosure rates have generally declined to levels similar to the years preceding the housing market turmoil ; and housing market activity in general is increasing .

as many communities have recovered , other housing market conditions have received increased attention .

some of the most prominent considerations that are often discussed in relation to current housing markets include the following: affordability of both owner - occupied and rental housing: in many areas of the country , housing affordability has been an ongoing issue for both homebuyers and renters .

house prices and rental costs have increased in recent years and have generally increased faster than incomes .

despite concerns about the affordability of owner - occupied housing , many metrics suggest that homeownership is currently relatively affordable by historical standards ; however , such measures generally focus on the ability of households to afford monthly mortgage payments and do not consider other costs of purchasing a home , such as saving for a down payment .

housing inventory: the available housing inventory is one factor that affects housing affordability , as too few homes available for sale or rent can increase home prices or rents .

limited inventory , particularly of modestly priced housing , appears to be impacting affordability and home sales in many housing markets .

relatively low levels of new home construction is one of the factors contributing to lower levels of housing inventory .

mortgage access: the availability of mortgage credit tightened in the aftermath of the housing crisis , for a variety of reasons .

while credit is not currently as tight as it was at the peak , some argue that it is still too difficult for some creditworthy households to obtain affordable mortgages .

others , however , argue that mortgage standards are loosening too much for certain types of mortgages .

the following subsections provide an overview of selected indicators reflecting conditions in owner - occupied housing markets and the mortgage market , and rental markets , respectively , during the 115 th congress .

some of the included graphics show housing market indicators over time ; these graphics highlight the time period of the 115 th congress to allow readers easily to see the levels and trends in these indicators during the congress .

in some cases , these graphics include data for the entire 115 th congress ( 2017-2018 ) , while in other cases data covering the full time period of the 115 th congress were not available as of the date of the final update of this report .

several of the issues that were of interest during the 115 th congress are related to the financing of housing .

in some cases , these issues can impact the financing of both owner - occupied housing and rental housing , though in other cases they are primarily relevant to one or the other .

during the 115 th congress , a number of housing - related tax provisions were modified or extended through different pieces of enacted legislation: a broad tax revision law that included changes to housing - related tax provisions , tax extenders legislation that extended temporary tax provisions related to housing , and an appropriations law that included changes to the low - income housing tax credit .

some of the housing - related issues that were active in the 115 th congress have to do with federal programs or activities that provide housing assistance to low - income households or other households with particular housing needs .

the trump administration took office in january 2017 , at the beginning of the 115 th congress .

in february 2017 , president trump issued executive order 13777 directing agencies to establish a regulatory reform task force to evaluate existing agency regulations and identify regulations that should potentially be modified or repealed .

in accordance with the order , in may 2017 hud issued a federal register notice requesting public comments "to assist in identifying existing regulations that may be outdated , ineffective , or excessively burdensome. .

hud has since suspended , withdrawn , or considered modifying a variety of regulations and policy decisions .

not all of these actions have been directly related to the regulatory review required by executive order 13777 , though hud has often described its actions as consistent with that review or noted public comments received as part of that review in explaining its decisions .

the regulations and policy decisions that have been withdrawn or suspended or that are under review impact a range of hud programs and policies .

some of the more high - profile actions that hud has taken are discussed in the following sections .

fair market rents ( fmrs ) are estimated annually by hud for use in various hud programs , including for setting subsidy levels in the section 8 housing choice voucher ( hcv ) program .

fmrs are set at the 40 th percentile gross rent of standard - quality housing in a community .

hud uses census data and inflation estimates to establish fmrs for the geographies of metropolitan areas and nonmetropolitan counties .

it has long been understood that housing markets are often more localized than metropolitan areas or counties , but given data limitations these were the smallest geographies for which hud would produce regular estimates .

with the introduction of the american community survey to replace the decennial census long form , more - frequently updated data became available at smaller geographies .

thus , hud is now able to calculate fmrs for smaller geographic areas .

hud released its first hypothetical small area fmrs ( safmrs ) , with fmrs at the zip code level , in fy2011 and has published them annually since .

with the release of the safmrs , hud also announced a demonstration to test the use of safmrs on the hcv program in selected communities .

in june 2016 , during the 114 th congress , hud published a notice in the federal register proposing to require certain phas to use safmrs in the administration of their hcv programs if they had high levels of vouchers concentrated in high - poverty areas .

some commenters expressed support , citing the opportunity safmrs present to promote mobility and accuracy in subsidy determination , among other reasons ; other commenters opposed the change , expressing concern about the potential for cost increases in the program resulting in fewer families being served , among other reasons .

the rule was finalized in november 2016 , at the end of the obama administration .

under the final rule , 24 communities would be mandated to use safmrs for their hcv programs and any other pha could choose to use them , beginning on october 1 , 2017 .

following the transition to the trump administration , hud secretary carson announced in the summer of 2017 that he was suspending the mandatory use of safmrs for two fiscal years , citing interim findings from the safmr demonstration that raised concerns about the availability of units for voucher holders , negative public comments during the rulemaking process , and the need for more guidance and technical assistance for phas .

in response to the suspension , fair housing advocates sued hud , and in december 2017 the u.s. district court for the district of columbia entered a preliminary injunction voiding the suspension , thus putting the mandatory use of safmrs into effect .

in light of the injunction , hud issued a notice for the 24 mandatory communities to begin using safmrs "as expeditiously as possible and no later than april 1 , 2018. .

other phas may also voluntarily begin using safmrs to administer their hcv programs .

manufactured housing — housing that is assembled in a factory setting and transported to a home site on a permanent chassis — is required to be built in accordance with hud's manufactured housing construction and safety standards .

hud issues regulations governing the standards , with the input of the manufactured housing consensus committee .

hud also develops model manufactured home installation standards ; states that implement their own manufactured home installation programs must have standards that at least meet the hud model standards .

in january 2018 , hud issued a federal register notice stating that , consistent with executive order 13777 and the regulatory reform task force , it was undertaking a broad review of hud's regulations related to manufactured housing and inviting public comment on regulations that may warrant review .

while hud rules are generally intended to ensure that manufactured housing is high quality and safe , some have argued that certain hud rules are unnecessary or too inflexible and that they therefore drive up the cost of manufactured housing and reduce access to it as an affordable housing option .

rules or guidance that have attracted particular attention in recent years include a final rule related to on - site completions of manufactured homes , a memorandum related to the construction of certain add - on features ( such as attached garages ) at the home site and the applicability of hud alternative construction procedures in those circumstances , and an interpretative bulletin related to foundation requirements in areas subject to ground freezing .

hud specifically requested comments on these and other selected topics , in addition to requesting comments generally on any of its manufactured housing regulations .

the house - passed fy2018 consolidated appropriations bill that included hud appropriations would have prohibited funds provided in that bill from being used for the three hud directives mentioned above .

while that provision was not included in the enacted fy2018 appropriations law , the explanatory statement directed hud to review those specific directives , develop a solution that balances consumer safety with costs and burdens placed on both manufacturers and consumers , and report on whether state and local agencies should have jurisdiction over on - site completion of manufactured homes .

the fair housing act requires hud to administer its programs in a way that affirmatively furthers fair housing , and statutes or regulations governing specific hud programs also require that funding recipients affirmatively further fair housing ( affh ) .

for many years , public housing authorities and state and local governments that receive hud block grant funds satisfied their obligation to affirmatively further fair housing by certifying to hud that they conducted an analysis of impediments ( ai ) to fair housing and were taking appropriate actions to overcome impediments .

however , both hud and gao had identified certain weaknesses in the ai process .

in july 2015 , during the 114 th congress , hud published a final rule ( affh rule ) that more specifically defines what it means to affirmatively further fair housing and requires that program participants submit a new assessment of fair housing ( afh ) to hud rather than an ai .

the rule also provides that hud will supply data for program participants to use in preparing their afhs and will publish tools that help them through the process .

on january 5 , 2018 , hud issued a notice stating that it would extend the deadline for local governments receiving more than $500,000 in cdbg funding to submit their afhs until after october 31 , 2020 .

under the affh rule , these local governments had begun submitting afhs starting in 2016 .

in extending the deadline , hud stated that , based on reviews of afhs that had been submitted so far , it believed that program participants needed more time and technical assistance to produce acceptable afhs .

on may 23 , 2018 , hud issued three more notices that effectively suspend indefinitely the implementation of the affh rule and return to the previous ai process .

the three notices ( 1 ) withdrew the january 2018 notice that delayed implementation of the affh rule for local governments , ( 2 ) withdrew the final assessment tool that had been released to assist local governments in preparing their afhs , and ( 3 ) directed program participants that have not already submitted an afh under the affh rule to comply with the previous ai requirements .

withdrawing the local government assessment tool delays the afh submission dates for local governments because the affh rule provides for at least nine months between publication of the final assessment tool and the afh due date .

hud states that it withdrew the assessment tool because it had identified "significant deficiencies" that made the tool "unduly burdensome" for program participants to use , and that it does not have the personnel to provide technical assistance that the jurisdictions would need .

the notice provides that hud will produce a "more effective and less burdensome" tool in the future and that it will accept public input on improving the tool .

in the 115 th congress , the restoring fair housing protections eliminated by hud act of 2018 ( h.r .

6220 ) would have required hud to reinstate the assessment tool for local governments and require them to submit afhs .

the bill was referred to committee but no further action was taken during the 115 th congress .

most recently , on august 13 , 2018 , hud announced an advance notice of proposed rulemaking ( anpr ) stating that it "has determined that a new approach towards affh is required" and requesting public comments on potential changes to the affh regulations .

the anpr states that "hud is committed to its mission of achieving fair housing opportunity for all," but that it believes that the current rule "is not fulfilling its purpose to be an efficient means for guiding meaningful action by program participants. .

a dditional information: for more on hud and fair housing , including hud's obligation to affirmatively further fair housing , see crs report r44557 , the fair housing act: hud oversight , programs , and activities .

the fair housing act ( fha ) was enacted "to provide , within constitutional limitations , for fair housing throughout the united states. .

it prohibits discrimination on the basis of race , color , religion , national origin , sex , physical and mental handicap , and familial status .

subject to certain exemptions , the fha applies to all sorts of private and public housing , including single family homes , apartments , condominiums , and manufactured homes .

it also applies to "residential real estate - related transactions," which include both the "making [and] purchasing of loans … secured by residential real estate [and] the selling , brokering , or appraising of residential real property. .

in june 2015 , the supreme court , in texas department of housing community affairs v. inclusive communities project , confirmed the long - held interpretation that , in addition to outlawing intentional discrimination , the fha prohibits certain housing - related decisions that have a disparate impact on a protected class .

historically , courts have generally recognized two types of disparate impacts resulting from "facially neutral decision[s]" that can result in liability under the fha .

first , courts have recognized disparate impact when a "decision has a greater adverse impact on one [protected] group than on another. .

second , courts consider the "effect which the decision has on the community involved ; if it perpetuates segregation and thereby prevents interracial association it will be considered invidious under the fair housing act independently of the extent to which it produces a disparate effect on different racial groups. .

the supreme court's holding in inclusive communities that "disparate - impact claims are cognizable under the [fha]" mirrors previous interpretations of hud and all 11 federal courts of appeals that had ruled on the issue as of june 2015 .

however , hud and these courts had not all applied the same criteria for determining when a neutral policy that causes a disparate impact violates the fha .

in a stated attempt to harmonize disparate impact analysis across the country , hud finalized regulations in 2013 that established uniform standards for determining when such practices violate the act .

the inclusive communities court did not expressly adopt the standards established in hud's disparate impact regulations , but instead embraced a similar , but not identical , three - step burden - shifting test for assessing disparate impact liability under the fha .

at step one , the plaintiff has the burden of establishing evidence that a housing decision or policy caused a disparate impact on a protected class .

at step two , defendants can counter the plaintiff's prima facie showing by establishing that the challenged policy or decision is "necessary to achieve a valid interest. .

the defendant will not be liable for the disparate impact resulting from a "valid interest" unless , at step three , the plaintiff proves "that there is an available alternative … practice that has less disparate impact and serves the entity's legitimate needs. .

in addition , the supreme court outlined a number of limiting factors that lower courts and hud should apply when assessing disparate impact claims .

the court stressed that lower courts and hud should rigorously evaluate plaintiffs' claims to ensure that evidence has been provided to support not only a statistical disparity , but also causality .

additionally , the court emphasized that claims should be disposed of swiftly in the preliminary stages of litigation if plaintiffs have failed to establish a prima facie case of disparate impact .

on june 20 , 2018 , hud published an advance notice of proposed rulemaking in the federal register seeking public comment on whether the 2013 disparate impact regulations should be amended in light of the inclusive communities decision .

the advance notice of proposed rulemaking noted that the request for comments was "consistent with hud's efforts to carry out the administration's regulatory reform efforts" and that hud had received "numerous" comments related to this rule in response to its may 2017 federal register notice seeking comment on its regulatory reform agenda .

with the june 2018 advance notice of proposed rulemaking , hud specifically sought public feedback on , among other issues , whether the regulations "strike the proper balance in encouraging legal action for legitimate disparate impact cases while avoiding unmeritorious claims" ; sufficiently detail the causality requirements for establishing a prima facie disparate impact case ; should establish safe harbors from or defenses to disparate impact claims ; and could be amended to "add [] clarity , reduce uncertainty , decrease regulatory burden , or otherwise assist the regulated entities and other members of the public in determining what is lawful. .

the public comment period closed on august 20 , 2018 .

