a ccording to the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , "115 americans die every day from an opioid overdose," and deaths from prescription opioids have more than quadrupled since 1999 .

the epidemic's origins are complex , with fingers pointed at pharmaceutical manufacturers and distributors , pharmacies , addicts and dealers , and health care professionals .

like the causes of the opioid epidemic , any solutions to the problem will likely involve many actors , including the federal government .

the food and drug administration ( fda ) —the executive branch agency tasked with protecting the public health by ensuring the nation's drug supply is safe and effective —has a central role in confronting drug abuse , including the opioid epidemic .

given the severity of the opioid epidemic and its prominence as a matter of national concern , efforts to combat the issue will likely continue to be of significant interest to congress .

this report focuses on fda as a key player in these efforts .

the report provides a brief overview of fda's role in approving new prescription drugs , including opioids , and also addresses selected examples of the agency's existing legal authorities under the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( fd&c act or act ) and recent action taken with respect to the opioid crisis .

the report concludes with a discussion of selected provisions of the recently enacted substance use - disorder prevention that promotes opioid recovery and treatment for patients and communities act ( support act ) , which amends the fd&c act .

in 1938 , congress passed the fd&c act in an effort to bolster federal protection of public health and safety by creating new requirements designed to keep impure or dangerous products out of interstate commerce .

fda is the primary federal agency responsible for the administration and enforcement of the fd&c act .

with respect to prescription drugs , the fd&c act establishes a comprehensive federal system of premarket approval for such drugs .

the act generally prohibits introducing or delivering new drugs in interstate commerce unless the drug is approved by fda .

under current law , in order to market a new brand - name drug , a manufacturer must file a new drug application ( nda ) with fda , which must include , among other things , "full reports of investigations which have been made to show whether or not such drug is safe for use and whether such drug is effective in use. .

fda may approve an nda only if the sponsor of the application ( eg , a drug manufacturer or marketer ) demonstrates , among other things , that the drug is safe and effective under the conditions prescribed , recommended , or suggested in the product's labeling .

the fd&c act generally authorizes fda to refuse to approve an nda if the agency finds the labeling is false or misleading in any particular way .

additionally , many drugs—including a majority of opioid products approved in recent decades—are reformulations of existing products .

reformulated drugs may also be approved through an nda under the fd&c act , and drug sponsors may rely on safety and efficacy data of previously approved products as part of their applications .

in addition to premarket authority , fda also possesses postmarket authority to monitor drugs that have entered interstate commerce and ensure that the benefits of a drug continue to overbalance the risks .

for example , fda may require postmarket drug labeling changes if the agency becomes aware of certain new information that the secretary of health and human services ( hhs secretary ) believes should be included in the labeling of the drug , as well as postapproval studies , clinical trials , and risk evaluation mitigation strategies ( rems ) under certain circumstances .

additionally , the agency may also monitor safety data related to approved drugs through an active postmarket risk assessment system .

in general , fda has broad authority with respect to the implementation of the fd&c act .

the agency is empowered to promulgate regulations to efficiently enforce the act's broad mandates and develop guidance documents that set forth the agency's interpretation of the act or accompanying regulations .

the fd&c act also authorizes fda to "conduct examinations and investigations" to administer the act and to disseminate information about regulated products involving "imminent danger to health" or "gross deception to the consumer. .

while new opioids are generally subject to the same approval requirements as most other drugs , fda's task to ensure the safety and efficacy of opioids is particularly difficult .

throughout recorded history , societies have struggled with balancing the medicinal use of opioids in pain management with the concomitant euphoric effects that have induced the substance's abuse .

sixty years ago , the head of surgery at the university of illinois noted , "we must appreciate that severe constant pain will destroy the morale of the sturdiest individual .

 .

 .

[b]ut .

 .

 .

we are often loathe to give liberal amounts of narcotics because the drug addiction itself may become a hideous spectacle. .

as a result of these difficulties , for nearly a century , opioid pain medications were used in the united states primarily to treat acute and cancer - related pain .

however , studies from the 1970s revealing inadequate management of chronic pain , followed by influential articles published in the 1980s reporting a low incidence of addictive behavior in small groups of cancer and noncancer patients , led to a trend toward more liberal prescribing of opioids within the medical community .

the shifting views on the safety and efficacy of opioids culminated in fda's 1995 approval of purdue pharma's controlled - release opioid pain medication , oxycontin , the product some point to as the catalyst for the current opioid epidemic .

between 2000 and 2009 , the medical community established new standards for pain management , which included pain as a new vital sign , and prescriptions for opioids increased .

by 2016 , an estimated 11.5 million americans were abusing prescription painkillers .

fda's legal authorities and recent actions taken in response to the opioid epidemic may be considered against the backdrop of challenging legal and policy questions about the role fda can or should play with respect to regulation of products that have public health consequences .

as part of these questions , fda officials have discussed the importance of striking the right balance between taking aggressive action to fight opioid misuse and addiction , while simultaneously protecting patients who experience severe pain .

additionally , given that the agency's approach to evaluating and approving drugs is based on "the conditions prescribed , recommended , or suggested" in fda - approved labeling , questions may arise about the extent to which the agency has legal authority to consider drug misuse in carrying out its regulatory actions .

under a number of fd&c act provisions , fda has considerable discretion in determining the information that is relevant to its regulatory decisions .

the following sections of this report illustrate how fda has exercised its discretion , particularly in its response to prescription opioid abuse and addiction .

fda is taking a multifaceted approach in its response to the opioid epidemic .

fda officials have indicated that the agency focuses its efforts in four areas: 1. decreasing exposure and preventing new addiction ; 2. supporting the treatment of those with opioid use disorder ; 3. fostering the development of novel pain treatment therapies ; and 4. improving enforcement and assessing benefit risk .

using these four categories as a framework , the following sections highlight some of fda's recent strategies for addressing the opioid epidemic and the agency's existing authority to pursue such strategies .

in october 2018 , congress passed the substance use - disorder prevention that promotes opioid recovery and treatment for patients and communities act ( support act ) , p.l .

115-271 , comprehensive legislation primarily aimed at opioid misuse and abuse .

title iii , subtitle a of the support act contains provisions that amend the fd&c act in various ways to address the opioid epidemic , including the following .

to promote appropriate prescribing practices and decrease exposure to opioids , the support act bolsters fda's rems authority , expressly permitting the agency to compel a rems if there is a serious risk of overdose or drug abuse .

further , under specified circumstances , fda may compel manufacturers through this rems to make drugs available with certain packaging systems ( such as packaging that provides a set treatment duration ) or safe disposal features to render the drugs irretrievable for illicit uses .

fda has authority to monitor drugs that are on the market .

for instance , fda may require postmarket labeling changes if the agency becomes aware of certain information about a drug , and postapproval studies or clinical trials under certain circumstances .

according to the fda commissioner , despite widespread use of opioid analgesics to treat chronic pain , limited data exists on the long - term efficacy and impacts of these products , and further research is warranted .

however , prior to enactment of the support act , fda commissioner scott gottlieb and some members of congress indicated that while fda had authority to request postmarket studies based on drug safety concerns , the agency lacked explicit authority to require studies solely to examine drug efficacy .

the support act generally amends the fd&c act to clarify fda's authority to require postmarket studies and trials for certain drugs that may have reduced effectiveness over time .

the act also expressly authorizes fda to compel drug manufacturers or others to make drug labeling changes based on new information related to reduced effectiveness .

finally , the support act calls on fda to issue guidance on its new authority .

to encourage development of new , nonaddictive therapies that treat chronic pain or opioid addiction , the support act directs fda to hold at least one public meeting and subsequently to issue nonbinding guidance to assist industry stakeholders and health care providers .

the meetings and guidance may address , among other things , ( 1 ) circumstances under which the agency considers misuse and abuse of controlled substances in reviewing a new drug or device ; ( 2 ) use of novel clinical trial designs and real - world evidence and patient experience data to develop nonaddictive medical products ; ( 3 ) standards for , and development of , opioid - sparing data to include on medical product labeling ; and ( 4 ) application of breakthrough therapy designation for nonaddictive medical products intended to treat pain or addiction .

the support act provides the hhs secretary with additional enforcement tools to address the opioid epidemic .

for instance , under new section 5569d of the fd&c act , if the secretary determines that there is a "reasonable probability that a controlled substance would cause serious health consequences or death," the agency may order manufacturers , importers , distributors , or pharmacists to immediately cease distributing these drugs .

parties subject to the order must have an opportunity to consult with fda prior to issuance of the order and an informal hearing .

following this hearing , the secretary may ( 1 ) vacate the order based on inadequate evidence to support the order ; ( 2 ) continue the order ceasing distribution of the drug until a specified date ; or ( 3 ) amend the order to require a recall .

however , if the secretary determines that recalling a controlled substance presents a greater health risk than not recalling it , the order may not include a recall or a cessation of distribution .

the support act addresses the agency's enforcement role with respect to drug importation as well .

in collaboration with u.s. customs and border protection , fda is authorized to inspect , detain , and refuse entry to imported drugs , devices , food , and other products under its jurisdiction .

recently , fda commissioner scott gottlieb and others have highlighted challenges associated with diverted opioids or illegal drugs that enter the united states through international mail facilities , including inspecting the high volume of items passing through these facilities and procedural difficulties relating to whether a particular product violates the fd&c act and may be refused entry or destroyed .

the support act is intended to streamline the process of refusing entry to diverted or illegal drug products .

among other things , the act directs the secretary ( acting through the fda commissioner ) to coordinate with the secretary of homeland security on customs and border protection activities relating to illegal controlled substances and drug imports , including at international mail facilities .

the act also requires the hhs secretary to work with the homeland security secretary and the postmaster general of the u.s .

postal service to provide that import facilities , in which fda operates , have certain facility and technology upgrades .

