the journal of the house of representatives of the united states is the official record of house proceedings .

the constitution , house rules and practices , and certain statutes define which proceedings are to be recorded , while the house itself controls how and to what extent the journal 's contents are presented .

the journal enables members , government officials , state legislatures , and members of the public to follow the actions of congress .

it is prepared under the direction of the clerk of the house .

after the close of a session , it is printed , distributed to members and selected government offices , and posted on the u.s. government publishing office ( gpo ) website .

the speaker announces approval of the daily journal at the start of each legislative day .

in current practice , the house automatically agrees to approval unless a member calls for a vote .

occasionally , a member demands a journal vote to reconsider the journal 's content .

more often , though , a journal vote is called for unrelated reasons , such as to assemble members before a major vote or to protest the actions of leadership .

the journal is the official record of house proceedings .

unlike the congressional record , it is not a transcript of debate .

rather , it is a listing of legislative actions .

if there is a discrepancy between the actions cited in the journal and the congressional record , the jo urnal is considered the correct account of actions taken .

as such , it is the record of house activities that is provided as evidence in legal proceedings .

the term house journal is used for both the daily journal and the session journal .

after one legislative day adjourns , the journal clerk prepares the day's minutes and presents them to the speaker .

at the start of the next legislative day , the speaker announces his or her approval of the previous day's journal ( the daily journal ) .

when each session of congress concludes , the minutes of all the legislative days are assembled together into a session journal .

gpo prints the session journal as a bound book and posts a digital copy on its website .

if a vote is called , it is for approval of the daily journal containing those proceedings that occur between the commencement of one legislative day and its time of adjournment .

in this report , all subsequent references to journal are to the daily journal .

under house rules i and xiv , the speaker announces his or her approval of the journal as the first order of business after the chaplain's prayer .

without objection , the journal stands approved .

however , if a member does object , that member may demand a vote on the speaker's approval .

according to the u.s. house of representatives roll call votes database , the house held 472 journal - approval record votes from 1991 to 2016 ( 102 nd - 114 th congresses , table 1 ) .

none of these votes failed .

instead , such votes have received support , on average , from three out of four members .

the 75% approval rate is not a strict reflection of party - line division .

however , party and political considerations may play a role in the decision to demand or vote against approval of the journal .

from 1991 through 2016 , there were 472 journal - approval record votes ( 2.8% of the total number of record votes ) .

in a single congress , the number has ranged from a low of eight in the 109 th congress ( 2005-2006 ) to a high of 77 in the 103 rd congress ( 1993-1994 ) , with the average number of votes being 36 .

during the 35-year period , a member of the party in power initiated 52.5% of all journal record votes , showing that approval votes were requested in roughly equal amounts by members of the majority and minority ( table 1 ) .

j our nal voting and procedural trends that extend over several congresses are considered below .

perhaps the most significant trend is the increased postponement of record journal votes ( table 2 ) .

these postponed votes are now frequently triggered by demands for yeas and nays , in addition to quorum points of order .

in 1983 ( 98 th congress ) , the house amended what is now rule xx , clause 8 , to allow the speaker to postpone journal votes until later in the same legislative day .

however , speakers ( or their designees ) continued to hold more immediate votes than postponed votes until the 104 th congress ( 1995-1996 ) .

in the 108 th congress ( 2003-2004 ) , there was one immediate record vote .

the 111 th congress ( 2009-2010 ) also featured one immediate vote .

all other journal - approval record votes since the 108 th congress have been postponed until later in the legislative day ( table 2 ) .

in current practice , the speaker is likely to postpone and group journal votes with other record votes .

the voting window is typically announced in advance , minimizing scheduling conflicts with members and committees .

between the 102 nd and the 105 th congresses ( 1991-1998 ) , all journal - approval record votes were triggered by a member noting the absence of a quorum after a voice vote .

under this still - common procedure , the speaker responds with either an immediate record vote to confirm the presence of a quorum or instead postpones the question until later in the legislative day , at which point the question is considered de novo ( as if new ) , and a record vote may or may not be requested following a voice vote .

as of the 106 th congress ( 1999-2000 ) , members began initiating some journal votes by demanding the yeas and nays .

this demand guarantees a record vote within the legislative day provided that the demand has the support of one - fifth of the members present .

when a quorum point of order was the initial triggering method , a record vote immediately followed in 40% of the occurrences .

in contrast , when the initial method was a demand for the yeas and nays , the resulting vote was postponed in every instance .

from 1991 to 2016 , there were 396 record votes triggered by quorum points of order , compared to 76 votes triggered by a demand for the yeas and nays .

however , from the 109 th through the 114 th congresses ( 2005-2016 ) , there were 72 yeas and nays initial requests compared to 62 quorum points of order , signifying an increase in the use of yeas and nays and a decrease in the point of order method to obtain a record vote .

when a member objects to an initial voice vote on the speaker's approval of the journal , the member may make a quorum point of order or demand the yeas and nays in an attempt to obtain a record vote .

the quorum method requires no additional support on the floor at the time of the request .

this is helpful for members who have not enlisted fellow supporters prior to calling for a vote on the speaker's approval .

making a successful quorum point of order ensures that the journal 's approval will be considered again ( immediately or at a later time ) within the legislative day .

the yeas and nays method is useful when a member desires a guaranteed record vote later in the day — so long as the demand receives sufficient support for a second .

if the yeas and nays are ordered , the demand locks in a vote period , which is likely to include important votes on issues not connected to the journal .

