the military construction , veterans affairs , and related agencies appropriations bill provides funding for the planning , design , construction , alteration , and improvement of department of defense ( dod ) facilities used by active and reserve components worldwide .

it capitalizes military family housing and the u.s. share of the nato security investment program , and finances the implementation of installation closures and realignments .

it underwrites veterans benefit and health care programs administered by the department of veterans affairs , provides for the creation and maintenance of u.s. cemeteries and battlefield monuments within the united states and abroad , and supports the u.s. court of appeals for veterans claims , armed forces retirement homes , and arlington national cemetery .

the bill also funds construction supporting contingency military operations ( i.e. , overseas contingency operations or oco ) and advance appropriations for veterans' medical services .

this report is intended to summarize only the major elements of the military construction ( milcon ) discretionary request .

these include amounts provided for military construction activities ( projects and planning ) , brac , and family housing .

since 2001 , these totals are represented as slices in the pie chart below .

the accompanying bar chart indicates the amounts of each element over time , as calculated by crs .

milcon appropriations are composed almost entirely of discretionary funds .

though funding for facility capital expenses is primarily provided within milcon , additional amounts ( not covered in this report ) are also distributed among separate appropriations for related purposes .

for example , within the operations and management ( o&m ) account , significant funds are provided for the maintenance and repair of dod facilities ( facilities restoration , sustainment and management ) , for environmental cleanup ( environmental restoration ) , for the disposal and leasing of dod real property assets , and for base operations support ( bos ) .

funding for military construction and maintenance of dod research facilities can also be found within the research development , test and evaluation ( rdt&e ) appropriation .

the following section summarizes military construction funding for projects in europe and the pacific based on the project location specified in dod budget and justification documents .

the purpose of this analysis is to identify capital investments in regions where dod construction investments are most prominent .

dod officials assert that since the implementation of the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-25 ) , the services have significantly reduced milcon spending and assumed increased risk in infrastructure .

budget data confirms the assertion that milcon budgets have generally declined during this period ( fy2013-fy2018 ) , which corresponds to the end of a surge in 2005 base realignment and closure ( brac ) spending .

in a june 2017 hearing before the senate appropriations subcommittee on military construction , veterans affairs , and related agencies , acting assistant secretary of defense ( energy , installations , and environment ) peter potochney testified that dod reductions to infrastructure investments have resulted in degraded facilities and "an unfunded backlog of deferred maintenance and repair ( m&r ) work that exceeds $140 billion , raising significant concerns about the performance and reliability of our facilities and installations. .

potchney stated that though the administration's fy2018 milcon request represented a substantial increase over previous budget submissions , the total amount is "still insufficient to reverse the impacts to our facilities resulting from sequestration. .

the administration's request of $10.4 billion for military construction appropriations represents a 28% increase over fy2017 enacted total of $8.1 billion .

the following section provides an overview of the administration's fy2018 oco request for military construction projects , follows selected congressional action , and summarizes enacted totals .

unless otherwise specified , the amounts shown below combine all service components .

oco and european reassurance initiative are treated separately .

with no base realignment and closure ( brac ) round authorized or underway , the primary purpose of continuing brac appropriations is to fund the environmental remediation necessary to permit the transfer of title to brac real property from the federal government to other parties .

for fy2018 , the president submitted a request of $256 million for brac - related activities .

congress has appropriated $310 million , or roughly $54 million ( 20% ) more than the administration requested .

defense committees of jurisdiction in the senate ( sasc , sac ) generally recommended fully funding the administration's request .

authorizing and appropriating committees in the house , however , recommended congress provide an additional $35 million in excess of the administration's request , primarily for the purpose of accelerating environmental remediation efforts at closed brac installations .

in report language , the hasc noted the department's goal of reaching 95% "response complete" — a status indicating remediation milestone goals have been met — by the end of fy2021 for more than 34,000 sites that include brac locations .

the committee further directed dod to report on efforts to achieve 100% "status "complete" for these h.r .

1625 sites .

appropriators expressed similar concerns in the joint explanatory statement that accompanied the enacted fy2018 military construction appropriations legislation ( division j of h.r .

1626 / p.l .

115-141 ) .

accelerated cleanup. — the agreement includes additional funding to accelerate environmental remediation at installations closed during previous base realignment and closure ( brac ) rounds .

priority should be given to those sites with newly identified radiological cleanup cost .

there are many factors hindering the cleanup of brac sites .

however , strategic investments can lead to quicker clean - ups and faster turnover of dod property to the local community .

therefore , the department is directed to submit to the congressional defense committees a spend plan for the additional brac funds not later than 30 days after enactment of this act .

legislative language prohibiting the use of funds for the purpose of a new brac round was included in final authorizing and appropriating legislation .

fy2018 ndaa ( h.r .

2810 ) : the ndaa conference agreement reflected identical provisions in the house and senate versions of the bill that stated , "nothing in this act shall be construed to authorize an additional base realignment and closure ( brac ) round. .

fy2018 defense appropriations ( h.r .

1625 , division j , section 8120 ) : "none of the funds made available by this act may be used to propose , plan for , or execute a new or additional base realignment and closure ( brac ) round. .

the administration strongly objected to such prohibitions , arguing a new brac round was necessary "so that dod can ensure it is not wasting resources on unneeded infrastructure. .

congressional advocates of the process made several unsuccessful attempts to initiate a new round .

on january 31 , 2017 , representative adam smith submitted h.r .

753 , the "military infrastructure consolidation and efficiency act of 2017," which would have reauthorized a brac process to begin in fy2019 that closely adhered to the established template of earlier rounds .

that bill was last referred to the subcommittee on readiness in february , 2017 .

a second proposal , drafted by senator john mccain and proposed as an amendment to the annual national defense authorization act for fy2018 ( h.r .

2810 ) , would have taken a different approach .

by omitting the appointment of a brac commission charged with reviewing recommendations made by the secretary of defense , senator mccain's amendment would have effectively omitted what long - time observers have considered the basic tenets of the brac process: third party appraisal by an independent commission and expansive opportunities for public comment by affected communities and other stakeholders .

appendix a .

summary of report methodology historical and regional analysis the historical and regional data used in this report was derived from dod comptroller budget documents generally regarded as the most authoritative open source available for analyzing milcon expenditures in detail .

since fy2001 , the comptroller has posted this data in excel format for public use , however , the style , spelling , format , and content have varied from year to year .

the graphic below illustrates a selected list of ( simplified ) fields the comptroller has either included or omitted from year to year .

data elements contained in publicly - available comptroller spreadsheets frequently contain labeling omissions , discrepancies , and other variations or errors , particularly in years prior to fy2008 .

wherever possible , crs has attempted to correct for these data anomalies by relying on numerical codes and keywords contained in associated fields .

for example , to establish classified construction crs identified records with the word classified in either the state / country , or construction project title columns of the compiled dataset .

to identify minor construction , crs relied on variations of the key phrase minor const in the fields , ba title , and construction project title , omitting brac related ( and blank ) records .

to identify regional trends in military construction activities , crs merged project level country data with various geoschemes .

for example , the u.n. regional and sub - regional classification system was used for this purpose , as well as a compiled list of countries - by - cocom .

appendix b .

additional projects requested in fy2018 , the administration's $10.1 billion request for military construction appropriations was amended a number of times to include approximately $920 million for additional projects in response to natural disasters and provocative actions taken by north korea .

the additional requests are colloquially referred to as either hurricane relief or the missile amendment .

the table below summarizes these additional projects by state , location , facility category title , and organization for the army national guard ( arng ) , navy / marine corps ( n / mc ) , and missile defense agency ( mda , defense - wide ) .

appendix c. crs account types the table below details the crs account grouping shown in table i. of this paper .

the data is derived from the comparative statements of committee conference reports , which may vary organizationally , affecting the totals and subtotals they provide .

the table is formatted hierarchically by title , crs account type category , and account designation .

