o n july 9 , 2018 , president donald j. trump announced the nomination of judge brett m. kavanaugh of the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit ( d.c .

circuit ) to fill the vacancy on the supreme court of the united states caused by justice anthony m. kennedy's retirement on july 31 , 2018 .

nominated by president george w. bush to the d.c .

circuit , a court once described by president franklin roosevelt as "the second most important court in the country," judge kavanaugh has served on the bench for more than twelve years .

in his role as a circuit judge , the nominee has authored roughly three hundred opinions ( including majority opinions , concurrences , and dissents ) and adjudicated numerous high - profile cases concerning , among other things , the status of wartime detainees held by the united states at guantanamo bay , cuba ; the constitutionality of the current structure of the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) ; the validity of rules issued by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) under the clean air act ; and the legality of the federal communications commission's ( fcc's ) net neutrality rule .

since joining the d.c .

circuit , judge kavanaugh has also taught courses on the separation of powers , national security law , and constitutional interpretation at harvard law school , yale law school , and the georgetown university law center .

prior to his appointment to the federal bench in 2006 , judge kavanaugh served in the george w. bush white house , first as an associate and then senior associate counsel , before becoming an assistant and staff secretary to the president .

before his service in the bush administration , the nominee worked in private practice at the law firm of kirkland & ellis , llp for three years and served in the office of the independent counsel and the office of the solicitor general .

judge kavanaugh began his legal career with three federal clerkships — two for judges on the federal courts of appeals and one for the jurist he is nominated to succeed , justice kennedy .

judge kavanaugh is a graduate of yale college and yale law school .

this report provides an overview of judge kavanaugh's jurisprudence and discusses how the supreme court might be affected if he were to succeed justice kennedy .

in attempting to ascertain how judge kavanaugh could influence the high court , however , it is important to note that , for various reasons , it is difficult to predict accurately a nominee's likely contributions to the court based on his or her prior experience .

a section of this report titled predicting nominees' future decisions on the court provides a broad context and framework for evaluating how determinative a judge's prior record may be in predicting future votes on the supreme court .

because judge kavanaugh would succeed justice kennedy on the high court , the report then focuses on those areas of law where justice kennedy can be seen to have influenced the court's approach , or provided a fifth and deciding vote , with a view toward how the nominee might approach those same issues .

justice kennedy's retirement is likely to have significant implications for the court , congress , and the nation as a whole .

justice kennedy , often described as the roberts court's median vote , was frequently at the center of legal debates on the high court , casting decisive votes on issues ranging from the powers of the federal government vis - à - vis the states , to separation - of - powers disputes , to key civil liberties issues .

accordingly , a critical question now before the senate as it considers providing its advice and consent to the president's nomination to the high court is how judge kavanaugh may view the many legal issues in which justice kennedy's vote was often determinative .

as a result , the report begins by discussing two cross - cutting issues — the nominee's general judicial philosophy and his approach to statutory interpretation .

it then addresses thirteen separate areas of law , arranged in alphabetical order , from "administrative law" to "takings. .

within each section , the report reviews whether and how judge kavanaugh has addressed particular issues in the opinions he authored .

in some instances , the report also identifies other votes in which he participated ( eg , votes to join majority opinions authored by other d.c .

circuit judges , votes on whether the d.c .

circuit should grant en banc review to a decision of a three - judge panel , etc. ) .

the report also analyzes , where relevant , judge kavanaugh's non - judicial work , including a number of speeches and academic articles , many of which address the role of the judiciary , separation of powers , and constitutional and statutory interpretation .

while this report discusses many of judge kavanaugh's non - judicial writings , it does not address two types of written work .

first , the report does not discuss anything written by the nominee in a representative capacity for another party , such as a brief submitted on behalf of a client to a court , as such materials may provide limited insight into the advocate's personal views on the law .

for purposes of this report , this limitation also extends to writings related to judge kavanaugh's former government service , such as his work for the george w. bush administration , the office of the independent counsel , and the office of the solicitor general .

second , the report does not discuss the nominee's writings that predate his graduation from law school , as such writings may be of limited import to gauging his educated views on the law .

while the report discusses numerous cases and votes involving judge kavanaugh , it focuses particularly on cases in which the sitting panel was divided , as these cases arguably best showcase how he might approach a legal controversy whose resolution is a matter of dispute and is not necessarily clearly addressed by prior case law .

in addition , the report highlights areas where the nominee has expressed views on the law that may contrast with those of some of his colleagues .

to the extent that the nominee's votes in particular cases arguably reflect broader trends and tendencies in his decisionmaking that he might bring to the high court , the report highlights such trends .

nonetheless , this report does not attempt to catalog every matter in which judge kavanaugh has participated during his service on the d.c .

circuit .

a separate report , crs report r45269 , judicial opinions of judge brett m. kavanaugh , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] , lists and briefly describes each opinion authored by the nominee during his tenure on the federal bench .

other crs products discuss various issues related to the vacancy on the court .

for an overview of available products , see crs legal sidebar lsb10160 , supreme court nomination: crs products , by [author name scrubbed] .

at least as a historical matter , attempting to predict how supreme court nominees may approach their work on the high court is a task fraught with uncertainty .

for example , justice felix frankfurter , who had a reputation as a "progressive" legal scholar prior to his appointment to the court in 1939 , disappointed some early supporters by subsequently becoming a voice for judicial restraint and caution when the court reviewed laws that restricted civil liberties during world war ii and the early cold war era .

similarly , justice harry blackmun , who served on the eighth circuit for a little over a decade prior to his appointment to the court in 1970 , was originally considered by president richard nixon to be a "strict constructionist" in the sense that he viewed the judge's role as interpreting the law , rather than making new law .

in the years that followed , however , justice blackmun authored the majority opinion in roe v. wade , which recognized a constitutional right to terminate a pregnancy .

he was generally considered one of the more liberal voices on the court when he retired in 1994 .

the difficulty in attempting to predict how a nominee will approach the job of being a justice remains even when the nominee has had a lengthy federal judicial career prior to nomination .

federal judges on the courts of appeals are bound by supreme court and circuit precedent and , therefore , are not normally in a position to espouse freely their views on particular legal issues in the context of their judicial opinions .

moreover , unlike the supreme court , which enjoys "almost complete discretion" in selecting its cases , the federal courts of appeals are required to hear many cases as a matter of law .

as a result , the courts of appeals consider "many routine cases in which the legal rules are uncontroverted. .

because lower court judges are often bound by supreme court and circuit precedent , moreover , the vast majority of federal appellate opinions are unanimous .

perhaps indicative of the nature of federal appellate work , the vast majority of cases decided by three - judge panels of federal courts of appeals are decided without dissent .

while the d.c .

circuit , where judge kavanaugh serves , witnesses more dissents on average than its sister circuits , the overwhelming majority of opinions issued by the nominee's court are unanimous .

accordingly , while judge kavanaugh's work on the d.c .

circuit may provide some insight into his general approach to particular legal issues , the bulk of the opinions that the nominee has authored or joined may not be particularly insightful with regard to his views on specific areas of law , or how he would approach these issues if he were a supreme court justice .

when a federal appellate judge takes the step to write separately , however , such an opinion need not accommodate the views of other colleagues , and can therefore provide unique insight into a circuit judge's judicial approach .

even in closely contested cases where concurring or dissenting opinions are filed , however , it still may be difficult to determine the preferences of the nominated judge if the nominee did not actually write an opinion in the case .

the act of joining an opinion authored by another judge does not necessarily reflect full agreement with the underlying opinion .

for example , in an effort to promote consensus on a court , some judges will decline to dissent unless the underlying issue is particularly contentious .

as one commentator notes , "the fact that a judge joins in a majority opinion may not be taken as indicating complete agreement .

rather , silent acquiescence may be understood to mean something more like 'i accept the outcome in this case , and i accept that the reasoning in the majority opinion reflects what a majority of my colleagues has agreed on.' .

using caution when interpreting a judge's vote isolated from a written opinion may be particularly important with votes on procedural matters .

for example , a judge's vote to grant an extension of time for a party to submit a filing generally does not signal agreement with the substantive legal position proffered by that party .

and while some observers have highlighted votes by judge kavanaugh in favor of having certain three - judge panel decisions reconsidered by the d.c .

circuit sitting en banc , these votes should be viewed with a degree of caution .

a vote to rehear a case en banc could signal disagreement with the legal reasoning of the panel decision , and may suggest that a judge wants the entire court to have an opportunity to correct a perceived error by the panel .

on the other hand , a vote to rehear a case en banc may be prompted by a judge's desire to resolve an intracircuit conflict between panel decisions , or may be indicative of the judge's view that the issue is of such importance as to merit consideration by the full court .

moreover , as one federal appellate judge noted in a dissent from a decision denying a petition for a rehearing en banc: most of us vote against most such petitions .

 .

 .

even when we think the panel decision is mistaken .

we do so because federal courts of appeals decide cases in three judge panels .

en banc review is extraordinary , and is generally reserved for conflicting precedent within the circuit which makes application of the law by district courts unduly difficult , and egregious errors in important cases .

consequently , a vote for or against rehearing a case en banc or on other procedural matters does not necessarily equate to an endorsement or repudiation of a particular legal position .

finally , it should be noted that , despite having served on the federal appellate bench for more than a decade , judge kavanaugh has said little about some areas of law because of the nature of the d.c .

circuit's docket and , as a consequence , it may be difficult to predict how he might rule on certain issues if he were elevated to the supreme court .

due to the d.c .

circuit's location in the nation's capital , and the number of statutes providing it with special or even exclusive jurisdiction to review certain agency actions , legal commentators generally agree that the d.c .

circuit's docket , relative to the dockets of other circuits , contains a greater percentage of nationally significant legal matters .

for instance , the d.c .

circuit hears a large number of cases on administrative and environmental law matters .

in contrast , cases at the d.c .

circuit rarely , if ever , involve "hot - button" social issues such as abortion , affirmative action , or the death penalty .

moreover , the d.c .

circuit docket has a lower percentage of cases involving criminal matters , prisoner petitions , or civil suits between private parties .

as a result , this report focuses primarily on areas of law where judge kavanaugh has written extensively , and notes only in passing those areas where little can arguably be gleaned from his judicial record on account of his participation in few , if any , decisions directly addressing those particular areas of law .

notwithstanding the difficulty of predicting a nominee's future behavior , three overarching ( and interrelated ) considerations may inform an assessment of how a jurist is likely to approach the role of a supreme court justice .

first, the nominee's general approach to the craft of judging — a phrase that this report uses to refer to the process of how a judge approaches key aspects of the job , including writing legal opinions and resolving legal disputes on a multi - member court — may be an important consideration in predicting how a jurist would behave on the high court .

second, the judge's overarching judicial philosophy , including how he evaluates legal questions as a substantive matter , is another central concern in gauging how a nominee may perform .

third , it may be helpful to reflect on a nominee's influences or judicial heroes , as those individuals may exhibit qualities that the nominee will aspire to emulate .

on all three fronts , there are a host of clues on how president trump's latest nominee to the high court views the proper role of a supreme court justice .

indeed , judge kavanaugh is a well - known jurist with a robust record , composed of both judicial opinions and non - judicial writings , in which he has made his views on the law and the role of the judge fairly clear .

this section begins by discussing how the nominee has approached the craft of judging , including by examining how he prepares for a case , his writing style , his approach to working with his colleagues on the d.c .

circuit , and how his opinions have fared at the supreme court .

the section then turns to more substantive questions about judge kavanaugh's judicial philosophy , noting two key aspects that have undergirded how the nominee has resolved legal disputes in the cases before him on the appellate bench .

finally , this section notes the jurists that judge kavanaugh has identified as judicial role models , either because of their general approach to the craft of judging or for their judicial philosophy .

one cross - cutting issue foundational to understanding judge kavanaugh's jurisprudence is his theory of statutory interpretation .

the nominee has been quite clear about his own views on this subject , actively engaging in ongoing debates within the legal community over the proper theories and tools to employ when interpreting statutes .

judge kavanaugh is an avowed textualist — that is , a jurist who will generally favor a statute's text over its purpose when interpreting the law's meaning , only crediting statutory purpose to the extent that it is evident from the text .

as the nominee remarked in a 2016 book review: "the text of the law is the law. .

in this vein , judge kavanaugh has lauded justice scalia's textualist influence on the field of statutory interpretation — and has also praised justice kagan for her more textualist opinions .

because of his commitment to textualism , judge kavanaugh's approach to statutory interpretation potentially differs from justice kennedy's , as the retiring justice did not necessarily adhere to one single theory of statutory interpretation .

in practice , though , the two jurists appear to have more in common than their general approaches toward reading statutes might suggest .

similar to judge kavanaugh , and many other judges , justice kennedy would "begin with the text" of a statute and would give that text's ordinary meaning significant weight .

moreover , justice kennedy , at times , disclaimed attempts to discover congress's original intent as divorced from the text .

but justice kennedy would also sometimes go beyond the disputed text to consider the statutory scheme as a whole , looking to its operation and the practical consequences of various interpretations .

in one concurring opinion , justice kennedy said: "faced with a choice between two difficult readings of what all must admit is not optimal statutory text , the court is correct to adopt the interpretation that makes the most sense. .

though judge kavanaugh's textualist philosophy would on its face appear to be inconsistent with justice kennedy's more pragmatic approach , the nominee's opinions and other writings reveal that he also considers the legislative process and gives significant weight to the way a statute will be implemented .

accordingly , if confirmed , while judge kavanaugh could further tip the court toward a more textualist approach to statutory interpretation , he might still invoke some of the more pragmatic considerations that justice kennedy sometimes relied on in his own analyses .

this section first outlines judge kavanaugh's general theory of statutory interpretation , as announced in his non - judicial writings and in his opinions .

it then explores in more detail how the nominee has applied this theory to resolve specific cases , examining the interpretive tools the nominee has used to determine a statute's meaning .

finally , it describes the nominee's views on severability , a doctrine closely related to statutory interpretation that may arise when courts consider the constitutionality of a provision situated within a larger statutory scheme .

administrative law is another critical area to consider when evaluating judge kavanaugh's judicial record , as the subject raises important questions about the scope of authority congress has granted to federal agencies , as well as the constitution's division of power among the three branches of government .

while the jurist judge kavanaugh may replace , justice kennedy , was perhaps less influential in the area of administrative law than he was in other areas , he did often find himself as a decisive vote in important administrative law cases during the roberts court era .

in the supreme court's most recent term , moreover , less than a week before announcing his retirement , justice kennedy authored an opinion in which he called for the court to "reconsider" the doctrine of judicial deference to agency interpretations of their statutory authority under chevron , u.s.a. , inc. v. natural resources defense council , inc. because justice kennedy previously provided the fifth vote to defer to an agency's statutory interpretation under chevron several times , this move signals to some that the court may be on the verge of recrafting foundational administrative law doctrines , depending on who replaces the recently retired justice .

given this context , it is notable that judge kavanaugh has a fairly robust record on administrative law matters .

this is unsurprising , considering the d.c .

circuit's location in the nation's capital coupled with the composition of its docket , which is composed of a substantial number of administrative law cases as compared to its sister circuits , as a result of various statutes vesting the court with ( sometimes exclusive ) jurisdiction to hear challenges to agency actions .

the nominee has accordingly ruled in numerous cases posing administrative law questions , including some in which the sitting panel was divided .

in such cases , he authored a considerable number of concurring and dissenting opinions that articulate his understanding of the disputed legal issue .

perhaps most notably , judge kavanaugh wrote a number of separate opinions to explain his disagreement with other judges' views concerning the scope of a federal agency's statutory authority , reflecting a tendency to view agency attempts to expand their regulatory power with skepticism .

in particular , echoing justice kennedy's recent concurrence , as well as similar opinions from other justices , the nominee has signaled some discomfort with the chevron framework , possibly indicating a willingness to cabin that doctrine to certain circumstances .

to the extent his past opinions and scholarly work reflect how he would approach such matters if confirmed to the supreme court , he might be a vote to limit the circumstances in which courts defer under the chevron doctrine to federal agencies .

before delving into the nominee's views on chevron deference , however , this section first examines judge kavanaugh's writings on the threshold issue of when litigants may challenge agency actions in court .

it then turns to the nominee's approach to agency interpretations of their statutory authority , including the chevron framework , and concludes with an examination of the nominee's views with regard to discretionary and factual review of agency decisions .

judge kavanaugh is likely to represent a key vote in the supreme court's business law cases .

last term , the roberts court issued a number of business - related decisions in which justice kennedy sided with bare majorities of the court to conclude , for example , that arbitration agreements providing for the individualized resolution of disputes between employers and employees must be enforced ; that federal antitrust law does not prohibit contractual provisions barring merchants from expressing a preference that customers use certain credit cards ; and that foreign corporations may not be sued under the alien tort statute ( ats ) .

decisions like these have prompted a debate among legal commentators as to whether the roberts court can be fairly described as overly "pro - business. .

regardless of one's assessment of the roberts court's approach to business issues , judge kavanaugh would have the opportunity to influence the court's business law jurisprudence if confirmed .

however , judge kavanaugh's views on a range of business law issues — including class action litigation , the reach of the federal arbitration act , and federal preemption of state tort law — remain unclear , as the nominee has no significant writings on these issues as the d.c .

circuit confronts "relatively few explicit business cases. .

nonetheless , the nominee's rulings provide some clues as to how he might address business law issues if elevated to the supreme court .

many of judge kavanaugh's most important decisions , which are discussed in more detail elsewhere in this report , have had potentially significant implications for business regulation .

in phh corp. v. cfpb , for example , the nominee dissented from a decision affirming the constitutionality of the cfpb's structure , reasoning that for - cause tenure protections for the cfpb's director unconstitutionally infringed on the president's removal power in light of , among other things , the director's "enormous power over american businesses , american consumers , and the overall u.s .

economy. .

and in doe v. exxon mobil corp. , judge kavanaugh dissented in part from a d.c .

circuit decision concerning corporate liability under the ats , concluding that certain ats claims against a corporation for its overseas conduct should be dismissed because , among other reasons , the executive branch had "reasonably explained that adjudicating those ats claims would harm u.s. foreign policy interests. .

whether these opinions reflect judge kavanaugh's approach to business - related cases more generally is open to debate , as they arguably reflect broader concerns about the separation of powers and national security , rather than any specific views of business regulation .

however , the nominee's decisions concerning matters of substantive business law — specifically , antitrust law , labor law , and securities law — offer some insight into his views of certain federal statutes that regulate key aspects of the nation's economy .

in these decisions , judge kavanaugh has expressed skepticism toward broad views of administrative power over business entities , evinced hesitance to find that federal statutes establish rights and remedies that are not textually explicit , and adopted a narrower view of federal antitrust law than some of his colleagues .

this section of the report discusses how the nominee might approach business law cases by examining his prominent decisions concerning antitrust law , labor law , and securities law .

justice kennedy was a critical vote in civil rights cases involving matters including voting rights , affirmative action , housing and employment discrimination , and sexual orientation discrimination .

while judge kavanaugh , if confirmed to succeed justice kennedy , could be influential in shaping the court's civil rights jurisprudence , the nominee's fairly limited record with respect to civil rights law makes it difficult to assess how he might vote on a broad range of civil rights matters .

judge kavanaugh's approach to analyzing constitutional civil rights claims is particularly difficult to discern given his limited participation in cases involving equal protection challenges based on the fifth or fourteenth amendments .

for example , the nominee's only brush with the issue of affirmative action came in the form of a vote — without a written opinion — in favor of rehearing a panel decision that upheld an affirmative action program against a constitutional challenge raised by a non - minority plaintiff .

the panel decision at issue rejected the plaintiff's arguments that a business development program denied him equal footing to compete with minority - owned businesses in violation of the fifth amendment .

as noted above , however , a vote to rehear a case before the en banc court can be motivated by many factors beyond mere disagreement with the panel decision .

the nominee's most significant cases addressing civil rights matters have involved claims brought under title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 ( title vii ) , the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) , and other employment discrimination statutes .

here , judge kavanaugh's record is still relatively limited , as the nominee has not addressed a number of issues that have divided the lower courts with respect to statutory civil rights law , such as whether and to what extent title vii prohibits discrimination based on sexual orientation .

similarly , judge kavanaugh has written one decision , discussed below , assessing the legality of a voter identification law under the voting rights act in a fact - intensive analysis that granted preclearance of that law on behalf of a unanimous three - judge panel .

this section provides an overview of the limited civil rights cases that judge kavanaugh has adjudicated , beginning with statutory civil rights matters and concluding with his one voting rights case .

although justice kennedy may have exerted less influence over criminal law and procedure doctrine than other areas of the law , he did cast decisive votes in numerous criminal procedure cases .

in particular , in cases implicating the eighth amendment's prohibition on cruel and unusual punishments , justice kennedy's voting record shaped much of recent supreme court doctrine .

if confirmed , judge kavanaugh could therefore have a considerable impact on the court's jurisprudence in this broad area of law .

the nominee has written relatively little on criminal law and procedure , however , which makes it difficult to assess how he might influence the doctrine .

the d.c .

circuit decides fewer criminal cases than other federal circuit courts .

as a result , judge kavanaugh has written notable separate opinions on some areas of criminal law and procedure ( eg , fourth amendment search and seizure , the constitutional aspects of criminal sentencing , and substantive criminal law ) , but not others ( eg , cruel and unusual punishments under the eighth amendment , fifth amendment miranda rights , and the sixth amendment right to counsel ) .

even on those issues that judge kavanaugh has addressed in multiple separate opinions — such as the fourth amendment — the record is too limited to support definitive conclusions about his judicial approach in such cases .

the limited set of judge kavanaugh's writings on criminal law and procedure that does exist , however , reveals discrete strains of strongly held views , rather than one overarching philosophy susceptible to summary as "pro - defendant" or "pro - government. .

on fourth amendment issues , he has espoused a circumscribed view of the constitutional protection against unreasonable searches and seizures — arguably more circumscribed than that of justice kennedy , who himself generally ( but not always ) favored the government position in search and seizure cases .

on constitutional sentencing issues , by contrast , judge kavanaugh has shown skepticism of advisory sentencing schemes that make use of facts not encompassed by the offense of conviction to increase a defendant's advisory sentencing range .

on substantive criminal law , he has strenuously voiced the opinion , also favorable to criminal defendants , that courts generally must read mental state requirements into criminal law statutes that do not establish such requirements expressly .

accordingly , this section addresses these various aspects of judge kavanaugh's criminal law jurisprudence .

over the last decade the supreme court has been closely divided on various aspects of environmental law — that is , the broad range of laws that addresses human impacts on the natural environment .

as was the case in other areas of law , the deciding vote in several important environmental law cases tended to be justice kennedy .

as a consequence , judge kavanaugh , if elevated to the high court to replace justice kennedy , could serve as a critical vote on such matters going forward .

during his tenure on the d.c .

circuit , judge kavanaugh has authored opinions and participated in dozens of environmental cases .

his opinions have addressed a wide range of environmental issues including climate change , air quality , water quality , nuclear energy and waste , chemical bans , endangered species , migratory birds , and other issues arising under federal environmental statutes .

the nominee's record on environmental law is relatively robust , as a large volume of the d.c .

circuit's docket tends to be environmental law cases , in part , because several major environmental statutes require challenges to certain types of agency actions to be brought exclusively in that court .

often , environmental cases address the scope of agency authority under an environmental statute or the legality of a specific agency action .

environmental law statutes and cases can also prompt broader questions of administrative law , such as standing to sue and standards for judicial review .

accordingly , this section begins by discussing judge kavanaugh's record on environmental justiciability issues , before addressing the nominee's views on substantive aspects of environmental law .

the past twenty - five years have witnessed what some commentators have described as a "federalism revolution" in the supreme court's jurisprudence — a "revolution" in which justice kennedy was a key participant .

this shift in the court's federalism case law began with the rehnquist court , which issued a series of significant opinions resuscitating the court's role in policing limitations on federal power .

specifically , the rehnquist court issued opinions ( 1 )  restricting the scope of congress's powers under the commerce clause , ( 2 )  reviving the tenth amendment as a limit on congress's authority , and ( 3 )  expanding the scope of state sovereign immunity .

this "federalism revolution" has not ended with the roberts court , which has extended a number of the rehnquist court's federalism decisions .

the roberts court's 2012 decision in national federation of independent businesses ( nfib ) v. sebelius , which involved a constitutional challenge to the aca , was perhaps its most notable federalism case .

while the nfib court ultimately concluded that the aca's "individual mandate" — which required individuals to maintain a minimum level of health insurance or pay a penalty — was a permissible exercise of congress's taxing power , a majority of the justices concluded that the mandate exceeded the scope of congress's commerce clause authority because it compelled individuals to engage in commerce rather than regulating pre - existing commercial activity .

perhaps more importantly , the nfib court extended the rehnquist court's tenth amendment cases — which held that congress may not coerce state and local governments into implementing federal regulatory programs — to strike down a provision of the aca that granted the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) the authority to withhold all medicaid payments from states that did not participate in an expansion of medicaid , marking the first time the court invalidated a condition attached to federal spending as unconstitutionally coercive .

justice kennedy was a key participant in this "federalism revolution," authoring or joining nearly all of the court's key decisions .

justice kennedy's successor will accordingly play a critical role in shaping the court's federalism jurisprudence .

judge kavanaugh's record on the d.c .

circuit contains limited information about his views on the various federalism issues that have confronted the supreme court .

the nominee has not authored or joined any significant opinions concerning the tenth amendment or state sovereign immunity .

judge kavanaugh's most prominent federalism case , seven - sky v. holder , involved a pre - nfib commerce clause challenge to the aca .

in that case , judge kavanaugh ultimately declined to consider the merits of the case after concluding that the court lacked jurisdiction to hear the dispute .

in seven - sky , plaintiffs brought a constitutional challenge to the aca's individual mandate , arguing that the mandate exceeded the scope of congress's authority under the commerce clause .

a majority of a three - judge d.c .

circuit panel upheld the mandate , concluding that it did not exceed the scope of congress's power under the commerce clause because it addressed a national problem that had "substantial effects" on interstate commerce .

however , judge kavanaugh dissented from the court's decision , concluding that the court lacked jurisdiction to decide the merits of the challenge because of the anti - injunction act , which denies courts jurisdiction over pre - enforcement lawsuits challenging "the assessment or collection of any tax. .

the nominee reasoned that although congress had labeled the exaction imposed on individuals who failed to comply with the individual mandate a "penalty" and not a "tax," the anti - injunction act nevertheless deprived the court of jurisdiction because the aca provided for the penalty to be assessed and collected "in the same manner as taxes. .

the nominee concluded that , because the penalty could not be assessed and collected "in the same manner as taxes" unless the anti - injunction act applied to the penalty in the same manner that it applied to "taxes," the act deprived the court of jurisdiction over the plaintiffs' pre - enforcement lawsuit challenging the penalty , just as it would deprive the court of jurisdiction over a pre - enforcement lawsuit challenging a tax .

although judge kavanaugh declined to take a position on whether the individual mandate was constitutional based on congress's powers under the commerce clause , he noted in his dissent that the question was "extremely difficult and rife with significant and potentially unforeseen implications for the nation and the judiciary" — a consideration that he viewed as militating in favor of avoiding a "premature" decision on the issue .

judge kavanaugh also argued that the importance of the constitutional questions presented by the case counseled in favor of proceeding cautiously .

in developing this argument , he noted that the government's defense of the mandate as falling within congress's commerce clause powers "carrie[d] broad implications" for the scope of those powers .

specifically , judge kavanaugh reasoned that under the government's view of the commerce clause , congress could not only impose criminal penalties on individuals who failed to purchase health insurance , but also require that individuals purchase a range of other financial products , including retirement accounts , disaster insurance , and life insurance .

while judge kavanaugh acknowledged that congress's commerce clause authority may be effectively cabined by the political process , he concluded that such political checks did not "absolve the judiciary of its duty to safeguard the constitutional structure and individual liberty" by policing the limits of federal power .

at the same time , judge kavanaugh argued that the court should be equally cautious about prematurely rejecting the government's defense of the mandate , noting that "[s]triking down a federal law as beyond congress's commerce clause authority is a rare , extraordinary , and momentous act for a federal court. .

the nominee also reasoned that , because the individual mandate marked "a shift in how the federal government goes about furnishing a social safety net for those who are old , poor , sick , or disabled and need help" — specifically , by providing such benefits via privatized social services and a mandatory - purchase requirement rather than a traditional "tax - and - government - benefit" program — courts "should be very careful before interfering with the elected branches' determination to update how the national government provides such assistance. .

finally , judge kavanaugh concluded that because congress may respond to the constitutional challenges to the individual mandate by altering the aca's language to provide that the mandate's penalty was in fact a "tax" ( thus bringing the mandate within congress's taxing power ) , or by eliminating the penalty altogether , the court should not strain to sidestep the anti - injunction act and prematurely decide a difficult constitutional question .

although judge kavanaugh declined to address squarely the merits of the commerce clause question presented in seven - sky , he delivered a speech in 2017 on chief justice rehnquist's legacy that offers some clues about his general views on the commerce clause .

in the speech , the nominee voiced general agreement with the rehnquist court's commerce clause decisions , outlining chief justice rehnquist's reasoning in lopez and morrison and describing those cases as "critically important in putting the brakes on the commerce clause and in preventing congress from assuming a general police power. .

accordingly , there is a limited record from which to gauge judge kavanaugh's views on federalism issues .

because the nominee has not adjudicated or commented on subjects like state sovereign immunity or the tenth amendment's limitations on congress's authority , it is difficult to draw firm conclusions about his views on those topics .

however , judge kavanaugh has indicated general agreement with the commerce clause decisions that served as the vanguard of the "federalism revolution" of the rehnquist and roberts courts , and has expressed support for the position that the judiciary has an "important role" in policing the boundaries of federal authority .

if confirmed to the supreme court , judge kavanaugh could play a significant role in the court's decisions concerning freedom of religion , an area of law encompassing the constitution's religion clauses — the free exercise clause and the establishment clause — as well as statutes like the religious freedom restoration act ( rfra ) .

after all , justice kennedy , who the nominee may succeed , provided deciding votes and drafted the majority opinions in a number of significant cases concerning religious liberty .

while serving on the d.c .

circuit , judge kavanaugh has authored or joined relatively few opinions on religious liberty .

nonetheless , three significant opinions he has written , along with his comments outside of the courtroom , suggest that judge kavanaugh's views on religious liberty are fairly similar to those of justice kennedy .

first amendment cases , particularly those involving the freedom of speech , have featured prominently on the roberts court .

in recent years , a majority of the court has looked with increasing skepticism on laws or government actions that restrict political speech or commercial speech , compel speech either directly or through mandatory subsidization of private speech , or regulate speech based on its content .

justice kennedy played a pivotal role in many of these cases , including by authoring the court's 2010 opinion in citizens united v. f ederal e lection c ommission ( fec ) , which invalidated a federal ban on certain corporate political expenditures .

in addition , in his last term , justice kennedy joined five - member majorities to invalidate compulsory public - sector union agency fees and hold that a state's disclosure requirements for certain pregnancy centers were likely unconstitutional .

however , he has also recognized limitations on the first amendment's reach , particularly in the context of a government employee's speech on an employment matter .

for his part , judge kavanaugh has a relatively robust free speech record , having encountered several strands of first amendment law as an appellate judge , and his opinions in these cases provide some limited insight into how he might approach free speech cases on the court .

some of judge kavanaugh's cases required him to decide whether the reasoning undergirding a key first amendment precedent applied to a new factual scenario .

in other cases , judge kavanaugh offered alternative analytical frameworks to tackle first amendment issues confronting lower courts , including on evolving areas of first amendment law such as commercial speech regulations .

this section of the report addresses judge kavanaugh's freedom - of - speech jurisprudence , beginning with his decisions on campaign finance law before turning to his opinions on the regulation of various types of media and commercial speech .

the section concludes by noting where the nominee has recognized key limitations on the first amendment's reach .

because of the unique docket at the d.c .

circuit , which has exclusive jurisdiction over certain matters related to military commissions and law of war detention , judge kavanaugh has authored or joined a large body of opinions related to national security .

like the themes echoed in several of justice kennedy's opinions , the nominee has frequently argued for courts to defer to the authority of the political branches on national security matters .

to judge kavanaugh , this deference arises from concerns that the judicial branch lacks the institutional competency to address national security and foreign policy debates in the absence of a statutory directive .

at the same time , the nominee's deference has limits , as he holds the view that deference is not warranted when a governing statute or constitutional provision calls for a judicial role .

judge kavanaugh appears less likely than justice kennedy to look to international law principles to inform his interpretation of a particular statute or constitutional provision in the absence of an express directive to do so .

in addition to his judicial rulings on national security matters , judge kavanaugh's non - judicial writings express a special interest in analyzing the constitutional limits on the executive's power to take the united states to war abroad without congressional authorization , a matter that has not received significant attention from the supreme court in the modern era .

parallels between justice kennedy's and judge kavanaugh's deference to the political branches are evident in their approach to cases concerning implied constitutional causes of action in the national security realm .

in his opinion for the supreme court in ziglar v. abbasi , justice kennedy reasoned that judicial recognition of an implied cause of action — allowing certain individuals who had been detained in the aftermath of the september 11 , 2001 attacks to sue the government for monetary damages — would raise separation - of - powers concerns by requiring "judicial inquiry into the national - security realm. .

in meshal v. higgenbotham , judge kavanaugh similarly declined to recognize an implied constitutional cause of action for monetary damages arising out of the alleged torture and detention of an american citizen during u.s. anti - terrorism operations in africa .

in a passage echoing ziglar , the nominee wrote in an opinion concurring in dismissal of the suit that it is congress , not the judicial branch , that "decides whether to recognize a cause of action against u.s. officials for torts they allegedly committed abroad in connection with the war against al qaeda and other radical islamic terrorist organizations. .

judge kavanaugh has been vocally deferential to the political branches when evaluating national security - related matters that he considered to concern policy choices rather than legal disputes .

in al bahlul v. united states — an en banc case concerning the scope of military commissions' jurisdiction — three dissenting judges argued that the government did not demonstrate that military exigency required the united states to try a defendant in a military commission , rather than in a court convened pursuant to the judicial authority established under article iii .

judge kavanaugh responded , stating that the dissenting judges had "no business" evaluating military exigency because they had "no relevant expertise on the question of wartime strategy. .

the nominee has also opined that courts should not second - guess the judgment of the executive branch in other national security - related matters , such as security clearance decisions or when evaluating how a foreign country is likely to treat a u.s. detainee slated for transfer overseas .

similarly , in a dissenting opinion in an alien tort statute suit against exxon mobil involving the indonesian army , judge kavanaugh argued , among other reasons , that because the department of state submitted a letter explaining that the case could adversely affect u.s. foreign relations and joint terrorism efforts , the suit should be dismissed .

klayman v. obama serves as another example that judge kavanaugh may be deferential to national security concerns when evaluating challenges to government action .

in an opinion concurring in the denial of rehearing en banc , judge kavanaugh wrote that the intelligence community's "bulk collection of telephony metadata serves a critically important special need — preventing terrorist attacks on the united states. .

in judge kavanaugh's view , this national security need outweighed competing privacy concerns .

and , in a passage echoing his deference toward the political branches , the nominee concluded that those with concerns about the metadata program should focus their efforts on congress and the executive .

but judge kavanaugh also has expressed the view that federal courts should play a role in some national security - related cases , particularly when the executive purports to possess the power to deviate from a statutory or express constitutional restriction .

"[p]residents must and do follow the statutes regulating the war effort[,]" judge kavanaugh wrote in 2016 article in the marquette lawyer .

and , the nominee noted in the same article , that "in cases where someone has standing — a detainee , a torture victim , [or] someone who has been surveilled — the courts will be involved in policing the executive's use of wartime authority. .

although federal courts should not create new rules to regulate the executive's war powers , judge kavanaugh similarly wrote in a 2014 law review article , courts also should not "relax the constitutional principles or statutes that regulate the executive," even during the high stakes of military conflict .

for example , in a 2016 speech following the death of justice scalia , judge kavanaugh expressed support for justice scalia's dissenting opinion in hamdi v. rumsf el d , which argued that courts should strictly enforce the suspension clause in cases challenging military detention of american citizens .

the case of el - shifa pharmaceutical industries co. v. united states may illustrate how judge kavanaugh's views expressed outside the courtroom concerning the role of the judicial branch in national security cases apply in practice .

in el - shifa , judge kavanaugh disagreed with the en banc d.c .

circuit's reliance on the political question doctrine as a basis to dismiss claims against the united states arising from the 1998 u.s. bombing of a sudanese pharmaceutical factory believed to be associated with al - qaeda .

while judge kavanaugh concluded that the case should be dismissed for failure to state an actionable claim , he argued that the court's reliance on the political question doctrine amounted to de facto approval of the executive's assertion of military authority in a case in which it was the court's responsibility to address the substance of the claims .

presaging the supreme court's later ruling in zivotofsky v. clinton , judge kavanaugh reasoned that the political question doctrine does not require federal courts to decline to resolve a case "simply because the dispute involves or would affect national security or foreign relations. .

accordingly , as a jurisdictional matter , judge kavanaugh appears skeptical of the view that courts do not have a role in cases solely based on the fact that the dispute raises national security concerns .

one of judge kavanaugh's most comprehensive bodies of national security - related jurisprudence , and one that may provide contrast between him and the jurist he may succeed , concerns the detention of enemy belligerents .

whereas justice kennedy was instrumental in the supreme court's ruling that the constitutional writ of habeas extended to foreign nationals held at guantanamo bay , judge kavanaugh ruled against detainees in a number of cases concerning the evidentiary rules that apply when adjudicating such habeas cases .

judge kavanaugh frequently authored or joined panel opinions that concluded the government had presented sufficient evidence that a guantanamo detainee was "part of" al - qaeda and its associated forces , and therefore subject to military detention .

in ali v. obama , for example , judge kavanaugh's opinion for the court explained that the standard of proof to uphold military detention may be less rigorous than the standard in criminal prosecutions because — even in "a long war with no end in sight" — military detention "comes to an end with the end of hostilities. .

one issue in which justice kennedy and judge kavanaugh appear likely to diverge is the extent that international law may inform judicial decisionmaking .

in 2004 , justice kennedy joined a four - justice plurality concluding that "longstanding law - of - war principles" that arise under international law informed the interpretation of the phrase "necessary and appropriate force" in the 2001 authorization for the use of military force ( 2001 aumf ) .

and in a concurring opinion in hamdan v. rumsfeld , justice kennedy wrote that , under the uniform code of military justice , common article 3 of the 1949 geneva conventions was "applicable to our nation's armed conflict with al qaeda in afghanistan and , as a result , to the use of a military commission. .

justice kennedy also occasionally considered international law in his opinions outside the national security context .

judge kavanaugh , by contrast , at times has been critical of arguments that international legal principles should influence judicial analysis in the absence of a clear statutory reference .

in a 2010 concurring opinion in al - bihani v. obama , judge kavanaugh expressed the view that the 2001 aumf did not incorporate judicially enforceable international law limits on the president's wartime authority .

"many international - law norms are vague , contested or still evolving[,]" judge kavanaugh wrote in al - bihani .

while federal courts historically have construed federal statutes to avoid conflicts with international law , judge kavanaugh argued that constitutional principles and 20th century judicial developments make such a rule of construction inappropriate in some cases .

judge kavanaugh expressed similar views in his 2016 concurring opinion in a l bahlul where he stated that federal courts are not "roving enforcers of international law[,]" and they are not permitted to "smuggle international law into the u.s. constitution and then wield it as a club against congress and the president in wartime. .

at the same time , judge kavanaugh has not been exclusively critical of international law .

in his 2016 a l bahlul opinion , he described international law as "important" and stated that "the political branches have good reason to adhere" to it .

moreover , when governing statutes or regulations expressly incorporated international law into u.s. domestic law , judge kavanaugh interpreted and enforced international legal principles .

for example , judge kavanaugh joined an opinion concluding that an applicable u.s. army regulation incorporated international legal protections afforded to medical personnel on the battlefield — although the court ultimately concluded that those protections did not apply under the facts of the case .

and in a 2012 decision , judge kavanaugh analyzed whether international law recognized certain criminal offenses for which a defendant was convicted in a military commission because , in that case , congress " explicitly incorporated international norms into domestic u.s .

law. .

finally , in several academic publications , judge kavanaugh explored what he believes to be one of the most important questions in american constitutional law: whether the president has the power to take the united states into war overseas without congressional authorization .

judge kavanaugh described the constitution's war - making power as shared between the legislative and executive branches .

in the realm of congressional power , according to judge kavanaugh , the legislative branch has broad authority to control whether the united states wages war and to regulate some aspects of how the executive conducts military operations , such as surveillance , detention , interrogation , and military commissions .

in the field of executive power , judge kavanaugh noted that article ii makes the president commander in chief of the armed forces .

but , according to the nominee , it is difficult to determine the extent to which the president's war powers are "exclusive and preclusive" — meaning they cannot be regulated by congress .

other than the power to command troops on the battlefield during a congressionally authorized war , judge kavanaugh has stated that the scope of the president's preclusive war powers are unsettled — although he did suggest in dicta that a statute regulating the president's "short - term bombing of foreign targets in the nation's self - defense" may not survive constitutional scrutiny .

ultimately , judge kavanaugh appears to believe that constitutional questions concerning war and national security will continue to be the subject of "heated debate," and that all three branches of government will play a role in resolving them .

the roberts court has been closely divided when interpreting the second amendment , and justice kennedy's replacement will likely play an important role going forward in shaping the jurisprudence governing the scope of the second amendment's right to keep and bear arms .

justice kennedy provided key deciding votes in the two landmark second amendment rulings of the roberts court .

first , in 2008 , he joined the five - justice majority in district of columbia v. heller ( heller i ) , which held for the first time that the second amendment protects an individual's right to possess a firearm .

then in 2010 , he joined another 5-4 majority in mcdonald v. city of chicago , which held that the second amendment is applicable to the states via the fourteenth amendment .

neither heller i nor mcdonald purported to define the full scope of the right protected by the second amendment , although the court cautioned that "the right secured by the second amendment is not unlimited. .

and the court has issued virtually no opinions meaningfully interpreting the second amendment since mcdonald .

accordingly , in the wake of heller i , the various federal circuit courts have examined the contours of the second amendment with little guidance from the high court , requiring the lower courts to identify the appropriate standard of review for federal and state firearm restrictions .

and judge kavanaugh undertook this task a year after mcdonald was decided in heller ii , in which he authored a notable dissent construing and applying heller i differently from the prevailing method that other federal district and circuit courts use .

heller ii assessed whether the district of columbia's firearms registration amendment act ( fra ) comported with the second amendment .

in particular , heller ii evaluated three of the fra's provisions: ( 1 )  its firearm registration requirement ; ( 2 ) its prohibition on the possession of certain semi - automatic rifles that fell within the fra's definition of "assault weapons" ; and ( 3 )  its prohibition on the possession of large - capacity magazines with a capacity for more than ten rounds of ammunition .

in a 2-1 ruling over judge kavanaugh's dissent , the d.c .

circuit largely upheld the challenged fra provisions .

the majority began by applying the two - step framework that has been employed by nearly all federal circuit courts that have considered second amendment challenges post - heller i , first asking whether the provisions implicate a right protected by the second amendment , and , if so , second , analyzing the provisions under the appropriate level of judicial scrutiny ( eg , rational basis review , intermediate scrutiny , or strict scrutiny ) .

ultimately , the d.c .

circuit generally upheld the challenged requirements .

while remanding the case to review several specific registration requirements , the court concluded that the general requirement that a gun be registered with the government fell within the category of "longstanding prohibitions" on the possession and use of firearms that the supreme court considered to be "presumptively lawful regulatory measures" that do not garner second amendment protection .

further , the court concluded that the ban on semi - automatic rifles and large - capacity magazines withstood intermediate scrutiny and , thus , were lawful because the government had shown a reasonable fit between the prohibitions and its interests in protecting police officers and controlling crime .

in his dissent , judge kavanaugh wrote at length about the meaning and import of the high court's decision in heller i , opining that: heller , while enormously significant jurisprudentially , was not revolutionary in terms of its immediate real - world effects on american gun regulation .

indeed , heller largely preserved the status quo of gun regulation in the united states .

heller established that traditional and common gun laws in the united states remain constitutionally permissible .

the supreme court simply pushed back against an outlier local law — d.c's handgun ban — that went far beyond the traditional line of gun regulation .

and , in judge kavanaugh's view , the fra — like the district of columbia's handgun ban that came before it — is an "outlier" and thus unconstitutional under heller i .

he reasoned that the fra provisions are outliers because they are not common or traditional firearm laws: "as with d.c.'s handgun ban [struck down in heller i ] , .

 .

 .

holding these d.c. laws unconstitutional would not lead to nationwide tumult .

rather , such a holding would maintain the balance historically and traditionally struck in the united states between public safety and the individual right to keep arms .

 .

 .

. .

notably , unlike the heller ii majority and several other federal circuit courts , judge kavanaugh proposed , in line with his general skepticism of balancing tests , that firearm laws should be evaluated not according to a particular level of scrutiny but , rather , "based on the second amendment's text , history , and tradition ( as well as by appropriate analogues thereto when dealing with modern weapons and new circumstances ) . .

while the nominee acknowledged that heller i did not direct lower courts as to the appropriate analytical framework for analyzing second amendment claims , he concluded that "look[ing] to text , history , and tradition to define the scope of the right and assess gun bans and regulations" is the "clear message" from heller i because the supreme court had gauged firearms laws according to "historical tradition," including whether a measure is "longstanding" or regulates weapons that "citizens typically possess" and that are "in common use. .

further , he contended that the heller i majority rejected "judicial interest balancing," which , in his view , includes strict or intermediate scrutiny , to assess whether a government restriction on firearms is permissible .

applying this analysis in his heller ii dissent , judge kavanaugh would have invalidated two of the three challenged fra provisions .

with respect to the fra's gun registration law , the nominee maintained that the "fundamental problem" with the law was that — in contrast to gun licensing and recordkeeping laws — gun registration requirements were "not 'longstanding,'" in that registration of lawfully possessed guns "has not been traditionally required in the united states and , indeed , remains highly unusual today. .

in arguing for striking down the district of columbia's ban on semi - automatic rifles that fell within the fra's definition of "assault weapons," the nominee maintained that semi - automatic rifles are "traditionally and widely accepted as lawful possessions. .

and with respect to the fra's prohibition on the possession of large - capacity magazines , the nominee would have remanded the case to the lower court to determine whether large - capacity magazines have traditionally been banned and are not in common use .

as the nominee's writings on the second amendment reveal , adding judge kavanaugh to the supreme court's bench could shape the way that second amendment claims are evaluated , which , in turn , could potentially affect the legality of firearm legislation at the federal , state , and local levels .

for instance , were the supreme court to adopt judge kavanaugh's history and tradition test for evaluating the scope of the second amendment — an approach that differs from the prevailing two - step approach adopted by nearly all federal circuit courts — it is possible that renewed challenges will be raised to some firearms laws that were upheld under the previous two - step approach .

that said , it is still possible that a court would reach the same result regarding a firearm law's permissibility under judge kavanaugh's suggested methodology as under the earlier approach .

moreover , as the nominee noted in heller ii , government bodies may have more flexibility under his proposed method of analysis than under the strict scrutiny test used at times by some circuit courts because "history and tradition show that a variety of gun regulations have co - existed with the second amendment right and are consistent with that right , as the court said in heller [i] . .

judge kavanaugh's disagreement with how the lower courts have generally interpreted the second amendment has prompted some commentators to argue that the nominee would necessarily vote in favor of granting a petition for certiorari in a case involving the second amendment .

while the decision to grant certiorari generally does not hinge on a justice's mere agreement or disagreement with a lower court's opinion , it is certainly possible that a new justice could result in changes to the court's docket , including with respect to second amendment cases .

since heller i , the supreme court has reviewed two second amendment challenges: first , two years after heller i in mcdonald v. city of chicago , and then six years after that in caetano v. massachusetts .

in caetano , the court , without ordering merits briefing or oral argument , issued a short per curiam opinion vacating the decision of the massachusetts supreme court that had upheld a state law prohibiting the possession of stun guns .

however , the two - page caetano opinion principally opined that the state court opinion directly conflicted with heller i , without engaging in a comprehensive analysis and offering little clarification on the court's second amendment jurisprudence .

since caetano , the supreme court has not granted a petition for certiorari in any second amendment matter .

during this period , though , justices thomas and gorsuch have dissented from the denial of certiorari in cases raising second amendment claims .

because only four justices are needed for the court to grant certiorari , and with a number of potentially important second amendment cases percolating in the lower courts , judge kavanaugh , if confirmed , could play an important role in deciding whether the supreme court adds another second amendment case to its docket .

separation of powers — that is , the law governing the allocation of power among the three branches of the federal government — is perhaps the most critical area of law in understanding judge kavanaugh's jurisprudence .

indeed , the nominee views the doctrine of separation of powers as fundamental to every aspect of adjudication , having noted that , from his perspective , "every case is a separation of powers case. .

separation of powers was also an important issue for the justice whom judge kavanaugh may succeed , justice kennedy .

like most of his fellow justices , justice kennedy viewed the separation of powers as a fundamental aspect of the american constitutional system .

nonetheless , justice kennedy did not adopt one particular approach in separation - of - powers cases .

as he was on so many other issues , justice kennedy was seen as a centrist of separation of powers , embracing in different cases both functional and formal analyses when providing the deciding vote in the court's most recent decisions on the constitution's allocation of powers among the federal branches .

like justice kennedy , judge kavanaugh views the separation of powers as "not simply [a] matter[] of etiquette or architecture," but as an essential and foundational aspect of the american constitutional system that serves primarily to protect the public from governmental abuse .

his general approach is arguably formalist , placing significant emphasis on the text and history of those provisions of the constitution that establish the "blueprint" for the fundamental design of the federal government and readily implementing the boundaries that he interprets to flow from those provisions .

as such , judge kavanaugh stresses both the importance of the separation of powers itself and the necessity of the judiciary's role in enforcing the framers' clear structural choices .

perhaps because of the significance he attaches to the doctrine , for judge kavanaugh , the separation of powers is the lens through which he approaches a wide variety of controversies , including cases relating to standing , administrative law , appropriations law , national security law , war powers , and others .

many of these aspects of judge kavanaugh's jurisprudence are addressed in other parts of this report and will not be discussed here .

instead , this section focuses on his general theory of the domestic separation of powers and how it shapes his views on specific topics such as the judiciary's role in checking violations of the doctrine ; the president's obligation to comply with and enforce the law ; legislative and executive immunity ; executive privilege ; requiring the president to comply with a subpoena ; and the structural design of administrative agencies .

in obergefell v. hodges , the justice that judge kavanaugh might succeed , justice kennedy , wrote that the "identification and protection of fundamental rights is an enduring part of the judicial duty to interpret the constitution. .

many fundamental rights that the court has identified as warranting constitutional protection stem from the fifth and fourteenth amendments , which prohibit the federal government and the states from depriving any person of "life , liberty , or property , without due process of law. .

the court has interpreted these amendments not only to accord procedural protections against such deprivations , but also to contain a substantive component that prohibits the government from infringing certain fundamental rights unless the government's law or action is narrowly tailored to serve a compelling state interest .

these fundamental rights include "most of the rights enumerated in the bill of rights," as well as additional , unenumerated rights that the court has recognized over the years , such as the right to marry or the right to privacy in making certain intimate decisions .

justice kennedy's legacy on the bench is closely tied to the issue of substantive due process , having authored or joined the controlling opinions in a number of closely divided cases recognizing unenumerated rights .

these cases include his joint opinion in planned parent hood of southeastern pennsylvania v. casey , which reaffirmed roe v. wade 's recognition of a woman's right to an abortion before fetal viability ; his opinion for the court in lawrence v. texas , which recognized the right of consenting adults to engage in private , sexual conduct without governmental interference ; and his opinion for the court in obergefell , which recognized the right of same - sex couples to marry .

however , justice kennedy has also declined to recognize due process protections in other cases , such as when he joined the court's refusal to recognize a fundamental right to physician - assisted suicide in washington v. glucksberg .

justice kennedy's central role in the development of the court's substantive due process jurisprudence has cast judge kavanaugh's decisions in this area and the nominee's broader judicial philosophy on the subject into the spotlight .

in particular , commentators have focused on judge kavanaugh's opinions in a case that reached the supreme court involving an unaccompanied alien minor who sought an abortion while in u.s. immigration custody , and the judge's scholarly commentary on the glucksberg decision .

these sources and certain other opinions and commentary by judge kavanaugh provide very limited insight into his approach to analyzing substantive due process questions , and are unlikely to serve as reliable predictors of the outcome in any given case .

of the relatively few substantive due process cases that judge kavanaugh encountered during his tenure on the d.c .

circuit , he authored opinions in only a handful of those cases , some of which presented unique factual and procedural scenarios or directly implicated controlling supreme court precedent .

nevertheless , his apparent endorsement of an approach to due process grounded in history and tradition suggests that if confirmed , judge kavanaugh may deploy a more narrow view of substantive due process than justice kennedy in defining the contours of future rights and protections .

this section begins by discussing the nominee's sole opinion on the right to an abortion , before turning to his other writings and comments on substantive due process .

relative to justice kennedy , who , during his tenure on the supreme court , cast several significant votes in eminent domain cases that decided whether and when federal and state governments may take private property for public use , judge kavanaugh does not appear to have significantly addressed the merits of a takings claim in a judicial opinion .

this is unsurprising , as the d.c .

circuit does not hear many takings claims because the tucker act vests the u.s. court of federal claims ( cfc ) with jurisdiction over such claims when the plaintiff seeks more than $10,000 in compensation from the federal government .

with limited exceptions , the cfc's jurisdiction over such claims is exclusive , and appeals from the cfc are to the federal circuit , not the d.c .

circuit .

while the fifth amendment applies to the district of columbia , there are few takings cases that have arisen against the district during judge kavanaugh's time on the court .

of the takings cases that he adjudicated , judge kavanaugh has either joined the majority opinion or summarily disposed of the takings issues .

as a result , there is currently an insufficient basis to evaluate judge kavanaugh's views regarding the scope of the takings clause or the extent to which the takings clause protects private property rights .

nonetheless , with takings cases presently pending before the supreme court , judge kavanaugh , if confirmed , will likely have the opportunity to consider the issue .

accordingly , questions concerning his views on the issue could be explored in a confirmation hearing .

