in recent years , a number of observers have suggested that united states special operations command ( socom ) is generally more effective at acquisitions than the u.s. military departments , in part because of the perception that socom has unique acquisition authorities .

this report describes socom's acquisition authorities for unclassified acquisition programs and compares these authorities to those granted to the military departments .

it also compares the military departments' and socom's chains of command , and the scope of acquisition activity and program oversight for those organizations .

finally , the report explores whether socom has unique characteristics that influence how it conducts acquisition .

the goldwater - nichols department of defense reorganization act of 1986 ( p.l .

99-433 ) reorganized dod's command and control structure , in part by establishing the current construct and authorities of combatant commands .

there are 10 combatant commands: 6 geographic and 4 functional commands .

socom possesses unique acquisition authorities when compared with other combatant commands .

socom was established and granted its own acquisition responsibilities in the fiscal year ( fy ) 1987 national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) ( p.l .

99-661 ) .

socom was the first combatant command endowed with acquisition authority and its own budget line for training and equipping its forces .

the fy2016 ndaa ( p.l .

114-92 ) granted limited acquisition authority to the u.s. cyber command , making cybercom the second command to have current independent acquisition authority .

however , socom's acquisition authority is more expansive .

the method socom uses for acquisitions is similar to the acquisition processes used by the military services: they share the same general statutory and regulatory framework ; training and education opportunities ( i.e. , access to defense acquisition university and national defense university ) ; and dod oversight regime .

however , there are also significant differences , many of which relate to the size and scope of socom and its authorities .

table 1 summarizes select similarities and differences .

socom benefits from being a smaller organization with a more focused mission set and limited scope of acquisition authorities .

other socom attributes , such as delegating more decisionmaking to lower levels and promoting a more risk - taking culture , may be transferable to the services .

a number of current senior acquisition officials in the military services recently served in socom and appear to be promoting more delegation of authority and cultural risk - taking in the services , including general paul ostrowksi , formerly a socom peo and currently the principal military deputy to the assistant secretary of the army ( acquisition , logistics and technology ) , and james guerts , formerly the socom acquisition executive and currently the assistant secretary of the navy ( research , development and acquisition ) .

one potential issue for congress may include the following: to what extent do current acquisition - related laws and regulations promote or inhibit a more efficient , less bureaucratic , and more balanced approach to risk in acquisitions ? .

in some instances socom has fewer acquisition authorities than the military departments .

this occurs where legislation grants acquisition authorities or flexibilities to the military departments .

the definition of military departments , codified in 50 u.s.c .

3004 , does not include socom .

as a result , socom may not receive new acquisition authorities provided by congress and must work through the secretary of defense to obtain these authorities or seek a legislative change , potentially resulting in lost opportunities for socom in its acquisition efforts .

potential associated issues for congress may include the following: based on the dod report on acquisition authorities required in the 2018 ndaa , should additional acquisition authorities should be granted to socom ? .

should the definition of military departments as they relate to acquisitions be modified to include socom ? .

appendix a .

appendix b .

comparison of chains of comman .

