i n 2017 , three hurricanes — harvey , irma , and maria — caused extensive damage to several states within the continental united states and to the u.s. virgin islands ( usvi ) and puerto rico .

the three storms were part of an active 2017 atlantic hurricane season ( june 1-november 30 ) that produced 17 named storms , of which 10 reached hurricane strength .

six of the 10 hurricanes achieved sustained wind speeds of at least 111 miles per hour ( mph ) and were classified as major hurricanes ( categories 3 , 4 , or 5 on the saffir - simpson hurricane wind scale ) .

hurricanes harvey and irma were the first storms with winds at major hurricane strength to make landfall in the continental united states since 2005 .

hurricane maria also had major hurricane strength winds when it struck puerto rico .

the potential for widespread destruction to parts of the u.s. coastline underscores the value of timely hurricane forecasts as a means for providing early and accurate warnings to affected communities .

this report first provides a synopsis of the role of the national hurricane center ( nhc ) , part of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration's ( noaa's ) national weather service ( nws ) , in forecasting hurricanes , and it discusses some of the advances and remaining challenges in hurricane forecasting .

the report then provides an overview of the 2017 hurricane season , with a focus on the three destructive hurricanes named above , and includes a brief summary of the hurricane outlook for 2018 .

hurricane forecasting has been improving for decades and is one of a number of weather - related ongoing issues of interest to congress .

a number of weather - and hurricane - related bills were introduced over the past several congresses , and on april 18 , 2017 , congress enacted p.l .

115-25 , the weather research and forecasting act of 2017 , which provides direction to noaa and nws on a range of weather - related activities , including hurricanes .

the broad aim of the legislation is to improve weather forecasts and warnings , and section 104 of title 1 of p.l .

115-25 specifically aims to improve hurricane forecasting .

at the april 12 , 2018 , hearing , the acting administrator for noaa stated that noaa would continue to follow guidelines outlined in p.l .

115-25 to improve the agency's hurricane predictions .

congress likely will continue to conduct oversight and consider legislation regarding the federal effort to improve hurricane forecasting , especially in response to active and destructive hurricane seasons , such as the one 2017 .

the national hurricane center ( nhc ) , part of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration's ( noaa's ) national weather service ( nws ) , is responsible for forecasting tropical cyclones , including hurricanes in the atlantic ocean and the eastern pacific ocean .

the nhc provides estimates of the path or track of a tropical cyclone , the intensity , and the size and structure of the storm , as well as predictions of storm surge , rainfall , and even tornadoes .

depending on the status of the tropical cyclone , this information may be used to create a hurricane watch or a hurricane warning and public advisories , which are issued on an increasingly frequent basis if a storm strengthens and approaches the u.s. coastline .

noaa releases its outlook for hurricane season prior to june 1 of each year and typically provides an update as conditions evolve for the atlantic basin .

table 1 shows that the number and strength of actual hurricanes slightly exceeded the upper range of noaa's seasonal outlook for an active hurricane season in 2017 .

three major hurricanes affected the continental united states , the usvi , and puerto rico in 2017 , causing severe damage: harvey ( august 17-september 1 ) , irma ( august 30-september 12 ) , and maria ( september 17-september 30 ) .

in general , forecasts of these hurricanes' tracks were better than the previous five - year average for track forecasts .

however , forecasts of intensity were less accurate ; some forecast errors for these hurricanes exceeded the previous five - year average for forecast errors .

track and intensity forecasts for each of the three major hurricanes are discussed below .

the climate prediction center ( cpc ) , within the nws , annually issues a noaa atlantic hurricane season outlook .

the outlook for 2018 , initially issued on may 24 , predicted 10-16 named storms , 5-9 hurricanes , and 1-4 major hurricanes .

the cpc updated its outlook on august 9 , predicting 9-13 named storms , 4-7 hurricanes , and 0-2 major hurricanes .

according to the august cpc prediction , there is a 60% chance of a below - normal season ( most likely ) , a 30% chance of a near - normal season , and a 10% chance of an above - normal season .

these categories reflect the probabilistic nature of the annual outlooks , meaning they have a certain likelihood of occurring .

the outlook is based on ( 1 ) predictions of large - scale climate factors known to influence seasonal hurricane activity and ( 2 ) climate models that directly predict hurricane activity .

for comparison to the 2018 outlook , table 8 shows seasonal means and ranges for named storms , hurricanes , and major hurricanes , using data collected between 1981 and 2010 .

in its august update , the cpc provided four main reasons why it expects the 2018 hurricane season to be less active than its may prediction: 1 .

exceptionally cool sea surface temperatures in the region of the atlantic where tropical storms initially form ; 2 .

an increased likelihood of an el niño developing ; 3 .

components of atmospheric circulation patterns that developed and are not conducive to hurricane formation ; and 4 .

consistent with the first three items , all hurricane models predict a less active season than they did in may .

although the atlantic hurricane season runs from june 1 to november 30 , the cpc notes that most of the predicted activity is expected to occur during the peak hurricane months of august to october .

because ocean and atmospheric conditions may change , the cpc typically issues an update in august to its initial may outlook to coincide with the onset of the peak season .

noaa includes several disclaimers when issuing its seasonal outlook .

for example , noaa does not make a seasonal hurricane landfall forecast , and it does not predict levels of hurricane activity for any particular area within the atlantic region .

hurricane landfalls are determined largely by weather patterns after the storm has formed , which are predictable only days before the hurricane makes landfall ( see " improvements and challenges " ) .

noaa also includes the following with its outlook: it only takes one hurricane ( or tropical storm ) to cause a disaster .

residents , businesses , and government agencies of coastal and near - coastal regions are urged to prepare for every hurricane season regardless of this , or any other , seasonal outlook .

congress enacted section 104 , title i , of p.l .

115-25 ( the weather act ) specifically to improve hurricane forecasting with a focus on improving the prediction of rapid intensification and track of hurricanes ; improving the forecast and communication of storm surges from hurricanes ; and incorporating risk communication research to create more effective watch and warning products .

congress has continued to focus on these issues in the second session of the 115 th congress .

at an april 12 , 2018 , hearing before the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation , the acting noaa administrator stated that forecasts for the 2017 hurricane season "were the best the nhc [national hurricane center] ever produced. .

however , despite clear improvements in hurricane forecasting , some stakeholders point to the need for even better forecasts .

one witness representing the red cross at the april 12 , 2018 , hearing , identified some uncertainties with predicting the track of hurricane irma that "challenged planners across the state [of florida]. .

a witness representing the national transportation safety board noted that the track for hurricane joaquin in 2015 was difficult to forecast because of moderate wind shear and recommended that noaa improve the performance of its forecast models in moderate wind - shear environments .

in the weather act , congress required a detailed plan for noaa's hurricane forecast improvement program under section 104 within a year of enactment ; however , the plan was unavailable as of early july 2018 .

other sections of the weather act address aspects of the noaa weather enterprise that also could lead to improvements in hurricane forecasting .

for example , section 107 of title i requires noaa to undertake experiments to assess different observing systems and their capabilities to improve hurricane track and intensity forecasting , among other things .

section 413 , title iv , requires noaa to acquire backup capabilities for hurricane hunter aircraft to prevent a single point of failure for that part of the hurricane observing system .

at a july 18 , 2018 , hearing of the house transportation and infrastructure committee , witnesses focused on recovery activities from the 2017 hurricane season and preparedness for the 2018 season .

it is likely that congress will maintain its interest in federal hurricane forecast abilities every year given the annual threat hurricanes pose to populated coastal regions of the united states .

