the chesapeake bay ( the bay ) is the largest estuary in the united states .

congress has described it as a "national treasure" ( p.l .

106-457 ) , and it is recognized as a "wetlands of international importance" by the ramsar convention .

the chesapeake bay estuary resides in a more than 64,000-square - mile watershed that extends across parts of delaware , maryland , new york , pennsylvania , virginia , west virginia , and the district of columbia .

it is home to more than 18 million people and thousands of species of plants and animals .

over time , the bay's ecological conditions have deteriorated due to land - use changes , increased sediment loads and nutrient pollution , the use and spread of chemical contaminants , overfishing and overharvesting of aquatic species , and the introduction of invasive species .

these changes have resulted in reductions to economically important fisheries , such as oysters and crabs ; the loss of habitat , such as underwater vegetation and sea grass ; annual dead zones , as nutrient - driven algal blooms die and decompose ; and potential impacts to tourism , recreation , and real estate values .

joint state and federal restoration attempts did not begin until the early 1980s .

since then , federal agencies have worked together under a watershed - wide agreement and through a restoration program spearheaded by the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) .

congress has and may continue to examine chesapeake bay restoration efforts .

actions in the chesapeake watershed have served as examples for other estuary restoration efforts in the united states .

this report provides background on the physical and ecological properties of the bay and watershed , its economic value , the health of the ecosystem over time , and federal governance of bay restoration efforts .

it then discusses issues facing congress as work continues toward 2025 restoration goals set by several state and federal plans .

the chesapeake bay has experienced various natural and man - made changes over the course of its existence .

according to stakeholders , restoring the bay ecosystem state is a complicated process due to the size of the bay's watershed , the variety of stakeholders , and the complexity of chesapeake bay ecosystems .

the bay transcends geographical and political boundaries and affects numerous jurisdictions .

restoration efforts are challenging because they require cooperation and coordination between multiple federal and state agencies , tribes , local governments , ngos , and private stakeholders .

planning and implementing complex environmental and ecosystem restoration efforts raises many technical , policy , and organizational issues .

congress began to concentrate on bay issues in the 1960s , as public and stakeholder pressure grew for federal government involvement in bay restoration .

congress ordered a series of reports from the u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) and the epa to investigate issues including the decline in fisheries , "control of noxious weeds," water pollution , and water quality control in the chesapeake bay .

since then , federal restoration activities have expanded across several federal agencies and are primarily coordinated by the chesapeake bay program ( cbp ) .

the cbp was established by the 1983 chesapeake bay agreement .

in 1987 , congress codified the cbp and directed the epa administrator to achieve and maintain water quality and to conduct habitat restoration and conservation for the benefit of bay living resources in section 117 of the clean water act ( p.l .

100-4 ) .

the cbp is a partnership of federal , state , and local agencies ; tribes ; academic institutions ; and ngos , and restoration activity implementation authority lies within individual agency program authorizations and the states .

the cbp works with states through a committee structure to develop actions and strategies for restoration .

the program's organization has changed over time as partners , agreements , and priorities have shifted .

the program's organization may continue to change under the cbp's adaptive management approach .

cbp activities have been led by an executive council ( ec ) .

the ec establishes policy direction for restoring and protecting the bay and its living resources and is accountable to the public for progress made under the agreement ( figure 6 ) .

the ec is supported by the principals' staff committee .

strategic planning , creation of guidance , and implementation of activities toward agreement goals occur in the five different groups below the principals' staff committee .

the entire effort is informed by three advisory committees .

federal agency representatives are involved at each level of the cbp organization , including membership on the executive council ; principals' staff committee ; management board ; goal implementation teams ; and science , technical analysis , and reporting group .

epa has been considered the lead federal agency for implementing the program because it was directed by congress to continue the cbp ( 33 u.s.c .

1267 ( b ) ; figure 6 ) .

congress also directed the epa to maintain an epa chesapeake bay program office ( 33 u.s.c .

1267 ( b ) ) , which is staffed by employees from a number of federal and state agencies , academic institutions , and ngos .

federal agencies are also partners through formal memoranda of understanding with epa .

the agencies also coordinate through the federal leadership committee ( flc ) , which was established through president obama's 2009 executive order 13508 .

in addition , federal agencies have various authorities to implement restoration programs and activities in the bay on their own , as discussed in the section titled " what authorities are federal agencies working under to restore the chesapeake bay ? .

in its oversight role , congress continues to weigh if and how chesapeake bay federal restoration efforts should continue .

if there is a federal role , congress may consider how bay restoration is coordinated , how much funding is available and may be needed for bay restoration efforts , and what progress is being made in restoring the bay .

a large , multi - jurisdictional ecosystem restoration initiative , such as in the bay , raises several questions for congress about the federal role in restoration .

congress may consider the mechanisms in place to guide restoration activities , what role the federal government has in bay restoration , and what federal agency authorities exist or are needed to complete , coordinate , and fund restoration activities in the bay .

although various state and federal stakeholders have set forth several frameworks , agreements , and visions for restoring the chesapeake bay , which address different jurisdictions , bay issues and timelines , no single , comprehensive ecosystem restoration plan exists to facilitate coordination of these efforts .

there are currently three guiding documents for restoration and one draft plan: the 2010 strategy for protecting and restoring the chesapeake bay watershed ( pursuant to president obama's 2009 e.o .

13508 ) , the epa's 2010 chesapeake bay total maximum daily load ( tmdl ) , the 2014 chesapeake bay watershed agreement , and the draft 2018 usace chesapeake bay comprehensive water resource and restoration plan .

table 1 briefly compares these guiding documents .

the extent to which one of these plans guides restoration efforts is unclear .

the plans cover different jurisdictions and vary in terms of implementation .

the plans also relate to each other in different ways .

select differences include the following: implementation of the 2010 e.o .

strategy , 2010 tmdl , and 2014 chesapeake bay watershed agreement is led by the epa , with other federal agencies involved in some cases , and each plan contains two - year work plans or milestones .

in comparison , the 2018 usace draft comprehensive plan does not specify a certain timeline , contain specific goals or objectives , or require periodic sub - plans .

the 2014 chesapeake bay watershed agreement includes many of the actions outlined in the 2010 e.o .

strategy and the 2010 tmdl , and has guided the development of the 2018 usace draft comprehensive plan .

stakeholders utilize the plans in different ways .

the trump administration has left the 2009 e.o .

in place , but the 2010 e.o .

strategy's use as a guiding mechanism is uncertain .

some federal program managers have argued that the 2010 e.o .

strategy is no longer a focus and that the 2018 draft usace comprehensive plan could serve as an organizing document for federal agencies when considering where to focus restoration efforts geographically .

some stakeholders have lauded the 2014 chesapeake bay watershed agreement's success in obtaining consensus results largely without regulatory or legally required action , in contrast to the actions required by the 2010 tmdl ( see next section for more information ) .

others argue that the voluntary nature of the 2014 chesapeake bay watershed agreement weakens restoration efforts .

finally , some may contend that the 2010 tmdl , which is focused on specific water quality factors , is not holistic in terms of addressing the entire ecosystem .

congress may consider other questions related to the plans , such as whether the current plans successfully integrate efforts across agencies , states , and local governments or whether they overlap and may cause confusion .

in addition , congress may continue to consider if the plans are most effective in their current states or with changes to jurisdictions , leadership , and enforcement , and if state and local stakeholders have been or should be equal partners in the implementation of the plans .

congress may examine the federal government's role in restoration efforts .

the federal government is authorized to perform restoration activities under several congressional authorizations ( see next section ) .

federal agencies complete restoration activities on their own or in partnership with other agencies .

federal agencies execute these collaborations through memoranda of understanding .

congress may also examine the role of state restoration efforts as they are coordinated and integrated with federal work in the chesapeake bay .

with the exception of the statutory relationship between the federal government and states in protecting water quality under the clean water act , the federal and state roles in bay restoration are not defined by law .

this is in contrast to other restoration initiatives , such as the comprehensive everglades restoration , which considers the state of florida as a nonfederal partner with formal duties under law ( p.l .

106-541 , title vi , §601 ) .

in the chesapeake bay , coordination of broad restoration activities between state and federal agencies is largely achieved through the voluntary chesapeake bay watershed agreement and cbp , where decisions are determined by consensus .

some have challenged the extent of the federal government's role in managing restoration of the chesapeake bay .

these stakeholders and members of congress contend that the federal government has overreached its authority and intruded upon the states' powers to regulate land use , especially in regard to the epa tmdl .

for example , a lawsuit challenged the extent of epa's authority and oversight over state actions , in regard to the tmdl , with the third circuit of appeals finding that the epa had acted within its authority .

in the 115 th congress , the fy2019 house interior , environment , financial services , and general government appropriations bill ( h.r .

6147 ) was amended to include a provision that would prohibit epa funding for actions against watershed states and dc in the event the jurisdiction did not meet tmdl goals .

the trump administration has encouraged "the six chesapeake bay states and washington , d.c. to continue to make progress in restoring the bay from within [epa] core water programs" in the proposed fy2018 epa budget .

in contrast , other stakeholders — such as some environmental groups , local government officials , and other members of congress — support federal government involvement in bay restoration .

these stakeholders argue that the federal government should lead restoration efforts and should provide greater federal funding for restoration activities .

several federal agencies conduct restoration activities in the chesapeake bay watershed independently or with other agencies under various authorities .

in contrast to restoration efforts in other large estuaries , such as the great lakes or everglades , congress has not authorized restoration work in the bay under a single comprehensive law .

some of the restoration work is authorized under a variety of chesapeake bay - specific laws and regulations ( appendix c ) .

for example , congress has directed the epa to maintain a chesapeake bay program ( 33 u.s.c .

§1267 ) , offer chesapeake bay restoration - related grants ( 33 u.s.c .

§1267 ( d ) & ( e ) ) , and perform annual bay grass surveys ( 33 u.s.c .

§2803 ( d ) ) , among other activities .

congress has also authorized federal agencies to perform more general activities that may be applied in the chesapeake bay , such as the clean water act ( 33 u.s.c .

§§1251 et .

seq. ) .

and the aquatic nuisance prevention and control act ( 16 u.s.c .

§§4701 et seq. ) .

 ( appendix c ) .

some stakeholders may contend that directing agencies to work together under a specific federal authority and with an organizing structure would encourage more efficient progress toward restoration .

congress has enacted organizing entities for the great lakes task force , under the great lakes restoration initiative ( p.l .

111-88 , title i ) , and the south florida ecosystem restoration task force , under the comprehensive everglades restoration plan ( p.l .

106-541 , title vi , section 601 ) .

other stakeholders , however , may note that legislation authorizing coordination and collaboration among federal agencies is not necessary , as restoration activities are already authorized for the epa and several other agencies under more general authorities .

further , these individuals may note that federal agencies are coordinating efforts under the chesapeake bay watershed agreement and through the cbp .

congress continues to consider how much funding has been spent , how much should be allocated to chesapeake bay restoration , and the total costs of restoring the bay .

answering these questions is complicated by the number of federal programs and states involved in restoring the chesapeake bay .

congress has been interested in how much has been appropriated for bay restoration , in part , to evaluate the appropriate level of federal spending on restoration activities .

most federal funding to restore the chesapeake bay is discretionary , subject to the annual congressional appropriations process .

until recently , tracking the amounts federal agencies have spent on restoration has been difficult , as many nationwide programs support restoration activities in the watershed but do not specify the level of funding for chesapeake bay efforts in their budget .

congress has been interested in tracking costs related to bay restoration and enacted the chesapeake bay accountability and recovery act in 2014 ( cbara ; p.l .

113-273 ) , which requires the office of management and budget ( omb ) to compile chesapeake bay restoration funding information from the seven federal departments on the flc in an annual crosscut report .

omb released crosscut reports in 2016 and 2017 for funding information between fy2014 and fy2016 , and estimates for fy2017 ( table 2 ) .

the reported amounts have specific limitations and assumptions ( see text box below ) .

according to the chesapeake bay crosscut reports , the federal government had between $460 million and $570 million per year in budget authority for restoration activities in the bay between fy2014 and fy2017 ( table 2 ) .

according to the crosscut , epa and the department of agriculture ( usda ) provided the most funding to the overall total budget authority .

epa distributed two - thirds through grants to state and local partners .

the remaining epa funding supported cbp office and personnel , contracts and interagency agreements , and scientific analysis and decision - support tools .

usda distributed most of its restoration funding through the nationwide natural resource conservation service , which supports conservation easement programs and provides technical and financial assistance to farmers and private landowners .

stakeholders have various viewpoints on how much funding should be appropriated to chesapeake bay restoration that congress may consider during the appropriations process .

for example , some stakeholders and members of congress have emphasized that consistent federal funding for activities is key to successful restoration and that the elimination or significant reductions of restoration funding could halt current progress on restoring the bay .

others contend that the federal government is spending too much on restoration and that financial responsibility for restoring the bay should fall to the states .

for instance , the trump administration proposed to eliminate fy2018 funding for the epa cbp and noted that epa would "encourage the six chesapeake bay states and washington , d.c. to continue to make progress in restoring the bay from within core [epa] water programs" and return "responsibility for funding local environmental efforts and programs to state and local entities. .

in fy2019 , the administration's epa budget request proposed $7.3 million for the cbp for state and local water quality monitoring and science coordination activities .

some stakeholders may contend that the chesapeake bay restoration effort would have a higher chance of receiving consistent funding if the authorization for funding for the cbp were current .

the cbp authorization for appropriations expired in 2005 .

similarly , other stakeholders , who believe that federal restoration efforts receive insufficient funding , may argue that if all federal restoration efforts were authorized and organized under one law , the efforts may receive more funding .

for example , great lakes restoration activities were supported by appropriations of $888 million to $986 million per year between fy2012 and fy2016 , the largest component of which supported the great lakes restoration initiative , a program with dedicated great lakes funding , in addition to agency great lakes restoration work .

some could disagree by arguing that gathering all restoration activities under one authorization could create a large target for funding decreases , implying that having restoration efforts spread across several authorities is more advantageous for receiving appropriations .

several groups have attempted to estimate the total cost of restoring the bay and maintaining a restored bay , with varying results .

cost estimates have ranged from $7 billion for individual state costs to $28 billion for the entire watershed , with additional annual maintenance costs projected once restoration is complete .

costs estimates vary depending on the restoration metrics , assumptions , and measures ( eg , nutrient - reduction technology , agricultural best management practices , etc. ) .

included in the calculations .

some stakeholders contend that the increase in social and economic benefits to the watershed will justify the final cost .

they add that the current cost of restoration is likely to be less than the cost of restoration in the future .

other stakeholders argue that the costs have and will result in continual , if slow , improvements to bay conditions .

others , including some members of congress , question the justification for funding bay restoration because a comprehensive cost - benefit analysis of restoration has not been completed .

some stakeholders may also contend that the reported improvements in water quality and habitat do not justify the funding already spent nor the expected final cost to restore the bay .

congress continues to be interested in whether progress is being made in restoring the bay .

the chesapeake bay watershed agreement contains milestones for achieving its goals , and progress toward meeting those goals by 2025 is evaluated periodically .

even with these evaluations , it is unclear whether progress is being made toward the stated goals .

since the cbp's inception , stakeholders have considered whether appropriate progress is being made to restore the chesapeake bay and its resources .

several chesapeake bay evaluations are conducted on an ongoing basis to measure the progress of bay restoration over time , each with unique methodologies .

chesapeake bay restoration progress results differ among evaluations .

the differences may be due to different priorities , methodologies , data sets , metrics , and timescales of interest .

the cbp has periodically assessed progress in restoring the bay since the 1983 chesapeake bay watershed agreement .

goals set in the bay agreements have been largely missed , such as in the 2000 chesapeake bay agreement , which aspired to restore the bay to certain conditions by 2010 .

the 2014 chesapeake bay watershed agreement set 2025 as its target year to reach certain goals ( and underlying outcomes ) and tracks biennial progress toward the goals .

for 2016-2017 , cbp reports that progress was made in five goals , and five goals showed no progress / regress .

for example , progress was made toward the sustainable fisheries goal due to reported increases in the blue crab and oyster populations .

in july 2018 , the epa released its midpoint assessment of progress in implementing practices to reach a 60% reduction of nutrients and sediment by 2017 , as set in the tmdl .

according to the epa , jurisdictions have implemented practices to achieve the phosphorus and sediment reductions , but did not reach the nitrogen reduction .

in addition to federal reporting , several ngos have evaluated restoration progress over time .

non - federal evaluations of restoration progress generally have been critical of the level of progress .

the 2016 chesapeake bay foundation ( cbf ) state of the bay report assigned the chesapeake bay a rating of 34 out of 100 , a slight increase from the 2014 rating of 32 .

since 1998 , cbf has rated the bay between 27 and 34 ; cbf would consider the bay restored at a rating of 70 .

similar chesapeake bay conditions were reported by an evaluation completed by the university of maryland center for environmental science ( umces ) .

according to umces , in 2017 decreased nutrient levels were "significantly improving" the bay , but poor to moderate water clarity and nitrogen , among other indicators , persisted .

umces rated the bay at a c , or 54% overall ; since 1986 , umces has rated the bay between 36% and 55% .

stakeholders have a range of opinions on whether bay restoration is progressing .

some stakeholders may contend that bay conditions are improving at an acceptable rate for the resources being spent on restoration .

others argue that restoration efforts are progressing even though restoration ratings remain stable or show minor improvements .

these stakeholders note that a stable ecosystem is progress since there has been no further deterioration of conditions despite population growth , increasing impermeable surfaces , and growing nutrient loads in the watershed .

others may contend that although the bay is improving , it could be doing so at a faster pace .

finally , some stakeholders may argue that it may not be possible to restore the bay to a pristine or semi - pristine level due to the persistence of original problems such as excess nutrients and habitat loss , among others .

these stakeholders may argue for lower expectations to measure restoration success or concede that a man - made ecosystem should be the goal of restoration .

since 1983 , the progress of the bay's resources and restoration efforts has received oversight from both the public and different levels of government .

congress , gao , and the epa office of inspector general ( oig ) have addressed the cbp's reporting of bay health and restoration progress .

gao recommended the establishment of an independent evaluator or peer review in 2005 , again in 2008 , with the epa oig echoing these concerns in 2008 as well .

president obama's 2009 executive order 13508 called for a consistent , periodic evaluation in coordination with the flc .

in response , some cbp stakeholders argued for the creation of an outside review group , an independent entity within the cbp with an enforcement role , or an internal audit committee .

some noted that the use of a one - time national academy of science evaluation in 2011 , while helpful to evaluate the short - term scientific and technical efforts of restoration , could not hold the cbp accountable in the long term .

others argued that the cbp's adoption of an adaptive management framework , which allows internal program evaluations , removed the need for external evaluation .

in 2014 , congress directed epa to appoint an independent evaluator to report its findings and recommendations to congress on a biannual basis ( chesapeake bay accountability and recovery act ; cbara ; p.l .

113-273 ) .

under cbara , epa must appoint an independent evaluator from a list of nominees provided by the cbp executive council .

in june 2018 , cbp stated that the implementation of an independent evaluator was "on hold pending direction from the [principle staff committee]. .

appendix a .

chronology appendix b. chesapeake bay agreement over time appendix c. selected federal authorities related to chesapeake bay restoratio .

