the indian health service ( ihs ) within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) is the lead federal agency charged with improving the health of american indians and alaska natives .

ihs provides health care for approximately 2.2 million eligible american indians / alaska natives through a system of programs and facilities located on or near indian reservations , and through contractors in certain urban areas .

ihs provides services to members of 573 federally recognized tribes .

it provides services either directly or through facilities and programs operated by indian tribes or tribal organizations through self - determination contracts and self - governance compacts authorized in the indian self - determination and education assistance act ( isdeaa ) .

the snyder act of 1921 provides general statutory authority for ihs .

in addition , specific ihs programs are authorized by two acts: the indian sanitation facilities act of 1959 and the indian health care improvement act ( ihcia ) .

the indian sanitation facilities act authorizes the ihs to construct sanitation facilities for indian communities and homes .

ihcia authorizes programs such as urban health , health professions recruitment , and substance abuse and mental health treatment , and permits ihs to receive reimbursements from medicare , medicaid , the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) , the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , and third - party insurers .

finally , the public health service act provides funds for the special diabetes program for indians grants administered by ihs .

the ihs has three major sources of funding , described here in order of magnitude: ( 1 ) discretionary appropriations , ( 2 ) collections , and ( 3 ) mandatory appropriations .

unlike most agencies within hhs , which receive their appropriations through the labor , health and human services , and education appropriations act , the ihs receives its discretionary appropriations through the interior / environment appropriations act .

ihs's discretionary appropriations are divided into three accounts: ( 1 ) indian health services , ( 2 ) contract support costs , and ( 3 ) indian health facilities .

as a second source of funding , ihs collects and expends funds received as payment for health services provided .

ihs has the authority to receive payments from other federal programs such as medicaid , medicare , chip , and the department of veterans affairs .

ihs also receives payments from state programs ( such as workers compensation ) and from private insurance .

ihs , under its ihcia collection authority , is able to retain these payments to increase services available to its beneficiaries .

in addition to these collections , ihs collects rent from facilities it owns .

the third and smallest source of ihs funding is a mandatory appropriation of $150 million annually to support the special diabetes program for indians .

this mandatory funding was extended through fy2019 in the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( bba 2018 , p.l .

115-123 ) .

the president's budget request proposes to shift the fy2019 appropriation to discretionary funding .

 table 1 presents ihs's funding from fy2014 through the proposed president's fy2019 budget submission .

the table generally shows increases in both appropriated funds and funds collected by ihs through fy2018 .

the table presents ihs's three budget accounts — indian health services , contract support costs , and indian health facilities — and the funds collected and allocated to programs under these accounts .

collections and proposed and actual mandatory funding are subtracted from program - level funding to show the agency's discretionary budget authority .

although appropriations for ihs have increased over time , the fy2018 appropriation represents a larger increase than in prior years .

in particular , the fy2018 appropriation included increases for a number of programs funded under the indian health facilities account , which includes maintenance and improvement and construction of new facilities .

in addition , the fy2018 appropriation increased funding for mental health and alcohol and substance abuse services , provided new funding for the indian health care improvement fund , and included language to require ihs to conduct an analysis of ihs locations and services relative to the ihs user population .

the fy2019 president's request represents a decrease from fy2018 levels for a number of ihs programs and activities .

however , final fy2018 appropriations had not been enacted during the period in which the fy2019 president's request was being formulated .

while the total request for ihs represents a decrease from fy2018-enacted levels , it represents an increase from fy2017-enacted levels and the fy2018 annualized continuing resolution levels that were in place at the time the fy2018 request levels were being determined .

ihs facilities collect payments from third - party payors for services provided to ihs beneficiaries who are also enrolled in other programs .

these collections are an important source of ihs's clinical services ( see table 1 ) .

medicaid is the largest source of ihs's collections — accounting for approximately 68% of all third - party collections in fy2017 , the most recent year of final data available — followed by medicare ( 21% in fy2017 ) and private insurance ( 9% in fy2017 ) .

beginning in fy2014 , ihs began receiving payments from the va for services provided to ihs beneficiaries who were also enrolled in the va ( these payments were 2% of all of ihs's third - party collections in fy2017 ) .

