the u.s .

fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , an agency within the department of the interior ( doi ) , is the principal federal agency tasked with the conservation , protection , and restoration of fish and wildlife resources across the united states and insular areas .

the service's history dates to 1871 , when the office of the commission of fish and fisheries — a predecessor to fws — was established .

fws manages both regional and national programs , which are carried out by fws staff at headquarters , regional offices , and field offices .

fws functions include administering the national wildlife refuge system , managing migratory bird species , protecting endangered and threatened species , and restoring fish species and aquatic habitats , as well as enforcing fish , wildlife , and conservation laws and conducting international conservation efforts .

fws also is responsible for the disbursement of fish and wildlife conservation and restoration funds to states , territories , and tribal governments .

this report summarizes the history , organizational structure , and selected functions of fws and provides an overview of the agency's appropriations structure .

the report describes the actions congress has taken to shape the structure and functions of fws over time and notes selected issues of interest to congress .

the origins of fws date back to the formation of two agencies in the late 1800s .

in 1871 , the first of fws's predecessor agencies , the office of the commission of fish and fisheries ( an independent agency ) , was established .

in 1885 , the second agency that later would become part of fws , the section of economic ornithology , was formed within the department of agriculture ( usda ) .

after several administrative and legislative reorganizations to these agencies , fws took its current form in doi in the second half of the 20 th century .

 ( see figure 1 for a timeline of selected events that helped to structure the agency. ) .

additional details on the administrative and congressional actions that have shaped the agency are provided below .

fws is composed of a three - tier structure , including national , regional , and field offices spread across the united states and insular areas .

in 2017 , fws employed approximately 9,000 people , though the number of employees varied throughout the year .

the national level is primarily responsible for policy formulation and budget allocation , and the regional and field offices are responsible for implementing and enforcing policy .

in addition , fws administers 566 national wildlife refuges and 70 national fish hatcheries , as well as national monuments ( four within the national wildlife refuge system and three under other authorities ) , other fisheries offices , and field stations .

in total , fws administers 856 million acres of lands , submerged lands , and waters , under primary or secondary jurisdiction , of which 146 million acres are included in national wildlife refuges and 705 million acres are in mostly marine national monuments .

at the national level , which has its headquarters in the washington , dc , metropolitan area , fws is administered by the director of fws , who is supervised by the assistant secretary for fish and wildlife within the doi .

there are 13 fws programs , such as the national wildlife refuge system or law enforcement , which are overseen by 11 assistant directors and 2 chiefs ( see figure 2 ) .

most of the assistant directors and chiefs in turn supervise deputies and one or more divisions within their programs .

selected assistant director and chief positions were established in statute .

for example , the position of assistant director for wildlife and sport fish restoration was established by the fish and wildlife programs improvement and national wildlife refuge system centennial act of 2000 .

fws's mission is to "work with others to conserve , protect and enhance fish , wildlife and plants and their habitats for the continuing benefit of the american people. .

to accomplish this mission , fws performs numerous administrative and enforcement activities , which are reflected in the agency's programmatic structure .

these activities include but are not limited to the following: operation of the national wildlife refuge system ; restoration of fisheries and fish habitats ; protection of threatened and endangered species ; management of migratory birds ; assistance in international conservation efforts ; enforcement of federal wildlife laws ; and disbursement of funds to states and territories for wildlife and sport fish restoration and for hunting and fishing safety and education .

in addition to activities entirely carried out by fws , cooperation , coordination , and partnerships are integral to fws activities .

the service routinely partners with other federal , state , local , tribal , and private partners to carry out activities .

congress has codified several of fws's programs in statutes , which provide guidance to the agency .

in cases where programs are not directly established in statute , authority is derived from other fws enabling legislation , such as the fish and wildlife act of 1956 or the national wildlife refuge system administration act of 1966 .

the following sections provide an overview of selected fws programs and certain statutes , treaties , and agreements relevant to each program .

 ( see figure 4 for a timeline of selected statutes related to fws. ) .

although many of fws's primary responsibilities are described , not all of the service's programmatic responsibilities are discussed herein .

selected issues that may be of interest to congress are noted in each section .

fws is funded through both discretionary and mandatory appropriations , which are provided on an annual basis .

discretionary funding is used to support many of the agency's essential functions , and mandatory funding supports selected activities specified in previously enacted statutes , including a significant portion of fws's financial assistance activities .

both discretionary and mandatory appropriations have fluctuated over time ( figure 6 ) .

from fy2009 through fy2018 , fws discretionary appropriations totaled $1.5 billion annually , on average ; over the same period , mandatory appropriations amounted to $1.2 billion annually , on average .

whereas discretionary appropriations have for the most part remained flat over the past 10 years , mandatory appropriations for fws have generally increased .

congress generally funds fws in annual appropriations laws for the department of the interior , environment , and related agencies .

in some years , funding for doi agencies , including fws , is provided through either continuing resolutions or omnibus / consolidated appropriations acts .

discretionary appropriations for fws are provided to carry out many of the essential functions related to the agency's mission , namely the conservation ; protection ; and enhancement of fish , wildlife , and plants and their habitats .

this aim is accomplished through various activities: resource management , construction projects , land acquisition , international conservation , and payments and grants to states and other parties .

during the appropriations process , congress faces several perennial issues , including the overall level of discretionary funding , its distribution across agency programs , and consideration of an administration's proposals to eliminate or change levels of funding for some functions .

congress also routinely considers fws policy issues , such as those discussed in the " u.s .

fish and wildlife service programs " section above .

from fy2009 through fy2018 , fws discretionary funding has averaged $1.5 billion , allocated across nine appropriations accounts ( figure 7 ) .

during this time period , the majority of fws discretionary funding ( 81.67% ) has been provided to the resource management account , which provides funding for several activities , including ecological services , which includes activities related to fws's role in esa implementation ; habitat conservation ; national wildlife refuge system ; conservation and law enforcement ; fish and aquatic conservation ; cooperative landscape conservation ; science support ; and general operations .

the remaining 18.33% has been allocated across eight appropriations accounts , each receiving between 0.27% and 4.35% of the total appropriation , on average ( figure 7 ) .

the remaining accounts include construction ( 1.84% ) ; land acquisition ( 3.91% ) ; cooperative endangered species conservation fund ( 3.84% ) ; national wildlife refuge fund ( 0.91% ) ; north american wetlands conservation fund ( 2.53% ) ; neotropical migratory bird conservation fund ( 0.27% ) ; multinational species conservation fund ( 0.68% ) ; and state and tribal wildlife grants ( 4.35% ) .

the construction account funds engineering design and construction throughout fws facilities and infrastructure through three activities: line item construction projects , bridge and dam safety programs , and nationwide engineering services .

funding for the land acquisition account generally is derived from the land and water conservation fund and is used to acquire land for recreation and conservation purposes .

the remaining six accounts fund conservation activities and payments to states and tribes for conservation and in - lieu - of tax reasons .

these programs support grant , financial , and technical assistance programs to states , international partners , tribes , and other stakeholders .

from fy2009 through fy2018 , fws received $1.2 billion on average , annually , in mandatory ( also called permanent ) appropriations .

mandatory appropriations have ranged from 39% ( fy2012 ) to 50% ( fy2015 ) of the total fws budget ( figure 6 ) in recent years .

fws mandatory appropriations fund land acquisition for migratory bird habitat conservation , financial assistance to the states and territories for fish and wildlife conservation and related activities , and other purposes .

from fy2009 through fy2018 , each account received between 0.36% and 50.51% of total mandatory appropriations , on average ( figure 8 ) .

fws mandatory appropriations are spread across several accounts: federal aid in wildlife restoration ( 50.51% ) ; federal aid in sport fish restoration ( 36.57% ) ; cooperative endangered species conservation fund ( 5.30% ) ; migratory bird conservation ( 5.09% ) ; north american wetlands conservation fund ( 0.73% ) ; national wildlife refuge fund ( 0.64% ) ; federal lands recreational enhancement act funds ( 0.44% ) ; contributed funds ( 0.37% ) ; and other miscellaneous permanent appropriations ( 0.36% ) .

the majority of fws mandatory appropriations are included in two accounts , the federal aid in wildlife restoration ( also known as the pittman - robertson ) account and the federal aid in sport fish restoration ( also known as dingell - johnson ) account ( for more information on these activities , see " wildlife and sport fish restoration " section , above ) .

both of these accounts are funded through excise taxes on various sporting goods related to hunting and fishing .

receipts for these taxes are collected annually and deposited into trust funds for each program .

disbursements from the funds are then allocated to states and territories ( and washington , dc , in the case of dingell - johnson ) in the year following their collection .

funding for the migratory bird conservation account is derived from the sale of federal duck stamps pursuant to the migratory bird hunting and conservation stamp act , commonly known as the duck stamp act ( see " migratory birds " section , above ) and an import duty on arms and ammunition implemented by the emergency wetlands resource act of 1986 .

funds in the migratory bird conservation fund support the acquisition of interests , either through title or easement , of wetlands and upland habitat for the conservation of migratory birds .

the cooperative endangered species conservation fund is supported through both discretionary and mandatory appropriations .

the fund , established by section 6 of esa , supports grants for states and territories to conduct species and habitat conservation activities on nonfederal lands .

funding for the cooperative endangered species conservation fund is derived from 5% of the total amounts deposited into the pittman - robertson and dingell - johnson accounts .

in addition , any balance in excess of $500,000 dollars derived from amounts collected on fines , penalties , or property forfeiture for esa and lacey act violations is to be transferred to the cooperative endangered species conservation fund .

mandatory appropriations for the north american wetlands conservation fund are derived from multiple sources , including interest on the pittman - robertson wildlife restoration account and fines related to violations of the migratory bird conservation treaty act .

in addition , the coastal wetlands planning , protection and restoration act provides funding from the dingell - johnson sport fish restoration account to complete nawca - authorized projects in coastal states .

nawca mandatory funds supplement nawca discretionary funds to support cooperative efforts to protect , enhance , and restore habitat for wetland species .

these funds support domestic programs and conservation efforts in canada and mexico ( see " migratory birds " section , above ) .

from fy2009 through fy2018 , fws has received supplemental appropriations outside the annual discretionary and mandatory appropriations cycle on three occasions: in 2009 , 2013 , and 2018 ( see table 1 ) .

each of these three acts is discussed in more detail below .

on february 17 , 2009 , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 was enacted .

through the act , fws received an additional $280 million divided between the resource management and construction appropriations accounts .

the resource management account received $165 million for "deferred maintenance , construction , and capital improvements on national wildlife refuges and national fish hatcheries and for high priority habitat restoration projects. .

the construction account received $115 million for "construction , reconstruction , and repair of roads , bridges , property , and facilities and for energy efficient retrofits of existing facilities. .

funding from the act was used to facilitate capital improvements , deferred maintenance , habitat restoration , visitor center construction , facility repair , and energy efficiency projects .

the service prioritized projects that could be completed in the shortest amount of time , generate the most jobs , and create lasting value for the american people .

in response to damages resulting from hurricane sandy , the disaster relief appropriations act of 2013 was enacted on january 29 , 2013 .

through this act , the fws's construction account received $68.2 million for "necessary expenses related to the consequences of hurricane sandy. .

in addition to funds appropriated directly to fws , doi's office of the secretary was appropriated $360 million for departmental operations .

in total , including both directly appropriated funds and funds provided through the doi appropriation , fws received $167 million for hurricane sandy recovery .

this funding supported projects such as direct recovery actions ( eg , beach and shoreline recovery and refuge and hatchery rebuilding ) and resilience and preparedness activities ( eg , dam removal , shoreline modification , and modernization of the coastal barrier resource system maps ) .

congress included supplemental funding for fws for damages associated with hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria under division b of the bipartisan budget act of 2018 .

pursuant to the act , $210.6 million was appropriated to the fws construction account for "necessary expenses related" to the hurricanes .

