on october 12 , 2017 , president trump issued executive order ( e.o. ) .

13813 , entitled "promoting healthcare choice and competition across the united states. .

e.o .

13813 generally aims "to facilitate the purchase of insurance across state lines and the development and operation of a healthcare system that provides high - quality care at affordable prices for the american people. .

the order addresses three unrelated , private - sector health coverage options: association health plans ( ahps ) ; short - term , limited - duration insurance ( stldi ) ; and health reimbursement arrangements ( hras ) .

this report answers frequently asked questions ( faqs ) about e.o .

13813 and subsequent rulemaking and provides background information about ahps , stldi , and hras .

given that these health coverage options operate in distinct parts of the private market and have different regulatory histories , the background faqs include discussion of policy issues uniquely relevant to each option .

e.o .

13813 directs specified agencies to "consider proposing regulations or revising guidance , consistent with the law" to expand access to ahps , increase availability of stldi , and expand the availability and permitted use of hras .

see table 1 for information about which agencies were given directives , what was stated in those directives , when agencies were directed to respond , and the status of their activities .

the environment in which e.o .

13813was announced is dynamic .

like other viable industries , the private health insurance market evolves as stakeholders make decisions in response to or anticipation of conditions outside of their immediate control ( such as economic conditions ) or decisions made by other stakeholders .

for instance , regulators may affect the regulatory environment through legislation .

depending on the scope of the legislative changes , insurers may change their behavior in terms of the geographic areas in which they operate , the types of insurance products they sell , how much they charge in premiums , etc .

in turn , consumers , employers , and other purchasers of insurance may adjust their behavior in response to both legislative and market changes .

in more recent years , the health insurance market has undergone significant change due to the effects of the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) , particularly in the individual and small - group segments of that market .

while the total number of persons with health coverage in those market segments has increased overall , compared to enrollment prior to aca enactment , the costs of coverage have continued to increase .

there are legislative and other proposals that take different approaches to address ongoing issues .

e.o .

13813 appears to primarily target concerns about health insurance costs for consumers and access to less - regulated coverage options in the individual and small - group markets .

understanding the sources of private health insurance coverage and how such coverage is regulated at the federal level may be useful in providing the context in which federal agencies may respond to e.o .

13813's directives ( see text box ) .

since applicability of federal requirements is contingent on the characteristics of a given health plan , e.o .

13813's directives — while all seeking to expand availability of a given health option — target different aspects of private health coverage .

for instance , the order's ahp directive addresses definitions in the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ) that align with the executive order's intention of "allowing [small businesses] to group together to self - insure or purchase large group health insurance. .

in contrast , stldi is private insurance that is designed for individuals .

unlike ahps or stldi , through which individuals receive coverage , an hra is an account authorized under the tax code that pays for or reimburses employees' medical expenses .

given the substantive differences among these three health options , applicable policy issues , current federal requirements , and possible changes identified under the executive order differ .

moreover , the scope of applicable regulations and guidance varies across the three coverage options , contributing to the different changes identified in the executive order ( and related proposed rules ) .

although the focus of this report is e.o .

13813 and federal regulation of private health insurance coverage , it should be noted that states are the primary regulators of insurance and state laws apply to most types of private coverage .

in some cases , however , state laws do not apply , as with self - insured arrangements ( with exceptions ) and tax - advantaged health accounts ( such as hras ) that are authorized under the federal tax code .

furthermore , in some cases state laws may apply where federal requirements do not ; for example , states may apply requirements to limited - benefits coverage , even though the federal government exempts such coverage from federal requirements .

hras are employer - established arrangements that pay or reimburse employees for substantiated medical care expenses up to a maximum dollar amount .

hras are one type of tax - advantaged health care account .

hras are similar to , but not the same as , other types of tax - advantaged health care accounts , such as flexible spending accounts and health savings accounts .

hras are funded solely by employers ; employees cannot contribute to hras directly or through salary - reduction agreements .

payments and reimbursements from an hra for an employee's ( and the employee's spouse and dependents ) substantiated medical care expenses are excluded from the employee's income and employment taxes .

if a distribution is , or can be , made for the payment or reimbursement of anything other than a medical care expense , all distributions from the hra in that tax year are included in income ( in other words , the hra loses its tax - advantaged status ) .

employers are not limited in the amount they may contribute to an employee's hra , and employers need not actually fund hras until employees draw on them ; the accounts may be simply notional .

in addition , reimbursements can be limited to amounts previously contributed .

unused balances may be carried over indefinitely , though employers may limit the aggregate carryovers .

the carryovers must be used for medical care expenses .

employers may set up hras in such a way that employees who change jobs or retire may take the funds in their hra with them , but employers are not required to do so .

employers may not offer hras through cafeteria plans .

in general , employers may offer to employees only hras that are integrated with another group health plan ( that is not an hra ) .

an hra is integrated with a non - hra group health plan if it meets specified requirements , including that the employer offering the hra also offers a non - hra group health plan and each employee provided an hra is enrolled in a non - hra group health plan .

hras may not be integrated with health insurance coverage that is not a group health plan , such as a plan offered in the individual market .

 ( this integration requirement is a fairly recent development ; for more details , see " how has federal regulation of hras and qsehras changed in recent years ? " ) .

employers may provide hras to current and former employees , including retirees ( regardless of the employee's or retiree's medicare eligibility and enrollment ) .

the integration requirement does not apply to hras that cover fewer than two current employees .

self - employed individuals are not eligible for hras .

qsehras are similar to hras in that they also are employer - established arrangements that pay or reimburse employees for substantiated medical care expenses ; however , qsehras and hras differ in a number of ways .

qsehras are not subject to the hra integration requirement .

in fact , an employer that provides a qsehra is prohibited from offering a group health plan to its employees .

however , an employee is eligible for tax - advantaged distributions from a qsehra only if the employee has minimum essential coverage .

these characteristics encourage employees who are provided a qsehra to obtain health insurance coverage outside of their employment ( eg , a health plan offered in the individual market ) .

although any employer may offer an hra , only small employers may offer qsehras .

in this case , a small employer is one with fewer than 50 full - time - equivalent employees .

payments and reimbursements from a qsehra cannot exceed specified dollar amounts .

for 2018 , those dollar amounts are $5,050 per year for self - only coverage or $10,250 per year for coverage that includes family members .

employers may provide qsehras only to current employees ( i.e. , qsehras are not available to former employees , such as retirees ) .

in general , tax - advantaged health accounts , such as hras and qsehras , are intended to help cover an account holder's ( and spouse's and any dependents' ) unreimbursed medical care expenses ( eg , expenses not covered by insurance ) .

both hras and qsehras are employer - established accounts ; neither is available to individuals unless it is offered by an individual's employer or the individual is a spouse or dependent of an individual who has an hra or qsehra .

the respective rules governing hras and qsehras provide that each account supplements health insurance coverage .

the hra integration rule provides that an individual must have employer - sponsored coverage in order to have an hra .

the rules governing qsehras provide that an individual must have some type of minimum essential coverage in order to have a qsehra .

both hras and qsehras are regulated under the internal revenue code ( irc ) and guidance from the internal revenue service ( irs ) .

the tax status of hras is governed by irc section 105 , which allows health plan benefits used for medical care to be exempt from employees' income taxes , and irc section 106 , which applies the same tax advantage to employer contributions to health plans .

however , hras are not explicitly authorized by legislation and are not named in the irc .

the irs first affirmed that hras could be a tax - advantaged way to pay for unreimbursed medical expenses in guidance issued in 2002 , so long as they meet certain criteria .

qsehras were established in legislation , are defined in the tax code at irc section 9831 ( d ) , and their tax status is governed by irc sections 105 and 106 .

the irs issued substantive guidance on the requirements that apply to qsehras on october 17 , 2017 .

possibly the most salient change to federal rules governing hras has to do with the establishment of the integration requirement described in " what are health reimbursement arrangements ? .

prior to the establishment of the integration requirement , employers were allowed to offer stand - alone hras .

that is , an employer could offer an hra without having to offer a group health plan and without ensuring that employees had coverage under a group health plan .

because hra funds can be used to pay premiums , employees could use stand - alone hras to purchase health insurance coverage ( which was not offered by their employers ) , such as coverage offered in the individual market .

the integration requirement effectively prohibits employers from offering stand - alone hras .

the integration requirement was established in guidance issued jointly by the departments of hhs , labor , and the treasury in september 2013 .

the guidance determined that , in general , an hra must be integrated with another group health plan ( that is not an hra ) to comply with two requirements that apply to group health plans .

the two requirements were established under the aca and are described below .

prohibition on a nnual l imits : group health plans are prohibited from having dollar limits on the amount the plan will spend for covered health benefits during a plan year .

preventive s ervices r equirement : group health plans must provide coverage for certain preventive health services without imposing cost sharing .

employers that offer group health plans that do not comply with one or both of these requirements — including an hra that is not integrated with a non - hra group health plan — could be subject to an excise tax of $100 per day per employee covered under the noncompliant arrangement .

the guidance ( and subsequent follow - up guidance ) specifically addresses hras that pay or reimburse employees for health insurance coverage purchased in the individual market .

in general , the guidance provides that an hra that can be used for such purposes may not be integrated with a non - hra group health plan and therefore is not in compliance with the prohibition on annual limits and the preventive service requirement .

the guidance issued in september 2013 was effective for plan years beginning january 1 , 2014 , for large employers , those with 50 more full - time - equivalent employees .

small employers , those with fewer than 50 full - time - equivalent employees , had to comply with the requirements for plan years beginning after june 30 , 2015 .

qsehras were established under the 21 st century cures act ( p.l .

114-255 ) in response to the hra integration requirement .

eligible employers were allowed to provide qsehras beginning in 2017 ; the irs issued substantive guidance on qsehras on october 17 , 2017 .

as of the date of this report , the secretaries of the treasury , labor , and hhs have not proposed changes to hras .

however , guidance issued by the irs on october 17 , 2017 , regarding requirements that apply to qsehras included the following statement .

in addition , executive order 13813 ( 82 fed .

reg .

48385 , oct. 17 , 2017 ) , directed the secretaries of the treasury , labor , and health and human services to consider revising guidance , to the extent permitted by law and supported by sound policy , to increase the usability of health reimbursement arrangements ( hras ) , expand employers' ability to offer hras to their employees , and to allow hras to be used in conjunction with non - group coverage .

the guidance provided in this notice addresses each of those objectives .

the treasury department ( treasury ) and the internal revenue service ( irs ) anticipate that the departments will issue additional guidance in the future in response to executive order 13813 .

