the federal government requires the u.s. fleet of heavy - duty engines and vehicles — including commercial long - haul tractor - trailers — to meet various requirements , including those for safety , fuel economy , and air pollution emissions .

the first federal emissions standards for heavy - duty engines and vehicles were introduced in 1974 and were gradually tightened in a number of steps .

on january 18 , 2001 , the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) set current emission standards for criteria air pollutants and their precursors , including nitrogen oxide ( no x ) and particulate matter ( pm ) .

further , on october 25 , 2016 , epa and the national highway traffic safety administration ( nhtsa ) jointly published the second ( current ) phase of greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions and fuel efficiency standards for medium - and heavy - duty engines and vehicles ( phase 2 ) .

the phase 2 requirements set emission standards for commercial long - haul tractor - trailers , vocational vehicles , and heavy - duty pickup trucks and vans , and they phase in between model year ( my ) 2018 and my 2027 .

the rule expands on the phase 1 standards ( promulgated on september 15 , 2011 , for mys 2014 through 2018 ) and introduces first - ever controls on trailers ( i.e. , the part of the vehicle pulled by the tractor ) and glider kits and vehicles ( i.e. , a new chassis combined with a remanufactured engine ) .

this report examines epa's and selected other federal agencies' requirements on glider kits and glider vehicles and outlines the congressional response .

a glider kit is a tractor chassis with a frame , front axle , interior and exterior cab , and brakes ( see figure 1 ) .

it becomes a glider vehicle when an engine , transmission , and rear axle are added .

engines are often salvaged from earlier model year vehicles , remanufactured , and installed in glider kits .

the final manufacturer of the glider vehicle ( i.e. , the entity that assembles the parts ) is typically a different entity than the original manufacturer of the glider kit .

glider kits and glider vehicles are produced arguably for purposes such as allowing the reuse of relatively new powertrains from damaged vehicles .

four original equipment manufacturers ( oems ) currently produce glider kits in the united states: peterbilt , kenworth , freightliner , and western star .

numerous companies of varying sizes unassociated with the oems serve as the final manufacturers or assemblers of glider vehicles .

these companies specialize in installing remanufactured main components from donor trucks ( commonly detroit , cummins , and caterpillar engine options ) into new glider kits purchased from the oems .

representatives of the glider assembler industry assert that the benefit of a glider vehicle over a new truck is a more reliable and fuel efficient vehicle that requires less maintenance , yields less downtime , and yet offers a range of currently available safety features and amenities .

further , they report that a glider vehicle is approximately 25% less expensive than a new truck at purchase , which makes it popular with small businesses and owner - operators .

the phase 2 standards require , among other provisions , that all glider vehicles be covered by both vehicle and engine certificates .

the vehicle certificate requires compliance with the ghg vehicle standards of 40 c.f.r .

part 1037 .

the engine certificate requires compliance with the ghg engine standards of 40 c.f.r .

part 1036 , plus the criteria pollutant ( i.e. , no x and pm ) standards of 40 c.f.r .

part 86 .

under the phase 2 rule , used or rebuilt engines may be installed in glider vehicles , provided that they meet all standards applicable to the year in which the assembly of the glider vehicle is completed , or they meet all standards applicable to the year in which the engine was originally manufactured and also meet one of the following criteria: the engine is still within its original useful life in terms of both miles and years , the engine has less than 100,000 miles of engine operation , or the engine is less than three years old .

thus , the standards allow for installation of relatively newer engines in glider kits for purposes epa deemed consistent with their original intended use — the salvaging of relatively new powertrains from vehicle chassis that have been damaged or have otherwise failed prematurely .

the phase 2 rule has a transitional program for glider manufacturers .

for calendar year 2017 , each manufacturer's combined production of glider kits and glider vehicles is capped at the manufacturer's highest annual production of glider kits and glider vehicles for any year from 2010 to 2014 .

any glider kits or glider vehicles produced beyond this allowance are subject to all requirements applicable to new engines and new vehicles for my 2017 .

effective january 1 , 2018 , the permissible number of glider vehicles that may be produced without meeting the phase 2 long - term requirements is limited as follows: small businesses may produce a limited number of glider vehicles without meeting the long - term engine or vehicle requirements ( or larger vehicle manufacturers may provide glider kits to these small businesses without the assembled vehicles meeting the long - term vehicle requirements ) capped at the small vehicle manufacturer's highest annual production volume in 2010 through 2014 or 300 , whichever is less .

the 2018 allowances mostly continue after 2020 , but effective january 1 , 2021 , all glider vehicles are required to meet the phase 2 ghg vehicle standards .

following promulgation of the phase 2 rule , epa received from representatives of the glider vehicle assembler industry a joint petition requesting that the agency reconsider the application of the phase 2 rule to glider vehicles , glider engines , and glider kits .

the petitioners made three principal arguments .

first , they argued that epa is not authorized by caa section 202 ( a ) ( 1 ) to regulate glider kits , glider vehicles , or glider engines .

second , they contended that in the phase 2 rule epa "relied upon unsupported assumptions to arrive at the conclusion that immediate regulation of glider vehicles was warranted and necessary. .

third , they asserted that reconsideration was warranted under executive order 13783 of march 28 , 2017 , "promoting energy independence and economic growth. .

in addition , the petitioners took particular issue with what they characterized as epa's assumption that the no x and pm emissions of glider vehicles would be increased significantly .

they highlighted the findings of a tennessee tech university ( ttu ) study that analyzed no x , pm , and carbon monoxide emissions from both remanufactured and oem engines .

the results of the study show that "remanufactured engines from model years between 2002 and 2007 performed roughly on par with oem 'certified' engines" and "in some instances even out - performed the oem engines. .

since the proposal , ttu leaders and other stakeholders have raised questions about the accuracy of the ttu study , the role engineering experts at the university played in it , and the relationship between specific glider kit manufacturers and the university .

ttu has since asked epa to "withhold any use or reference to said study pending the conclusion of [an] internal investigation. .

finally , the petitioners argued that the phase 2 rule had failed to consider the significant environmental benefits that glider vehicles create .

they noted that glider vehicle ghg emissions are less than those of oem vehicles due to glider vehicles' greater fuel efficiency and that the carbon footprint of glider vehicles is further reduced by the savings created by recycling materials .

on november 16 , 2017 , epa ( under administrator scott pruitt ) proposed a repeal of the emission standards and other requirements on heavy - duty glider vehicles , glider engines , and glider kits based on a proposed interpretation of the caa .

glider kits and glider vehicles have presented challenges to the interpretation and enforcement of other federal requirements .

some notable examples include safety standards and tax provisions .

members of congress remain divided on epa's glider vehicle regulations .

recent congressional actions regarding glider kits and vehicles include proposed legislation and agency oversight requests by committees , groups of lawmakers , and individual member offices .

examples include representative diane black sponsored two amendments in the 114 th congress to department of the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bills ( h.amdt .

1313 and h.amdt .

630 ) to prohibit epa from using funds to implement , administer , or enforce the agency's phase 2 fuel efficiency and emissions standards or any other rule with respect to glider kits and glider vehicles .

both amendments were agreed to by voice votes , but neither spending bill was enacted .

in a march 12 , 2018 , letter to epa administrator scott pruitt , senators tom carper and tom udall — ranking members to the senate environment and public works committee and the senate appropriations committee , respectively — asked the agency to provide documentation on the proposed repeal and to "immediately announce plans to withdraw the proposal. .

in march 2018 , 14 republican members of congress — four senators and 10 representatives — sent letters to epa administrator scott pruitt asking the agency to discontinue efforts to repeal the emissions standards for glider vehicles because a repeal would undermine manufacturing industries in their home states .

in a may 16 , 2018 , letter to dot secretary elaine chao , representative bill posey asked dot to defer to epa's proposed repeal .

in its response , dot stated that it "does not currently impose fuel efficiency requirements on glider kits or glider vehicles" and did not plan to do so .

at issue in epa's phase 2 standards for glider kits and glider vehicles — and in their proposed repeal — are requirements affecting criteria pollutants , not fuel efficiency .

in a may 24 , 2018 , letter to omb , 24 members of congress from both the house and the senate "who represent manufacturers and / or users of glider kits" urged omb to waive the requirement for a regulatory impact analysis for the proposed repeal .

in a june 21 , 2018 , letter , subcommittee chairman greg gianforte on the house committee on oversight and government reform asked epa's office of the inspector general ( oig ) to investigate the november 20 , 2017 , nvfel study .

the letter cites documents that show communications between epa scientists and stakeholders in the trucking industry that compete with the glider vehicle assembler industry that may have impacted the "objectivity and legitimacy" of the study .

on september 4 , 2018 , epa's oig announced plans to audit the agency's "selection , acquisition and testing of glider vehicles at the epa's national vehicle and fuel emissions laboratory , as well as the epa's planning for this testing. .

in a july 12 , 2018 , letter to epa acting administrator andrew wheeler , chairman lamar smith and other members of the house committee on science , space , and technology asked epa officials for documents pertaining to , and a briefing on , the nvfel study , stating concerns similar to those listed in chairman gianforte's letter .

on august 21 , 2018 , epa assistant administrator william wehrum responded to chairman smith stating that "relevant staff … have assured me that they designed the test program , performed the testing , and wrote the test report — all independent of any outside stakeholder input. .

the response stated that epa would work with the committee to schedule a briefing on the nvfel glider vehicle testing .

in an august 29 , 2018 , follow - up letter to acting administrator wheeler , chairman smith requested additional documents and information in order "to appropriately inform the committee on the rationale to initiate a testing program and the overall independence of the testing program. .

the house committee on science , space , and technology's subcommittee on oversight and subcommittee on environment have scheduled a hearing entitled "examining the underlying science and impacts of glider truck regulations" on september 13 , 2018 .

