the soldiers' and sailors' civil relief act of 1940 ( sscra ) provided civil protections and rights to individuals based on their service in the u.s. armed forces .

congress enacted the servicemembers civil relief act ( scra ) in 2003 in response to the increased deployment of reserve and national guard military and as a modernization and restatement of the protections and rights previously available to servicemembers under the sscra .

the scra has been amended since its initial passage , and congress continues to consider amendments from time to time .

most recently , congress has enacted amendments to extend certain benefits to the spouses of servicemembers .

congress has long recognized the need for protective legislation for servicemembers whose service to the nation compromises their ability to meet obligations and protect their legal interests .

for example , congress tolled all judicial actions during the civil war , civil and criminal , for persons who "by reason of resistance to the execution of the laws of the united states , or the interruption of the ordinary course of judicial proceedings," were beyond the reach of legal process .

during world war i , congress passed the soldiers' and sailors' civil relief act of 1918 , which , unlike many state laws of the civil war era , did not create a moratorium on legal actions against servicemembers , but instead directed trial courts to apply principles of equity to determine the appropriate action to take whenever a servicemember's rights were implicated in a controversy .

during world war ii , congress essentially reenacted the expired 1918 statute as the soldiers' and sailors' civil relief act of 1940 , and then amended it substantially in 1942 to take into account the new economic and legal landscape that had developed between the wars .

congress enacted amendments to the sscra on several occasions during subsequent conflicts , including in 2002 , when the benefits of the sscra were extended to certain members of the national guard .

the scra is an exercise of congress's power to raise and support armies and to declare war .

the purpose of the act is to provide for , strengthen , and expedite the national defense by protecting servicemembers , enabling them to "devote their entire energy to the defense needs of the nation. .

the scra protects servicemembers by temporarily suspending certain judicial and administrative proceedings and transactions that may adversely affect their legal rights during military service .

the scra does not provide forgiveness of all debts or the extinguishment of contractual obligations on behalf of active - duty servicemembers , nor grant absolute immunity from civil lawsuits .

instead , the scra provides for the suspension of claims and protection from default judgments against servicemembers .

in this way , it seeks to balance the interests of servicemembers and their creditors , spreading the burden of national military service to a broader portion of the citizenry .

courts are to construe the scra liberally in favor of servicemembers , but retain discretion to deny relief in certain cases .

many of the scra provisions are especially beneficial for reservists activated to respond to a national crisis , but some provisions are also useful for career military personnel .

one measure that affects many who are called to active duty is the cap on interest at an annual rate of 6% on debts incurred prior to a person's entry into active - duty military service .

other measures protect military families from being evicted from rental or mortgaged property ; from cancellation of life insurance ; from taxation in multiple jurisdictions ; from foreclosure of property to pay taxes that are due ; and from losing certain rights to public land .

this report provides a section - by - section summary of the scra .

sections 201 through 208 describe the general relief available in most kinds of court actions .

they serve to suspend civil liabilities of military personnel and preserve causes of action either for or against them .

sections 301 through 308 provide protections from eviction and loss of other benefits or rights due to the failure of a servicemember to meet payments on rent , loans , mortgages , or insurance policies .

unlike the other parts of the scra , the rights described in these sections can be asserted by a servicemember's dependents in their own right .

title iv provides relief from insurance premiums and guarantees servicemembers' continued coverage under certain commercial life insurance policies .

a servicemember who applies for protection under this title will eventually have to pay all of the premiums due , either to the insurer or to the government , in the event the united states pays the delinquent premiums .

in this way , servicemembers may defer payments of insurance premiums without losing coverage .

there is no need to show that military service materially affects the servicemember's ability to pay .

the fifth broad category of provisions of the scra provides certain rights regarding public lands and relieves servicemembers from having to pay certain taxes to multiple jurisdictions .

it also prevents the attachment of certain personal or real property in order to satisfy tax liens .

title vi provides courts the authority to deny remedies to servicemembers that would abuse the purpose of the scra .

it also indicates how a servicemember's military and financial status can be established in court , and covers other procedural requirements .

title vii of the scra provides a means for servicemembers to petition for relief without having to wait until a creditor brings an enforcement action against them .

it also treats powers of attorney and provides relief from liability insurance premiums for servicemembers who need to maintain such policies for their civilian occupations .

title viii provides the attorney general the authority to bring civil actions against violators of the scra .

servicemembers who are aggrieved by a violation can join an action brought by the attorney general or can initiate their own civil action against a violator .

this section authorizes the u.s. attorney general to commence a civil action in u.s. district court for violations of the scra by a person who ( 1 ) engages in a pattern or practice of violating the act ; or ( 2 ) engages in a violation that raises an issue of significant public importance .

courts may grant any appropriate equitable or declaratory relief , including monetary damages .

additionally , courts , in order to vindicate the public interest , may assess a civil penalty up to $55,000 for a first violation , and up to $110,000 for subsequent violations .

finally , individuals alleging violations of the scra , for which the attorney general has commenced an action , are authorized to intervene in previously commenced cases as a plaintiff .

in addition to the right to join a previously commenced case , persons aggrieved by a violation of the scra have the ability to commence a civil action in their own right .

the court may grant appropriate equitable or declaratory relief , including monetary damages .

the court is also authorized to award the costs of the action and reasonable attorney fees to an individual who prevails in a civil action under this section .

this section provides that sections 801 and 802 do not preclude or limit any other remedies available under the law , including consequential or punitive damages for violations of the scra .

