in 1984 , congress passed the comprehensive crime control act ( ccca ) .

the act , in the words of the senate judiciary committee report that accompanied the legislation , was "the product of a decade long bipartisan effort .

 .

 .

to make major comprehensive improvements to the federal criminal laws. .

in an effort to achieve that goal , the ccca established new bail procedures , imposed mandatory minimum sentences for many criminal offenses , increased the penalties for drug offenses and violent crimes , and created additional federal criminal offenses .

various provisions of the ccca employ the term "crime of violence" in reference to the elements of certain offenses , the conditions for the issuance of bail , and the circumstances where enhanced prison sentences are required .

for example , the ccca requires a judge to consider , among other things , the nature and circumstances of a criminal defendant's offense , including whether the offense is a crime of violence , when assessing whether conditions permit the defendant's release from custody while awaiting trial .

in addition , the ccca directs the united states sentencing commission to ensure that the sentencing guidelines specify a term of imprisonment "at or near the maximum term" authorized by the federal criminal code for adult criminal defendants convicted of a crime of violence .

a number of federal statutes have been enacted that employ the ccca's crime of violence definition ( cov definition ) to describe proscribed conduct , including in both the criminal and immigration context .

in addition , courts have sometimes looked to the cov definition ( and jurisprudence interpreting that provision ) for guidance in interpreting similarly worded provisions found elsewhere in the federal criminal code , such as those statutory provisions referencing a "misdemeanor crime of domestic violence" or "violent felony. .

the supreme court has found the cov definition relevant in interpreting some of these provisions , while finding the definition inapposite in other cases .

the cov definition contains two prongs .

in its 2018 ruling in sessions v. dimaya , the supreme court struck down on vagueness grounds the second prong of the cov definition , as incorporated into the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , which covers any felony offense that , "by its nature , involves a substantial risk that physical force .

 .

 .

may be used in the course of committing the offense. .

the ruling narrows the scope of the offenses covered by the cov definition and may have consequences for the application of a number of laws that incorporate the cov definition or employ similar language as the "residual clause" struck down by the court .

nonetheless , the first prong of the cov definition remains in effect , covering any offense "that has as an element the use , attempted use , or threatened use of physical force against the person or property of another. .

this report examines the statutory definition of a crime of violence and notable judicial developments concerning the definition's scope , including the court's ruling in dimaya narrowing the application of the cov definition .

in particular , this report examines how the courts have interpreted the elements of the cov definition found in 18 u.s.c .

§ 16 and similarly worded provisions in the federal criminal code .

the report concludes by considering the implications of these legal issues and judicial developments for congress .

prior to the ccca , some federal statutes employed the term "crime of violence" in setting forth the elements of a criminal offense or the conditions of confinement .

although there was no uniform definition of a crime of violence , congress typically provided definitions of that term when they appeared in a federal law .

for example , in the narcotic addict rehabilitation act of 1966 , congress included a definition of a crime of violence that was limited to specific criminal offenses: voluntary manslaughter , murder , rape , mayhem , kidnaping , robbery , burglary or housebreaking in the nighttime , extortion accompanied by threats of violence , assault with a dangerous weapon or assault with intent to commit any offense punishable by imprisonment for more than one year , arson punishable as a felony , or an attempt or conspiracy to commit any of the foregoing offenses .

eventually , in an effort to provide a universal and broader definition of a crime of violence , congress created a two - pronged cov definition in the ccca .

that definition , which is codified at 18 u.s.c .

§ 16 , covers each of the following: ( a ) [a]n offense that has as an element the use , attempted use , or threatened use of physical force against the person or property of another , or ( b ) any other offense that is a felony and that , by its nature , involves a substantial risk that physical force against the person or property of another may be used in the course of committing any offense .

following passage of the ccca , congress incorporated the cov definition into a number of other federal statutory provisions .

for example , under the ina , a non - u.s. national who commits a crime of violence for which the term of imprisonment is at least one year may face significant immigration consequences , including being subject to removal from the united states , subject to mandatory detention pending removal proceedings , ineligible for certain forms of relief from removal , barred from naturalization , and generally barred for readmission into the united states .

in the criminal context , other examples include a statutory provision that imposes increased prison sentences on a person who intentionally uses a minor to commit a crime of violence , and a provision that makes it unlawful to receive anything of pecuniary value from an enterprise engaged in racketeering activity in exchange for threatening to commit a crime of violence .

despite congress's attempt to provide a uniform definition of a crime of violence , courts have struggled to assess the scope of that definition .

and on multiple occasions , the supreme court has intervened to clarify the meaning of a crime of violence and similarly worded phrases found elsewhere in the federal criminal code .

the following section briefly discusses three major issues the courts have considered in assessing the scope of activities covered by the cov definition: ( 1 ) whether to examine either the underlying conduct of a criminal offense , the statutory elements of the offense , or some combination in order to determine whether a person has been convicted of a crime of violence ; ( 2 ) the degree of force necessary for an act to satisfy the "physical force" element of the cov definition ; and ( 3 ) whether a crime of violence requires a specific mental state .

as courts have been called to interpret the scope of conduct covered by the cov definition in 18 u.s.c .

§ 16 , notable disagreement has arisen regarding the scope of other federal criminal code provisions with similar , but not identical wording .

in analyzing the meaning of these related provisions , courts have sometimes looked to the cov definition for guidance and clarification .

in addition to considering the degree of physical force that must be employed and the mental state required for an offense to constitute a crime of violence , courts have also considered a more fundamental question — is the cov definition unconstitutionally vague ? .

the fifth amendment's due process clause requires that a criminal statute define an offense "with sufficient definiteness that ordinary people can understand what conduct is prohibited and in a manner that does not encourage arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement. .

in recent years , several courts considered whether 18 u.s.c .

§ 16's cov definition , as incorporated into the ina and other statutes carrying penalties or other negative consequences for a covered individual , sufficiently meets the specificity standard under the due process clause .

in 2018 , the supreme court in dimaya v. sessions ruled that the second prong of the cov definition , as incorporated in the ina , is unconstitutionally vague .

in dimaya , a lawful permanent resident ( dimaya ) challenged his order of removal that was predicated on a finding that his burglary conviction constituted a crime of violence under the second prong of the cov definition , 18 u.s.c .

§ 16 ( b ) , which covers "any other offense that is a felony and that , by its nature , involves a substantial risk that physical force against the person or property of another may be used in the course of committing any offense. .

in his petition for review to the ninth circuit , dimaya argued that 18 u.s.c .

§ 16 ( b ) is unconstitutionally vague because it has no standard to determine whether a criminal offense carries a "substantial risk" of physical force .

while dimaya's case was pending in the ninth circuit , the supreme court in johnson v. united states ( not to be confused with the supreme court's 2010 johnson decision discussed supra , which addressed the meaning of "physical force" under the acca ) held that a similarly worded provision of the acca , which was employed for the purpose of imposing increased prison sentences on certain firearm offenders convicted of a "violent felony," was unconstitutionally vague .

specifically , the acca's multi - pronged violent felony definition included a provision covering a felony offense that [i]s burglary , arson , or extortion , involves use of explosives , or otherwise involves conduct that presents a serious potential risk of physical injury to another .

in johnson , the supreme court addressed the constitutionality of the "residual clause" of this definition ( italicized above ) .

in doing so , the court observed that , under the " categorical approach ," a court may look only to the statutory elements of an offense , rather than the facts underlying a conviction , to determine whether the crime meets the definition of a violent felony .

given the limitations of this approach , the court determined that the acca's residual clause "leaves grave uncertainty" about how to estimate the risk ordinarily posed by a crime .

the court also determined that the residual clause offers no practicable way to measure the level of risk required to meet the "serious potential risk" threshold .

the court thus held that the residual clause "produces more unpredictability and arbitrariness than the due process clause tolerates. .

the ninth circuit granted dimaya's petition for review , and held that the second prong of the cov definition , which rendered dimaya's burglary conviction an aggravated felony that made him removable , was unconstitutionally vague .

the circuit court concluded that the supreme court's holding in johnson concerning the acca's residual clause "applies with equal force to the similar statutory language and identical mode of analysis used" by the second prong of the cov definition .

apart from the ninth circuit , the third , sixth , seventh , and tenth circuits had also held that 18 u.s.c .

§ 16 ( b ) 's cov definition is unconstitutionally vague in light of johnson .

the fifth circuit , however , rejected a vagueness challenge to 18 u.s.c .

§ 16 ( b ) .

given the circuit split over the constitutionality of the second prong of the cov definition , the supreme court granted the government's petition to review the ninth circuit's decision in dimaya .

citing johnson as "a straightforward decision , with equally straightforward application here," the court determined that 18 u.s.c .

§ 16 ( b ) suffers from the same "constitutionally problematic" features that infected the acca's residual clause struck down in johnson .

given these concerns , the court concluded that 18 u.s.c .

§ 16 ( b ) is unconstitutionally vague .

the court also rejected the government's contention that 18 u.s.c .

§ 16 ( b ) 's "distinctive textual features" rendered it less susceptible to vagueness concerns than its acca counterpart found unconstitutional in johnson .

the court determined that , although 18 u.s.c .

§ 16 ( b ) temporally limits its analysis to the risk of force arising "in the course of committing any offense," this language made no meaningful difference because analyzing a crime's inherent risk is already limited to what usually happens during its commission .

the court also recognized that 18 u.s.c .

§ 16 ( b ) focuses on the risk of "physical force" rather than "physical injury" as is the case with the acca's violent felony definition , but the court found no significant distinction because both standards require a court to gauge a crime's potential consequences .

finally , the court noted , although 18 u.s.c .

§ 16 ( b ) is not preceded by a list of enumerated crimes like the acca's residual clause , the absence of such a list is immaterial because the textually indeterminate features of 18 u.s.c .

§ 16 ( b ) remain .

in striking down the second prong of the federal cov definition , the supreme court has potentially narrowed the scope of criminal offenses that would render an alien subject to removal .

courts have previously interpreted 18 u.s.c .

§ 16 ( b ) to cover a wide range of offenses such as first - degree manslaughter , kidnapping , lewd and lascivious acts upon a child , sexual assault , burglary , aggravated fleeing , and assault on a police officer .

while many of these offenses may still constitute removable offenses under the ina , there may be some types of criminal conduct that would only fall within the second prong of the cov definition .

beyond the immigration context , the dimaya court's ruling potentially impacts many other criminal and civil statutes that expressly incorporate the cov definition .

therefore , t he court's decision in dimaya may have significant consequences for those subject to the heightened criminal penalties and other legal consequences resulting from the commission of a crime of violence .

when congress passed the ccca in 1984 , it intended to create a clear definition of a crime of violence — a definition that could be readily applied for purposes of defining certain criminal offenses and imposing mandatory prison sentences .

and following codification of the cov definition , congress expressly incorporated that language into a number of other federal statutes , including the ina .

over the last few decades , however , courts have grappled over the scope of the cov definition , occasionally resulting in divergent interpretations .

to add to the quandary , the supreme court has now struck down as unconstitutionally vague the second prong of the cov definition , raising new questions concerning 18 u.s.c .

§ 16's already contested scope and application .

regardless of how the courts construe the federal cov definition , it is within congress's power to amend that definition to clarify or alter its scope .

for example , congress could , if it believes such an approach is warranted , provide clarification with respect to the degree of force that a crime of violence requires ; whether a crime of violence requires a specific state of mind ; and the circumstances in which a criminal offense may constitute a crime of violence in the absence of the actual ( or threatened or attempted ) application of physical force .

alternatively , congress could simply limit the scope of the cov definition to certain enumerated types of inherently violent crimes such as robbery , arson , manslaughter , aggravated assault , or forcible sex crimes .

conversely , in shaping the scope of the cov definition , congress could set forth the types of offenses that would not constitute crimes of violence .

in any event , while the creation of a statutory definition of a crime of violence in 1984 did not result in a uniform judicial interpretation of the term in the decades that followed , congress has the power to alter or clarify the statutory definition to resolve some ambiguities that have arisen regarding the term's meaning .

