in addition to water resource issues , the 115 th congress has given considerable attention to drinking water and wastewater infrastructure management and funding issues .

numerous bills have been introduced to amend epa - administered programs under the clean water act ( cwa ) and / or the safe drinking water act ( sdwa ) to help municipalities meet public health and environmental quality goals through drinking water and wastewater infrastructure improvements and other means .

these bills would variously increase federal investment in water infrastructure , promote infrastructure resiliency and sustainability , and increase capacity to comply with cwa and sdwa mandates .

many of these objectives were incorporated in provisions of awia 2018 .

similarly , wrrda 2014 and wiin in 2016 addressed water infrastructure programs administered by epa .

wrrda 2014 included wifia , which authorized epa and usace to provide credit assistance for an array of water infrastructure projects , including projects to build and upgrade wastewater and drinking water treatment systems — and , specifically , projects eligible to receive assistance under the clean water state revolving fund ( cwsrf ) and drinking water state revolving fund ( dwsrf ) programs .

wifia specifies that state infrastructure finance authorities are eligible to receive wifia assistance .

wrrda 2014 also made significant revisions to the cwsrf program .

in 2016 , wiin , title ii ( water and waste act of 2016 ) , made numerous amendments to sdwa .

awia 2018 included numerous provisions involving epa - administered water quality infrastructure programs and other authorities .

most of these provisions occurred in title v , but other titles also featured epa - relevant provisions ( eg , section 3702 proposed to amend and reauthorize epa's long island sound programs ) .

title v of awia 2018 would have amended the cwa to ( 1 ) reauthorize the appropriation of grants for municipal sewer overflow projects and to make stormwater management projects eligible for these grants ; ( 2 ) authorize a technical assistance program for small - and medium - sized wastewater treatment works ; and ( 3 ) formally authorize epa's integrated planning initiative , which is intended to help municipalities comply with multiple cwa wastewater discharge mandates .

awia 2018 would have further amended the cwa to require certain epa offices to promote the use and coordinate the integration of green infrastructure into permitting , planning , research , funding guidance , and other activities , among other provisions .

section 3308 of awia 2018 proposed to amend the cwa to codify in statute the existing epa regulations on water transfers .

it would have defined water transfer as "an activity that conveys or connects waters of the united states without subjecting the water to intervening industrial , municipal , or commercial use. .

it would also have specified that discharges from water transfers do not require a cwa permit , with the exception of pollutants introduced by the water transfer activity itself to the water being transferred .

that is , surface water containing pollutants ( eg , nutrients , sediment , or invasive species ) could be transferred to another waterbody or watershed without being subject to cwa controls .

regarding sdwa authorities , title v of awia 2018 would have made several changes to the act's dwsrf provisions , including making permanent the requirement that projects receiving dwsrf assistance must use iron and steel products produced in the united states .

among other sdwa amendments , awia 2018 would have ( 1 ) expressly authorized epa's watersense program , and ( 2 ) revised the sdwa grant program for testing for lead in school and childcare - program drinking water .

additionally , awia 2018 included several wifia amendments .

title v would have removed wifia's designation as a pilot program and added a new section to wifia regarding loans to state cwsrf and dwsrf finance authorities .

although state srf financing authorities are currently eligible to receive wifia assistance , these provisions would have authorized epa to provide secured loans at subsidized interest rates for states meeting certain conditions .

unlike other wifia assistance , this section also would have allowed the use of federal assistance to support 100% of project costs , and it would have waived application fees .

in addition , awia 2018 proposed to authorize epa to establish a water infrastructure resiliency and sustainability grant program ; authorize an indian reservation drinking water and wastewater infrastructure pilot program at epa ; and support water utility workforce development .

awia 2018 also called for studies on "intractable water systems" and on wifia accessibility for certain communities .

these and other water quality and drinking water provisions are described below in table 4 .

in contrast , wrda 2018 contained none of these provisions .

