o n june 27 , 2018 , justice anthony m. kennedy announced that , effective july 31 , 2018 , he would retire from active service as an associate justice on the supreme court of the united states .

nominated to replace justice lewis powell in 1987 , justice kennedy has been one of the longest - serving justices in the history of the court .

his decisive role on the court , particularly during the roberts court era , cannot be overstated .

while justice kennedy has been a critical vote on the court for much of his 30-year tenure , since the october 2005 term that marked the beginning of the roberts court , justice kennedy has been the court's "median justice," voting for the winning side in a case more often than any of his colleagues in 9 out of 12 terms .

during this era , the high court issued a number of landmark rulings that spanned the ideological spectrum .

for instance , during the roberts court era , the court held that the fourteenth amendment to the constitution requires states to recognize marriages between same - sex couples in the same circumstances as they recognize marriages between opposite - sex couples ; invalidated state laws viewed to impose an "undue burden" on a woman's right to terminate a pregnancy ; afforded enemy belligerents detained at guantanamo bay certain procedural protections ; and concluded that the eighth amendment prohibits the states from imposing the death penalty or a sentence of life without parole in certain circumstances .

at the same time , since 2005 , the court also struck down campaign finance laws banning corporate independent expenditures for electioneering communications ; invalidated section 5 of the voting rights act of 1965 on federalism grounds ; recognized that the second amendment protects an individual's right to possess a firearm and to use that firearm for lawful purposes ; upheld president trump's proclamation placing entry restrictions on foreign nationals from specified countries ; and invalidated on first amendment grounds state laws that aimed to regulate certain commercial activities .

in all of these cases , the sitting justices were closely divided , and the composition of justices in the deciding majority in such cases shifted dramatically from case - to - case with one exception: justice kennedy .

perhaps because of his pivotal role on the court , like justice powell whom he succeeded , justice kennedy was viewed by many to be the court's "swing" vote .

the label of being a "swing vote" on the court , however , may invite misleading conclusions about justice kennedy's approach to cases .

as several commentators have noted , justice kennedy's jurisprudence did not necessarily focus on compromise or balance in the court's decisions , but was instead , at times , informed by principles that resulted in votes that could not be categorized uniformly by a conservative or liberal ideology .

for his part , justice kennedy resisted the "swing vote" moniker , declaring in a 2015 interview that "[t]he cases swing , i don't. .

as a result , an examination of the underlying cases in which justice kennedy cast critical votes during the roberts court era may be necessary to fully gauge his jurisprudence and the significance of his retirement .

this report provides a broad overview of justice kennedy's approach to the law , with a particular emphasis on how he interpreted the constitution .

the report then discusses what his retirement may mean for the future of the court in various areas of the law , broadly noting key legal decisions during the roberts court era in which justice kennedy cast a decisive vote .

the report does not , however , purport to discuss fully every area of law that justice kennedy considered during his more than three decades of service on the court .

nonetheless , guided by several tables in the appendix noting the opinions in which justice kennedy cast decisive votes during the roberts court era , the report highlights key aspects of justice kennedy's jurisprudence and the key legal issues where his absence from the court could result in a shift in the court's jurisprudence .

on july 9 , 2018 , president trump announced the nomination of judge brett m. kavanaugh of the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit ( d.c .

circuit ) to fill the impending vacancy on the supreme court caused by justice kennedy's scheduled retirement .

crs reports analyzing judge kavanaugh's jurisprudence on particular areas of the law , as well as a tabular listing of lower - court decisions in which he authored opinions , are in preparation .

as one legal scholar has observed , "identifying justice kennedy's judicial philosophy is no easy task. .

unlike justice antonin scalia , his colleague for nearly 28 years on the high court , justice kennedy did not subscribe to a particular judicial philosophy , such as originalism or textualism .

in his 1987 confirmation hearings , justice kennedy eschewed committing himself to a "single , overarching theory" of legal interpretation .

for instance , in response to a question posed by senator robert byrd concerning the role of history when interpreting the constitution , the nominee opined that a judge cannot rely only on "history in order to make the meaning of the constitution more clear," and that "new generations" can also "yield new insights and new perspectives" that change "our understandings" of the constitution .

these and similar statements made during his confirmation hearing appear to have presaged the approach taken by justice kennedy on the court , wherein he often synthesized several approaches to judging to guide his decision as to the appropriate result in a given case .

justice kennedy's approach to judging appeared informed by certain guiding principles , three of the most determinative of which are discussed below .

the principles that undergirded justice kennedy's judicial philosophy often cut across ideological lines , as his views on liberty , the structural constitution , and the power of the court resulted in the justice taking sometimes idiosyncratic approaches to a given case .

as a result , justice kennedy's approach to the law placed him in the middle of the roberts court , with the justice not necessarily voting in tandem with the blocs of justices that commentators have labeled to be "liberal" or "conservative. .

justice kennedy had a significant influence on the court , sometimes because the substance of his opinions was jurisprudentially significant , as in the areas of free speech and substantive due process , and sometimes by means of providing a fifth vote in closely divided cases .

the following subsections broadly note critical areas of law in which justice kennedy was particularly influential on the roberts court .

the subsections briefly highlight justice kennedy's approach to a given area of law , noting the key cases that help explain the justice's views on a given legal issue .

throughout , the subsections , by noting justice kennedy's influence on a particular area of law , signal how the trajectory of the court's jurisprudence in that area may change when justice kennedy retires from active service on the court .

justice byron white noted that "every time a new justice comes to the supreme court , it's a different court. .

that adage could be particularly true when the departing justice is considered a "swing vote. .

several justices considered "swing votes" who left the court in recent decades were replaced , respectively , by justices who altered the trajectory of the court's jurisprudence .

justice lewis powell's retirement in 1987 and justice kennedy's arrival on the court the next year witnessed noticeable changes in the court's jurisprudence , including with respect to abortion , the death penalty , and the rights of same - sex couples .

justice sandra day o'connor's departure had similar consequences on the court's jurisprudence .

not only did justice o'connor's replacement , justice alito , take a markedly different approach than his predecessor on a number of legal issues , but her departure also cemented justice kennedy's position as the critical vote in closely divided cases decided by the court .

accordingly , because of the "difference one justice [can] make" on the court , justice kennedy's jurisprudence and the areas in which he was a deciding vote may be relevant considerations as the senate determines whether to confirm the president's choice to replace the soon - to - be - retired justice .

justice kennedy cast the deciding vote in many consequential supreme court cases , particularly during the roberts court era beginning with the october 2005 supreme court term .

this section includes several tables relating to 186 cases where justice kennedy cast a deciding vote from the date of chief justice roberts's elevation to the court to the date of justice kennedy's retirement .

for purposes of the tables , justice kennedy is considered to have cast a "deciding vote" any time he joined a majority or plurality opinion or concurred in the result of a case where the justices were divided either 5-4 , 5-3 , 4-3 , or 4-2 on one or more issues .

per curiam opinions are included only if they resolved an appeal pending before the court .

table a - 1 identifies cases primarily centering on questions of constitutional interpretation in which justice kennedy cast a deciding vote .

table a - 2 includes cases mainly addressing questions of statutory interpretation — including the interpretation of administrative regulations , procedural rules , and other legal rules promulgated in accordance with statutory authority — in which justice kennedy cast a deciding vote .

table a - 3 compiles closely divided cases that do not fall neatly into either of the prior tables ( eg , cases centering on issues of federal common law or principles of equity ) .

table a - 1 , table a - 2 , and table a - 3 also identify ( 1 ) the statute , constitutional provision , or other source of law primarily at issue in the case ; and ( 2 ) justice kennedy's position on the key issue in the case .

the cases in these three tables are listed alphabetically by year , and are categorized under the following subject areas: abortion law , administrative law , business law ( including issues arising in antitrust , banking , bankruptcy and debt collection , consumer law , contract law , intellectual property law , and securities law ) , civil rights law ( including issues arising under the fourteenth amendment and civil actions brought under 42 u.s.c .

§1983 ) , civil liability ( including torts ) , communications law , criminal law and procedure , education law , election law , environmental law , family law , food and drug law , freedom of association , freedom of religion , freedom of speech , habeas corpus , immigration law , indian law , international law , judicial system ( including issues involving federal and state courts generally , civil procedure , standing and justiciability , class actions , equitable remedies , arbitration , and judicial ethics ) , labor and employment law , maritime law , military law , national security , privacy law , public benefits , second amendment , separation of powers , takings , tax law , and territorial law .

for purposes of brevity , no more than two subject areas are identified as relevant to a particular case .

while these categorizations are intended to provide a helpful guide to readers in identifying the subject matters of decisions , they do not necessarily reflect the full range of legal issues a judicial opinion may involve .

table a - 1 , table a - 2 , and table a - 3 also identify the composition of justices hearing a listed case , dividing the members of the court who participated in the case into two categories: ( 1 ) justices making up the majority or controlling plurality , including those who concurred with the court's judgment ; and ( 2 ) those justices who dissented in whole or in part from the key ruling of the case .

the author of the primary opinion is designated with an asterisk ( * ) .

authors of concurring and dissenting opinions are identified with plus signs ( + ) .

justice kennedy's name has been capitalized throughout for the reader's convenience .

for ease of reference , justices are listed in alphabetical order , rather than order of seniority .

table a - 4 identifies how frequently justice kennedy voted with specific lineups of justices in the cases in which he cast a decisive vote .

