the title x family planning program ( title x ) , enacted in 1970 , is the only domestic federal program devoted solely to family planning and related preventive health services .

it is administered by the office of population affairs ( opa ) , under the office of the assistant secretary for health ( oash ) within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

on june 1 , 2018 , hhs published a proposed rule in the federal register that would change opa's administration of the grant program .

hhs contends that the program has not been properly administered in accordance with sections 300 to 300a - 6 of title 42 of the u.s. code ( u.s.c ) .

hhs states that the goal of the rule is to ensure that title x funds are used within the limits set by congress .

according to hhs , family planning projects that receive title x funds are closely monitored to ensure that federal funds are used appropriately and are not used for prohibited activities , such as for performing surgical abortion procedures .

hhs states that the agency has concerns about whether title x projects that operate in a health care facility where abortions are provided are unintentionally crossing federal funds with funds used to cover the facility's abortion - related expenses .

furthermore , according to the proposed rule's preamble , opa had previously misinterpreted current law by requiring title x providers to provide abortion - related services such as counseling and referrals to their patients upon request .

the 115 th congress is debating the scope of the program to determine whether providing an abortion - related service such as an abortion referral should be a family planning service under title x .

for example , some members of congress have stated that the service of providing abortion referrals is a family planning service that title x providers should continue to provide title x clients upon request .

according to some members of congress , the proposed rule is a gag rule that "would bar patients from receiving information to support their ability to make informed decisions about their own reproductive health. .

these members of congress are referring to a policy originally put in place by president reagan in 1988 that was challenged in court but upheld by the supreme court in 1991 .

the court case , rust v. sullivan , narrowed the scope of permissible abortion - related activities that are linked to federal funding .

congress subsequently voted to repeal the gag rule but fell short of the two - thirds majority needed to override a president george h.w .

bush veto in 1992 .

the clinton administration suspended the gag rule in january 1993 .

according to the clinton administration , during the first 18 years of the [title x] program , medical professionals at title x clinics provided complete , uncensored information , including nondirective abortion counseling .

in february 1988 , [hhs] adopted regulations , which have become known as the "gag rule," prohibiting title x recipients from providing their patients with information , counseling , or referrals concerning abortion .

subsequent attempts by the [george h.w. .

bush administration to modify the gag rule and ensuing litigation have created confusion and uncertainty about the current legal status of the regulations .

other members of congress state that title x providers should not provide abortion referrals as a method of family planning .

according to these members , current regulations on abortion referrals "undermine" the statutory requirement that no title x funds shall be used in projects "where abortion is a method of family planning. .

the trump administration has stated that "[c]ontrary to recent media reports , hhs's proposal does not include the so - called 'gag rule' on counseling about abortion that was part of the reagan administration's title x rule. .

members on both sides of the issue agree , however , that the proposed rule would make it harder for planned parenthood federation of america ( ppfa ) to receive title x funds .

to assist congress as it considers issues related to title x , this report provides a brief overview of the title x program ; discusses the proposed rule's major elements and explains how the proposed rule differs from current title x rules and guidance ; provides hhs' rationale for the components of the proposed rule , as well as selected commentary from key stakeholders in reaction to the proposed rule ; and summarizes hhs's regulatory impact analysis .

all 50 states , the district of columbia , and the u.s. territories and freely associated states ( collectively referred to as states ) are eligible to apply for title x grants , as are other public agencies and nonprofit organizations .

grantees may use title x dollars to establish and operate family planning projects that provide effective methods of family planning services , such as contraception , as well as infertility services .

in 2016 , there were 91 title x family planning services grantees .

these grantees included 48 state , local , and territorial health departments and 43 nonprofit organizations , such as community health agencies , family planning councils , and planned parenthood affiliates .

grants for family planning services fund a range of family planning and related preventive health services , such as contraceptive services ; natural family planning methods ; infertility services ; adolescent services ; breast and cervical cancer screening and prevention ; sexually transmitted disease ( std ) and human immunodeficiency virus ( hiv ) prevention education , counseling , testing , and referral ; preconception health services ; and reproductive life plan counseling .

these services must be provided "without coercion and with respect for the privacy , dignity , social , and religious beliefs of the individuals being served. .

in fy2017 , opa used approximately 90% of title x funds for clinical services such as those listed above , and the other 10% for activities such as personnel training and service delivery improvement research in family planning .

current regulations require that title x's medical services be provided under the direction of a physician with special training or experience in family planning .

however , most title x clinical service staff are not medical doctors .

title x clinical service providers include physicians , nurse practitioners , certified nurse midwives , physician assistants , and registered nurses .

in 2016 , of title x's full - time equivalent ( fte ) clinical service providers , 22% were physicians ; 71% were nurse practitioners , certified nurse midwives , and physician assistants ; and 7% were registered nurses with an expanded scope of practice .

title x grantees can provide family planning services directly or subaward title x monies to other public or nonprofit entities to provide services .

although no fixed matching amount is required for grants , current regulations specify that no title x projects may be fully supported by title x funds .

in 2016 , title x grantees provided services through 3,898 clinics .

that same year , title x - funded clinics served 4.008 million clients , primarily low - income women and adolescents .

of those clients , 11% were male , 64% had incomes at or below the federal poverty guidelines , and 85% had incomes at or below 200% of the federal poverty guidelines .

an earlier survey found t hat for 61% of clients , title x - funded clinics were their "usual" or only regular source of health care .

forty - three percent of title x clients were uninsured in 2016 .

title x is a discretionary program ( i.e. , its funding is provided in and controlled by annual appropriations acts ) .

it has received appropriations every year since the program started in fy1971 .

on march 23 , 2018 , president trump signed the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) .

this law provides $286.479 million for title x in fy2018 , the same as the fy2017-enacted level .

the fy2018 act continues previous years' requirements that title x funds not be spent on abortions , among other requirements .

president trump's fy2019 budget request , submitted february 12 , 2018 , includes $286.479 million for title x , the same as the fy2018-enacted level .

the fy2019 budget would continue previous years' provisions in appropriations laws prohibiting the use of title x funds for abortion , among other requirements .

on june 28 , 2018 , the senate appropriations committee reported s. 3158 , departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies appropriations act , 2019 .

s. 3158 would fund title x at the fy2018-enacted level , and would continue previous years' provisions in appropriations laws prohibiting the use of title x funds for abortion , among other requirements .

on july 23 , 2018 , the house appropriations committee reported h.r .

6470 , the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies appropriations act , 2019 .

h.r .

6470 would provide no funding for title x in fy2019 .

during the house appropriations committee's bill markup , a committee amendment was defeated that would have funded title x at the fy2018-enacted level and would have prohibited the bill's funds from being used to finalize , implement , administer , or enforce the title x proposed rule .

on june 1 , 2018 , hhs published a proposed rule in the federal register to revise the regulations that implement the title x family planning program .

hhs accepted comments for 60 days , until july 31 , 2018 .

discussed below are three major elements of the proposed rule that hhs aims to modify: ( 1 ) abortion - related activities , ( 2 ) grantee requirements , and ( 3 ) pertinent definitions .

provided in each discussion of the major elements is an explanation of how the proposed rule differs from current title x rules and guidance .

in its regulatory impact analysis , opa estimates that the proposed rule would cost $45.5 million in 2019 and $14.6 million in subsequent years ( 2020 to 2023 ) .

with respect to the physical separation requirements , opa estimates that between 10% and 20% of title x service sites do not comply and would have to incur costs to come into compliance .

costs would also be incurred for activities such as training , documentation , monitoring , enforcement , and reporting .

opa states that the proposed rule is expected to result in several benefits , including assurance that tax dollars are being used in compliance with the law , increased patient access , improved quality of services , and an expanded and more diverse field of medical professionals .

according to the preamble , some of these benefits would stem from the conscience - related provisions: for providers , the proposed regulation is expected to create benefits through respect for conscience .

it would do so by better aligning the title x regulations with the statutory prohibitions on discrimination against health care entities , including individual health care providers , who refuse to participate in abortion – related activity such as counseling and referrals .

potential grantees , and subrecipients that refuse to provide abortion counseling and referrals may now be eligible and interested in applying to provide family planning services under the current title x regulations .

current title x regulations might discourage some potential title x grantees from applying .

some potential title x grantees might not apply because current grantees must provide abortion referrals upon request .

this requirement may clash with the religious and moral beliefs held by some potential grantees .

for that reason , the finalization of this proposed rule might encourage more potential title x grantees that hold such beliefs to apply .

the preamble further states that "the expansion of provider and family planning options would have salutary benefits for patients , including for patients who seek providers who share their religious or moral convictions. .

a study of 1,430 religious reproductive - aged women ( 18-45 years old ) found that 34.5% of the women felt that it was somewhat or very important to know about a hospital's religious affiliation .

that same study also found that 80.7% of the religious women felt that it was somewhat or very important to know about a hospital's religious restrictions on reproductive care , prior to seeking the care .

the proposed rule would require title x projects to comply with its physical separation requirements one year after the final rule's publication .

for other requirements , compliance would be required 60 days after the final rule's publication .

