o n july 9 , 2018 , president trump announced the nomination of judge brett m. kavanaugh of the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit ( d.c .

circuit ) to succeed supreme court justice anthony m. kennedy , who is scheduled to retire from active status on july 31 , 2018 .

judge kavanaugh has served as an appellate judge for the d.c .

circuit since his appointment by president george w. bush on may 30 , 2006 .

he has also sat , by designation , on judicial panels for the u.s. court of appeals for the eighth circuit ( eighth circuit ) , the u.s. court of appeals for the ninth circuit ( ninth circuit ) , and the u.s. district court for the district of columbia .

during his tenure on the bench , judge kavanaugh has adjudicated more than 1,500 cases , almost all while a member of either a three - judge or en banc panel of the d.c .

circuit .

the d.c .

circuit considers far fewer cases each year than other federal appellate courts .

but in part because of the d.c .

circuit's location in the nation's capital and the number of statutes providing it with special or even exclusive jurisdiction to review certain agency actions , legal commentators generally agree that the d.c .

circuit's docket , relative to the dockets of other circuits , contains a greater percentage of nationally significant legal matters .

cases adjudicated by the d.c .

circuit are more likely to concern the review of federal agency action or civil suits involving the federal government than cases adjudicated in other circuits , while the d.c .

circuit docket has a lower percentage of cases involving criminal matters , prisoner petitions , or civil suits between private parties .

unlike the supreme court , which enjoys "almost complete discretion" in selecting its cases , the federal courts of appeals are required to adjudicate many cases as a matter of law and , as a result , tend to hear "many routine cases in which the legal rules are uncontroverted. .

arguably indicative of the nature of federal appellate work , the vast majority of cases decided by three - judge panels of federal courts of appeals are issued without a dissenting opinion .

however , while the vast majority of cases adjudicated by the d.c .

circuit are decided without a dissenting opinion , perhaps because of the nature of the d.c .

circuit's docket , a greater percentage of the court's decisions draw a dissenting opinion relative to its sister circuits .

this report provides tabular listings of 306 cases in which judge kavanaugh authored a majority , concurring , or dissenting opinion .

arguably , these written opinions provide the greatest insight into judge kavanaugh's judicial approach , as a judge's vote or decision to join an opinion authored by a colleague may not necessarily represent full agreement with a colleague's views .

accordingly , this report does not include cases in which judge kavanaugh sat on a reviewing judicial panel , but is not credited as the author of an opinion .

for example , instances where judge kavanaugh was part of a panel that issued a per curiam opinion , in which no particular judge was credited as an author , are omitted from this report .

this report also does not attempt to identify the various rulings made by circuit panels on procedural issues in the midst of the appeal ( eg , granting a litigator's request for an extension of time to file a brief ) .

finally , the report does not address subsequent legal proceedings that may have occurred after a cited decision was issued , except to note where westlaw or lexis editors have indicated that a decision was subsequently abrogated , affirmed , reversed , or vacated by the supreme court or the d.c .

circuit .

the opinions discussed in this report are categorized into three tables: table 1 identifies 148 opinions authored by judge kavanaugh on behalf of a unanimous panel ; table 2 contains 47 controlling opinions authored by judge kavanaugh in which one or more panelists wrote a separate opinion ; and table 3 lists 111 cases where judge kavanaugh wrote a concurring or dissenting opinion , including cases where judge kavanaugh wrote both the majority opinion and a separate concurrence .

a concurring opinion is identified as a "concurrence in the judgment" — that is , an opinion where the author agrees with the ultimate conclusion reached by the majority but not the manner in which it was reached — only when the concurrence is expressly labeled as such .

cases are listed in reverse chronological order based on where the case appears in the federal reporter .

in each instance , the key ruling or rulings of the case are succinctly described .

a glossary of common abbreviations for statutes , agencies , and supreme court cases referenced in the tables is attached as an appendix .

judicial opinions discussed in this report are categorized using the following legal subject areas: administrative law ( 77 cases ) communications law ( 14 cases ) antitrust law ( 4 cases ) bankruptcy law ( 1 case ) business & corporate law ( 6 cases ) civil rights law ( 24 cases ) contracts law ( 7 cases ) criminal law & procedure ( 45 cases ) elections law ( 7 cases ) energy & utilities law ( 17 cases ) environmental law ( 33 cases ) federal courts & civil procedure ( covering matters such as standing , justiciability , civil procedure , legal ethics , and the admission of evidence in noncriminal proceedings ) ( 53 cases ) indian law ( 2 cases ) firearms law ( 1 case ) freedom of religion ( 4 cases ) freedom of speech ( including the right to petition ) ( 13 cases ) food & drug law ( including agriculture ) ( 7 cases ) government operations ( concerning the structure and functions of executive and legislative branch entities ) ( 18 cases ) healthcare law ( 14 cases ) immigration law ( 3 cases ) intellectual property law ( 4 cases ) international law ( 6 cases ) labor & employment law ( 38 cases ) military & veterans law ( 6 cases ) national security ( 17 cases ) pensions & benefits law ( 6 cases ) privacy & records ( 15 cases ) securities law ( 7 cases ) tax law ( 8 cases ) torts ( 10 cases ) transportation law ( 17 cases ) workers' compensation & social security ( 5 cases ) where appropriate , up to three subject areas are identified as primarily relevant to a particular case .

the goal of the subject matter listing is to provide those interested in particular issues concerning judge kavanaugh a means to identify key judicial opinions he authored in a given subject area .

however , the list above is not an exhaustive accounting of all possible legal subjects addressed in judge kavanaugh's judicial writings .

moreover , categorization of a case under a particular legal subject area does not necessarily mean other categories are wholly inapplicable .

for example , several listed cases that concern challenges by wartime detainees held at the u.s .

naval station at guantanamo bay , cuba , are solely categorized under the legal subject area of "national security," though the cases may touch on other issues , such as "federal courts & civil procedure" ( because detainee challenges concern judicial review of executive discretion in wartime matters ) or "administrative law" ( because the cases involve review of determinations made through an administrative process employed by the u.s. military to assess whether a person is properly detained ) .

accordingly , while the categories used in this report may prove helpful to readers seeking to locate judicial opinions by judge kavanaugh concerning certain legal topics , these categories do not necessarily capture the full range of legal issues those opinions address .

while this report identifies and briefly describes opinions authored by judge kavanaugh during his tenure on the federal bench , it does not analyze the implications of those opinions or suggest how he might approach legal issues if appointed to the supreme court .

those matters will be discussed in a forthcoming crs report .

the cases included in this report were compiled by searching all federal cases in the lexisadvance legal database for "writtenby ( kavanaugh ) . .

a search was then conducted of all federal cases in the westlaw legal database using "wb ( kavanaugh ) " as a cross - check because editors of different legal databases may vary in how they identify cases .

these search results were then compared to the listing of authored opinions submitted by judge kavanaugh to the senate committee on the judiciary .

these results were last compared on july 23 , 2018 .

not every identified result proved relevant .

moreover , in a handful of cases , an opinion authored by judge kavanaugh was subsequently republished with minimal , and sometimes only stylistic , changes .

in cases where there are little , if any , substantive changes between two versions of a judicial opinion , only the most recent published version is listed .

on the other hand , if there is a meaningful substantive difference between the two versions , both are included .

ultimately , this methodology was used to identify 306 cases in which judge kavanaugh is credited authoring an opinion: 301 cases decided by the d.c .

circuit and 5 cases decided on three - judge district court panels ( judge kavanaugh is not credited as an author of any opinions issued by eighth or ninth circuit panels on which he served ) .

apa – administrative procedure act aumf – 2001 authorization for use of military force chevron – chevron , u.s.a , inc. v. nat'l resources def .

council 467 u.s. 837 ( 1984 ) caa – clean air act cfpb – consumer financial protection bureau cia – central intelligence agency dhs – department of homeland security dodd - frank act – dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act dot – department of transportation epa – environmental protection agency erisa – employee retirement income security act of 1974 faa – federal aviation administration fbi – federal bureau of investigation fcc – federal communications commission ferc – federal energy regulatory commission foia – freedom of information act hhs – department of health and human services irs – internal revenue service nlra – national labor relations act nlrb – national labor relations board title vii – title vii of the civil rights act of 196 .

