on september 20 , 2017 , hurricane maria made landfall in puerto rico as a category 4 storm with sustained wind speeds of over 155 miles per hour .

at that time , the commonwealth of puerto rico ( the commonwealth ) was already in recovery mode following the glancing blow struck by hurricane irma on september 6 , 2017 , which left 70% of electricity customers without power .

puerto rico's office of emergency management reported that hurricane maria had incapacitated the central el ectric power system , leaving the entire island without power as the island's grid was essentially destroyed .

after maria , officials were estimating that many of puerto rico's 3.5 million people could be without electricity for up to six months .

even before the 2017 hurricane season , puerto rico's electric power infrastructure was known to be in poor condition , due largely to underinvestment and the perceived deficient maintenance practices of the puerto rico electric power authority ( prepa ) .

with the poor state of the electricity system ( physically , organizationally , and financially ) , and a perceived lack of transparency with regard to decisions ( both before and since hurricane maria ) , discussions have already started about how the electricity system in puerto rico would be rebuilt , and under what regulatory regime it will operate .

the primary focus thus far has largely been on restoring electric power in puerto rico , while the task of rebuilding the grid in puerto rico to modern standards is expected to follow .

the new hurricane season in the atlantic basin ( comprised of the atlantic ocean , the caribbean sea , and the gulf of mexico ) began june 1 , 2018 , and will last until november 30 .

congress continues to follow the recovery of puerto rico from the 2017 hurricanes , and the restoration of power .

the electric power infrastructure for transmission and delivery of power was largely destroyed by the hurricanes , and prepa's aging power generation facilities have been struggling to provide electricity .

whether , and how , puerto rico rebuilds its system into a reliable , efficient , and resilient electricity system will be of key interest to congress .

a large part of the federal emergency management agency's ( fema's ) role in puerto rico was centered on coordinating the restoration of electric power .

for this task , fema brought about 900 portable generators ( including several generation units providing over 50 megawatts ( mw ) of capacity at the partially operating palo seco electric power generation station in san juan ) , and tasked the u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) to oversee restoration of the electric transmission system , which was damaged extensively .

prepa itself has largely been focused on the restoration of the electric distribution system , and service connections to its customers .

both usace and prepa have used contractors to do much of the transmission and distribution system repairs .

with the end of the grid repair part of usace's mission assignment on may 18 , 2018 , almost 99% of prepa's customers have seen their electric service restored .

however , over 16,000 customers ( in mostly rural parts of the island ) were still without electricity after eight months .

the power restoration mission has been described as incomplete by the usace , with much of the work to date essentially to patch up the electric system to bring power back to the people of puerto rico .

fema has agreed to leave over 700 portable generators on puerto rico past the end of the usace's grid repair mission .

the grid emergency in puerto rico led to triage - type decisions , resulting in electric distribution poles and transmission towers that were marginally structurally sound being left in place in some instances .

these poles and towers will almost certainly have to be replaced , as the focus of the commonwealth and the federal government turns from power restoration to rebuilding what has been described in the media as a "teetering" grid .

while usace's initial power restoration efforts were focused on repairing puerto rico's grid to "pre - storm" conditions , the poor state of the electrical system soon led to fema realizing that improvements would have to involve mobilizing the usace to "rebuild the grid to u.s. code standards. .

when asked to what extent were improvements made to puerto rico's grid under authority granted by the restoration of damaged facilities , 44 c.f.r .

§206.226 ( d ) , fema responded as follows: to date , power restoration has been completed as "emergency work. .

the materials used for emergency power restoration were designed to current codes and standards .

many areas received materials that will ultimately strengthen the system .

for example , some towers that toppled over ( that were rusted and not maintained ) were replaced with new towers .

while some infrastructure was replaced and even upgraded to code , puerto rico electric power authority ( prepa ) was not able to use the optimal materials or design to maximize resilience , because it was focused on emergency work .

that will be done in the permanent work phase .

puerto rico's governor rosselló initially proposed privatizing and selling prepa's assets in january 2018 .

this was followed in march 2018 with a plan submitted to puerto rico's legislative assembly with details of how the privatization of the utility would proceed .

one of the goals of the plan was to use public - private partnerships to stabilize the electric system and lessen prices for electricity customers .

details of how the privatization effort could accomplish these goals are unclear at this time .

there have been two previous efforts at privatization of a public utility in puerto rico .

efforts were made in the 1990s and early 2000s to privatize the puerto rico aqueduct and sewer authority ( prasa ) , but "service quality deteriorated and prices for consumers increased , as did the agency's operational deficit. .

power recovery efforts in puerto rico have focused primarily on restoring power to electricity customers .

however , according to reports in the media , the speed of emergency restoration has taken precedent over "basic quality standards" for the work .

puerto rico is taking steps to adopt guidelines for electric systems maintenance used on the mainland .

doe has recommended that puerto rico follow guidelines for electric industry standards suggested by the rural utilities service of the u.s. department of agriculture .

however , the extent to which the restored infrastructure in puerto rico is rebuilt to current electrical standards will be important to the modernization efforts that would follow , and much of this work may have to be redone .

among the recommendations by doe for improving electric reliability in puerto rico was the recommendation for an effective mutual assistance agreement to be in place .

mutual aid agreements help utilities recover from power outage situations often caused by severe weather events , and are typically negotiated in anticipation of a future need .

under mutual assistance agreements for electric utilities , the utility receiving aid generally pays for the costs incurred by the utility providing aid in accordance with the assistance agreement .

congress gave the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) authority to oversee the reliability of the bulk - power system under the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) .

reliability standards were added as section 215 of the federal power act to help ensure the reliable operation of the bulk power system so that "instability , uncontrolled separation , or cascading failures" will not occur as a result of a sudden disturbance .

ferc - approved reliability standards address programs ranging from vegetation clearances in electric transmission line rights - of - way , to policies and procedures for critical infrastructure protection of power plants and supporting facilities .

however , ferc - approved reliability standards are only applicable to the continental united states , and not to u.s. territories such as puerto rico .

to date , no legislation has been proposed to change this .

puerto rico's reliance on fossil fuels for power generation raises cost , reliability , and potential health issues going forward .

before the 2017 hurricane season , coal and diesel fuel represented approximately 64% of fuel used for power generation .

and the mega - and peaking electric combustion turbine generators left behind on puerto rico by fema are currently powered by burning diesel fuel .

coal and diesel fuel are expensive to import to puerto rico , and the reliance on diesel fuel for almost 50% of electricity on the islands has resulted in high prices , about 24 cents per kilowatt - hour ( kwh ) for residential customers for power when compared to an average price of 13 cents per kwh on the u.s. mainland .

on the financial side , prepa's inability to pay for fuel for power generation was a major complicating factor following hurricane maria .

on the health side , among other factors ( such as an increase in mold spores ) , emissions from diesel - and gasoline - fueled power generators of all sizes have been reported in the media as being linked to rising asthma rates in puerto rico since the 2017 storm season .

puerto rico adopted a renewable portfolio standard ( rps ) in july 2010 ( act 82 of 2010 ) which mandated that prepa supply increasing amounts of retail electricity sales from eligible "green energy" resources , peaking at 20% of retail sales by 2035 .

in 2014 , concerns about prepa's ability to follow through with this goal led to new legislation ( act 57 of 2014 ) that established a puerto rico energy commission and an office of consumer advocacy .

the puerto rico energy commission must have an independent regulatory role if rps goals are to be met .

increasing renewable electric generation and requiring more energy storage may potentially reduce electricity costs , since most renewable electric technologies do not directly require a fossil fuel to produce power .

however , the variability and intermittency of renewable generation means that energy storage , and traditional power generation capable of flexible , efficient operation ( to increase or decrease power generation to support renewables ) to provide reliable electricity would likely be needed .

increasing natural gas generation has been discussed by some as an option for puerto rico , since it is generally considered a cleaner - burning option to diesel fuel .

but given jones act restrictions on importing liquefied natural gas to puerto rico , whether and how authorities may follow through with this option is unclear .

in the 115 th congress , s. 1894 was introduced in september 2017 , as a bill to exempt puerto rico from the coastwise laws of the united states .

the bill would revise the coastwise laws , commonly known as the jones act , that govern domestic transportation of merchandise or passengers by vessels .

the jones act requires that vessels transporting merchandise or passengers between puerto rico and other u.s. ports be built in the united states , at least 75% owned by u.s. citizens , and mostly crewed by u.s. citizens .

jones act requirements are currently waived with respect to vessels transporting passengers between puerto rico and u.s. ports .

this bill would permanently exempt vessels transporting merchandise between puerto rico and other u.s. ports from those requirements .

in the 115 th congress , the "puerto rico and virgin islands equitable rebuild act of 2017" ( s. 2165 ) , introduced in november 2017 , would provide for additional disaster - recovery assistance and other assistance to puerto rico and the u.s. virgin islands with respect to infrastructure , health care , agriculture , education , economic development , and environmental remediation , among other sectors .

specifically , regarding energy use in both territories , the bill would provide for the use of certain emergency assistance to rebuild electric grids , and would establish grant programs to promote energy efficiency and renewable energy .

in the 115 th congress , the "puerto rico and virgin islands equitable rebuild act of 2018" ( h.r .

4782 ) , introduced in january 2018 , would provide additional disaster - recovery assistance and other assistance to puerto rico and the u.s. virgin islands with respect to infrastructure , health care , agriculture , education , economic development , and environmental remediation , among other sectors .

specifically , regarding energy use in both territories , the bill would provide for the use of certain emergency assistance to rebuild electric grids , and would establish grant programs to promote energy efficiency and renewable energy .

funds listed under "project worksheet" in table a - 1 are amounts associated with fema's public assistance program .

funds listed under mission assignment refer to the work orders issued by fema to another federal agency directing the completion of a specific task .

