t here are approximately 766 million acres of forestlands in the united states , most of which are privately owned ( 445 million acres , or 58% ) by individuals , families , native american tribes , corporations , nongovernmental organizations , and other groups ( see figure 1 ) .

the federal government has numerous programs to support forest management on those private forests and also public — state and local — forests .

these programs support a variety of forest management and protection goals , including activities related to planning for and responding to wildfires , as well as supporting the development of new uses and markets for wood products .

these programs are primarily administered by the forest service ( fs ) in the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , and often with the assistance of state partner agencies .

this report describes current forestry assistance programs mostly funded and administered through the state and private forestry ( spf ) branch of the fs .

following a brief background and overview , this report presents information on the purposes of the programs , types of activities funded , eligibility requirements , authorized program duration and funding level , and requested and enacted program appropriations .

figure 1 .

forest landownership in the conterminous united statessource: crs .

data from jaketon h. hewes , brett j. butler , and greg c. liknes , forest ownership in the conterminous united states circa 2014 - geospatial data set , forest service research data archive , 2017 , https: / / doi.og / 10.2737 / rds - 2017-0007 .

providing federal assistance for nonfederal forest landowners has been a component of usda's programs for more than a century .

initial forestry assistance efforts began with the creation of the usda division of forestry in 1881 ( to complement forestry research , which began in 1876 ) .

forestry assistance and research programs grew slowly , and in 1901 the division was upgraded to the usda bureau of forestry .

in 1905 , the bureau merged with the interior department's division of forestry ( which administered the forest reserves , later renamed national forests ) and became the usda forest service ( fs ) .

the fs has three primary mission areas: managing the national forest system , conducting forestry research , and providing forestry assistance .

the senate and house agriculture committees have jurisdiction over forestry in general , forestry assistance , and forestry research programs .

congress authorized specific forestry assistance programs in the clarke - mcnary act of 1924 .

this law guided those programs for more than half a century , until it was revised in the cooperative forestry assistance act of 1978 ( cfaa ) .

the house and senate agriculture committees often examine these programs in the periodic omnibus legislation to reauthorize agriculture and food policy programs , commonly known as farm bills .

the 2008 farm bill established national funding priorities ( conserve working forests , protect and restore forests , and enhance public benefits from private forests ) ; enacted a standardized process for states to assess forest resource conditions and strategize about funding needs ; and established , modified , and repealed specific assistance programs , among other provisions .

the 2014 farm bill repealed several programs , mostly programs whose authorizations had expired or programs that had never received appropriations .

the 2014 farm bill also reauthorized and modified the requirement for statewide assessments and the office of international forestry .

many of the agricultural programs — including two forestry programs — authorized by the 2014 farm bill are scheduled to expire at the end of fy2018 unless congress provides for an extension or reauthorizes them .

most forestry assistance programs are administered by the fs , but the programs are typically implemented by state partners ( eg , state forestry or natural resource agencies ) .

in these cases , the fs provides technical and financial aid to the states , which then provides information and assistance to private landowners or specified eligible entities .

however , the 2008 farm bill expanded the definition of authorized conservation practices for agricultural conservation programs generally to include forestry practices , and thus direct federal financial assistance to private forest landowners may be feasible through the conservation programs .

see table 1 for a brief summary of the fs programs addressed in this report ; more information on each program is available in the " forest service assistance programs " section of this report .

to be eligible to receive funds for most of the programs , each state must prepare a state forest action plan , consisting of a statewide assessment of forest resource conditions , including the conditions and trends of forest resources in the state ; threats to forest lands and resources , consistent with national priorities ; any areas or regions of the state that are a priority ; and any multistate areas that are a regional priority ; and a long - term statewide forest resource strategy , including strategies for addressing the threats to forest resources identified in the assessment ; and a description of the resources necessary for the state forester to address the statewide strategy .

the state forest action plans are to be reviewed every 5 years and revised every 10 years .

all 50 states , the district of columbia , and 8 territories are covered by a state forest action plan .

each state must also publish an annual funding report and have a state forest stewardship coordination ( fsc ) committee .

chaired by the state forester and composed of federal , state , and local representatives ( including representatives from conservation , industry , recreation , and other organizations ) , the fsc committee makes recommendations on statewide priorities on specific programs as well as on the development and maintenance of the state forest action plan .

this report focuses on forestry assistance programs administered by fs .

other agencies , inside and outside of usda , also administer programs that may have forest conservation or protection benefits .

for example , the usda farm services agency ( fsa ) administers several programs , including the emergency forest restoration program , which provides assistance to nonindustrial forest landowners to recover or restore forests following catastrophic events .

the usda natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) administers the healthy forest reserve program , which funds agreements , contracts , or easements to assist landowners with forest restoration or enhancement projects .

the department of the interior administers a community assistance program to support collaborative community planning and projects to mitigate wildfire risk .

the tabular presentation that follows provides basic information covering each of the fs forestry and fire assistance programs , including brief program description ; program activities ; eligibility requirements ; the fs appropriations account budget line item that provides funding for the program ; authorized funding levels and any funding restrictions ; fy2018 funding level in the consolidated appropriations act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) ; fy2019 funding level requested by the administration ; statutory authority , recent amendments , and u.s. code reference ; expiration date of program authority unless permanently authorized ; and program's website link .

information for the following tables is drawn largely from agency budget documents and presentations , explanatory notes , and websites .

further information about these programs may be found on the fs spf website at http: / / www.fs.fed.us / spf and on the "cooperative forestry" page .

