shortly following his confirmation as secretary of state in april 2018 , secretary mike pompeo lifted the hiring freeze that former secretary rex tillerson left in place for over a year .

subsequent guidance issued after the hiring freeze indicates that the department intends to increase foreign and civil service personnel levels in a manner consistent with the language and funding congress included in the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) .

the trump administration has taken additional actions affecting department of state personnel , including designing "keystone modernization projects" within its leadership and modernization impact initiative .

these projects seek to strengthen workforce readiness and enhance performance management and employee accountability , among other goals .

the state department is also prioritizing efforts to address long - standing concerns regarding the perceived lack of diversity in the foreign service .

the trump administration has moved more slowly than previous administrations in transmitting nominations for senior department of state positions to the senate for advice and consent ; meanwhile , the senate has taken longer than it has in the past to provide advice and consent for many of those nominations that have been transmitted .

in general , some supporters of personnel reform argue that the department of state has become increasingly overstaffed and sclerotic in recent decades , and that reform is needed to restore the department's foreign policymaking influence that it is perceived to have lost to other government entities such as the national security council and the department of defense .

others , however , have asserted that some of the administration's policies , especially those under secretary tillerson , were leading to a weak , understaffed department of state incapable of advancing and protecting america's foreign policy and national security interests abroad .

among those who have demonstrated concern with the administration's approach is senator robert menendez , the ranking member of the senate committee on foreign relations , who has commented that "we have an emaciated state department under this administration. .

since his confirmation , secretary pompeo has pledged that he will work to enable the department of state to play a central role in implementing president trump's agenda and protecting the national security of the united states , empower the department's personnel in their roles , and ensure that department personnel have a clear understanding of the president's mission .

while the president possesses a level of control over personnel policies at the department of state , congress has demonstrated interest in leveraging its constitutional and statutory prerogatives to shape the department's personnel policies since at least the mid - 19 th century , when it codified compensation levels for individuals appointed to certain diplomatic and consular positions .

more recently , passage of the landmark foreign service act of 1980 ( p.l .

96-465 ) , building upon previous legislation dating back to the early 20 th century , created the infrastructure for the modern - day foreign service , which is the united states' professional diplomatic corps tasked with serving at both u.s. overseas posts and in key diplomatic positions based at the department's headquarters in washington , dc and elsewhere in the united states .

among other matters , the law prescribes the admission , appointment , promotion , and separation procedures of the foreign service .

these provisions are designed to uphold congressional intent that , as reflected in legislation for over a century , america's diplomats serve as part of a professional organization wherein individuals are appointed and promoted in a manner that reflects merit principles .

in addition to the foreign service , the department of state also employed over 10,000 civil service ( cs ) employees as of december 2017 .

congress has long been engaged in governing the administration of the civil service , passing the pendleton act of 1883 , which is viewed by many as the legal foundation of the civil service .

the civil service reform act of 1978 ( p.l .

95-454 ) , as amended , provides the modern statutory framework for the civil service .

given the priority the trump administration has placed on implementing changes affecting department of state personnel , some members of congress with varying degrees of support for the administration's efforts have demonstrated renewed interest in applying congressional prerogatives to ensure that any changes enhance american capabilities to project and protect its interests overseas .

factoring in the administration's existing priorities and the fact that the administration's policies could expand in scope , this report provides a comprehensive background summary of department of state personnel infrastructure and practices , including those areas where policies were established or could be adjusted through congressional action .

it begins with an overview of the foreign service , including a summary of legislative efforts to codify a professional foreign service and its key personnel policies .

it then explores the department's foreign service and civil service personnel categories in some detail , specifying key statutes and authorities that remain relevant to current department workforce issues .

the report concludes by identifying selected issues for congress , which comprise areas where the trump administration is seeking to implement changes , and where congress may seek to weigh in directly or indirectly .

congress established the department of state in 1789 and pr e scribed an initial salary for the secretary of state , the department's chief clerk , and other clerks employed by the department .

the department's domestic staff was initially extremely small , consisting of only three clerks and translators when thomas jefferson became secretary of state i n 1790 and expanding to 10 such individuals by the conclusion of the 18 th century .

similarly , u.s. diplomatic representation abroad was fair ly limited during this period — only two commissioned american diplomats were present in europe when president washington was inaugurated in 1789 .

by 1797 , the united states maintained diplomatic relations with france , great britain , the netherlands , portugal , and spain , yet had only limited diplomatic ties with other countries , including austria , prussia , russia , and sweden .

department of state personnel can broadly be characterized as being employed in the foreign service or the civil service ; however , many categories therein are governed by various legal authorities passed by congress .

with respect to the foreign service , such categories encompass chiefs of mission , all u.s. diplomats serving at state department posts abroad and in the united states , the locally employed staff with management responsibilities important to the functioning of overseas posts , and all other foreign service personnel .

therefore , should congress seek to weigh in on executive branch practices — including the admission , appointment , or promotion of an official of the department of state ; the responsibilities or compensation afforded to a department official ; or the separation of an official from the department of state — the means through which it would do so depend on the employment category of the official in question and its associated legal authorities .

the department of state's staffing levels and global presence have gradually increased throughout american history , experiencing significant growth in the 20 th century as the united states assumed a greater leadership role in global affairs .

for example , the number of domestic state department employees increased from 1,128 in 1940 to 3,767 in 1945 , while the number of foreign service personnel increased from around 1,650 in the years immediately following world war ii to 3,436 by the end of 1957 .

more recently , the combined total number of foreign service generalists and specialists has increased from 11,555 in 2008 to 13,676 in 2017 , while the number of civil service employees increased from 9,262 to 10,503 over the same period .

however , the number of foreign service and civil service employees at the department of state declined from december 2016 to december 2017 amid the department's previous efforts to reduce personnel levels ( as described in the " state department personnel staffing levels " subsection below ) .

amid these declines , the american foreign service association ( afsa ) expressed particular concern regarding reductions in the number of senior foreign service officers , including those at the rank of career minister and minister counselor .

according to the department of state , the number of senior foreign service officers serving at the rank of career minister declined from 27 at the end of fy2016 to 19 at the end of fy2017 , while the number of those serving at the rank of minister - counselor declined from 431 to 385 .

afsa attributed such declines in part to what it said were department decisions to slash promotions .

it added that because the foreign service , like the military , recruits officers at the entry level and develops them into senior leaders over a number of years , the department of state will face significant difficulties replacing lost talent quickly .

department of state officials offered a different assertion , attributing the broader decline in the number of senior foreign service personnel largely to senate inaction in approving career senior foreign service promotions transmitted for advice and consent .

see table 5 for more information comparing the department's personnel levels in 2008 and 2017 .

congress has long maintained an interest in personnel matters at the department of state .

issues concerning state department personnel , including but not limited to those discussed below , are frequently highlighted in reports and analyses concerning broader potential efforts to reorganize or reform the department .

among the most recent examples , a 2017 report on state department reform published by the atlantic council recommended that the state department initiate a redesign of intake , assignment , and promotion processes for personnel .

the report also pushed for expanding leadership and management training for mid - and senior - level personnel .

also in 2017 , the american academy of diplomacy recommended that in the midst of any reorganization , domestically assigned personnel should bear the brunt of any major staff cuts , while "front line" personnel should be increased .

in addition , a 2016 report from the heritage foundation , among other recommendations , called on the department to ( 1 ) increase assignments of foreign service employees abroad from an average of three years to five years , ( 2 ) better ensure that candidates for ambassador appointments are qualified , and ( 3 ) conduct an evaluation of the standards , training , and qualifications for both the foreign and civil service .

the 115 th congress has been engaged in a variety of state department personnel issues , including the trump administration's ongoing efforts to leverage the leadership and modernization impact initiative to make the department's workforce more capable of responding to emerging global challenges and priorities .

in addition , the initiative seeks to ensure that the process the department employs to conduct performance reviews better emphasizes employee accountability and provides tools to facilitate employee performance improvement .

some members of congress have expressed concern regarding personnel staffing levels at the department of state , asserting that the department may lack the human capital required to deliver on its mission .

moreover , some members of congress and others have noted misgivings regarding the pace at which the administration is transmitting nominations for senior department positions that require the advice and consent of the senate .

congress also continues to provide oversight of the department of state's efforts to comply with the foreign service act of 1980's directive that the foreign service be sufficiently diverse to be representative of the american people and implement authorities provided in law to allow the department to recruit personnel from all segments of american society .

the below sections examine the state of play with each of these issues and include related congressional activity and potential options .

as noted above , several legislative vehicles and options are available to congress , including but not limited to foreign relations authorization measures and annual appropriations bills , that would enable it to enact new laws or amending existing laws pertaining to department of state personnel .

while such measures could address aforementioned matters pertaining to implementation of the impact initiative , personnel staffing levels , diversity , and the provision of advice and consent by the senate for nominees for selected state department senior positions .

congress could also address other personnel issues through legislation .

for example , the department of state authorities act , fiscal year 2017 ( p.l .

114-323 ) , provided new authorities on matters such as security training for personnel assigned to high - risk , high - threat posts , compensation for locally employed staff , the expansion of civil service opportunities , and means of lateral entry into the foreign service for mid - career professionals .

the 115 th congress is currently considering competing versions of an authorization bill for fy2018 ( s. 1631 in the senate and h.r .

5592 in the house of representatives ) that , if enacted , would weigh in on additional personnel matters .

