daylight saving time ( dst ) is a period of the year between spring and fall when clocks in most parts of the united states are set one hour ahead of standard time .

the beginning and ending dates and times — the second sunday in march at two o'clock ante meridian and the first sunday in november at two o'clock ante meridian — are set in statute .

congressional interest in the potential benefits and costs of dst has resulted in changes to dst observance since it was first adopted in the united states .

congress may consider whether to make additional changes to dst observance or standard time .

congress may also consider whether additional examination of potential benefits and costs of dst observance would be informative .

this report presents a selected history of dst in the united states and includes a summary of potential effects , selected state actions related to dst or standard time , and federal legislation that has been introduced related to dst in the 115 th congress .

the development of railroads led to the creation of a standard time in the united states .

to reduce the confusion resulting from locally established "sun times" at railroad terminals , u.s. and canadian railroads adopted four standard time zones in 1883 .

the four established times zones were the eastern , central , mountain , and pacific .

adoption of time zones at the local level was influenced by the time zones adopted by the railroads .

support and opposition to changes in dst observance often focus on its potential effects .

those in favor of extending dst observance reportedly argue that the extended daylight in the evening promotes economic activity , including tourism .

those against extending dst observance reportedly argue that losing an hour of daylight in the morning could negatively affect golf course operations , ski resorts , and schoolchildren's morning commutes .

a number of studies have been conducted on dst's effects on safety , energy savings , and health .

a selection of these — including studies mandated by congress — is discussed in this section .

this is not a comprehensive review of the literature .

congress has required several agencies to evaluate the effects of dst .

dot provided an interim evaluation and final report on the operation and effects of dst in 1974 and 1975 .

the interim report's findings were inconclusive , stating that the observed effects were "so small that they could not in general be reliably separated from effects of other changes occurring at the time. .

the report concluded that , "there is no unambiguous direct evidence that [the measurable effects of year - round daylight saving time] were either beneficial or harmful. .

dot reported that "modest overall benefits might be realized by a shift from the historic six - month dst ( may through october ) [to year - round dst] in areas of energy conservation , overall traffic safety , and reduced violent crime. .

dot also reported that these potential benefits would be minimal and difficult to distinguish from seasonal variations and fluctuations in energy prices .

although states may exempt themselves , in whole or in part , from dst , they cannot independently change time zone or alter the length of dst ( i.e. , dst begins and ends on statutorily mandated dates ) .

there are two ways in which an area can be moved from one time zone to another: by regulation or by statute .

under the standard time act of 1918 , as amended by the uniform time act of 1966 , moving a state or an area within a state from one time zone to another requires dot regulation .

such a request can be made only by certain political authorities in an area .

for example , if the request for change is for one or more counties , the board ( or boards ) of county commissioners would make the request .

if the request is for a state , the governor or the legislature would make the request .

the principles for deciding whether to change the time zone are the area's "convenience of commerce and the existing junction points and division points of common carriers engaged in interstate or foreign commerce. .

the convenience of commerce is defined broadly to consider such circumstances as the shipment of goods within the community ; the origin of television and radio broadcasts ; the areas where most residents work , attend school , worship , or receive health care ; the location of airports , railways , and bus stations ; and the major elements of the community's economy .

after receiving a request , dot determines whether it meets the minimum statutory criteria before issuing a notice of proposed rulemaking , under which it would solicit public comment and schedule a public hearing .

usually the hearing is held in the area requesting the change so that affected parties can be represented .

after the comment period closes , comments are reviewed and appropriate final action is taken .

if the secretary agrees that the statutory requirement has been met , the change would be instituted , usually at the next changeover to or from dst .

even though a state cannot unilaterally go on year - round dst , several states have initiated efforts to change the summer observance of dst .

these include efforts to establish permanent dst as well as efforts to establish permanent standard time .

crs identified 16 states that have proposed legislation to establish some variation of permanent dst since 2015: alabama , california , colorado , connecticut , florida , idaho , illinois , iowa , mississippi , missouri , new mexico , nevada , oklahoma , south carolina , washington , and wyoming .

in the case of idaho , the proposal would only apply to the 10 northern counties that are currently in pacific standard time should the state of washington move from pacific standard time to mountain standard time ( i.e. , one hour ahead ) and exempt itself from dst , effectively implementing year - round dst .

prior to 2015 , legislation was introduced in the louisiana legislature in 2003 , 2006 , and 2010 that sought to make dst permanent standard time .

in addition , four states in new england — maine , massachusetts , new hampshire , and rhode island — have reportedly created commissions or introduced proposals to move to year - round dst .

in the case of new england , the proposals would reportedly change the standard time zone from eastern standard time to atlantic standard time ( i.e. , one hour ahead ) , which would "effectively adopt daylight saving time all year round. .

while some states have proposed legislation to establish permanent dst , other states have proposed legislation to establish permanent standard time .

crs identified 17 states that have proposed such legislation since 2015: alabama , alaska , california , connecticut , florida , kansas , michigan , missouri , nebraska , north dakota , oklahoma , oregon , south dakota , texas , utah , washington , and wyoming .

in eight of these states , legislators have proposed both permanent dst and permanent standard time legislation: alabama , california , connecticut , florida , missouri , oklahoma , washington , and wyoming .

several states have also introduced legislation to study the effects of dst or the effects of changing the observance of dst .

these include louisiana , new york , south carolina , virginia , and washington .

most of the legislative proposals in recent years have not passed .

one exception is florida's h.b .

1013 , the sunshine protection act .

on march 23 , 2018 , governor scott approved h.b .

1013 , which would institute year - round dst in florida "if the united states congress amends 15 u.s.c .

s. 260a to authorize states to observe daylight saving time year - round. .

congress may consider whether to make additional changes to dst observance or standard time .

in the 115 th congress , four bills have been introduced that would make changes to standard time .

the four bills introduced are two sets of related house and senate bills: the sunshine state act ( s. 2536 and h.r .

5278 ) and the sunshine protection act of 2018 ( s. 2537 and h.r .

5279 ) .

the sunshine state act would make daylight saving time permanent in the state of florida by setting the standard time of florida advanced one hour ( effectively moving it from eastern standard time to atlantic standard time ) .

the sunshine protection act of 2018 would make daylight saving time permanent for most states and areas in the united states by advancing standard time one hour ( with exemptions for states and areas that do not observe dst on the day before enactment ) .

information on the benefits and costs of dst with its current length compared to year - round observance ( or other variations ) may be of congressional interest .

on march 12 , 2018 , the house committee on energy and commerce sent a letter to the department of transportation requesting updated information related to dst and standard time "to more fully appreciate the various policy factors associated with changing between standard and [dst]. .

