despite steady urbanization , some 71% of u.s. road mileage is in rural areas .

in recent decades , though , many rural areas have lost population , leaving state and local governments with the financial burden of maintaining roads that may carry diminishing traffic yet still be important to a particular community or to a local industry , such as agriculture .

rural roads received about 37% of federal highway funds during fy2009-fy2015 , although they accounted for about 30% of annual vehicle miles traveled .

this report examines the special challenges of maintaining rural roads and presents data on their use and condition .

it also looks at federal spending on rural roads and discusses relevant policy issues for congress .

there is no single definition of "rural," and different definitions may lead to different conclusions about conditions in rural america: the census bureau defines rural areas to be those outside urbanized areas with populations of 50,000 or more or urban clusters that have populations of at least 2,500 .

under this definition , many urban fringe counties and rural areas within urban counties are treated as rural .

some 97% of the land area of the united states , home to about 60 million people or 19% of the u.s. population , is rural under the census bureau definition .

people who live in areas that are defined as rural in this way are more likely to own single - family homes , to reside in their state of birth , to be older , and to have somewhat lower household incomes than those living in urban areas .

the department of agriculture's economic research service ( ers ) uses a definition established by the office of management and budget , under which rural counties do not have urbanized areas of 50,000 or more people and are not tied to urbanized areas by labor commuting patterns .

this definition , which encompasses 72% of u.s. land area and 46 million residents , treats many urban fringe areas as urbanized , in contrast to the census bureau's definition .

ers finds the median household income in rural areas to be about 25% lower than in urban areas , although it says this gap is mitigated by differences in the cost of living .

ers also finds that median household farm income exceeded median u.s. household income by 29% , suggesting that farm households fare better economically than other rural households .

the federal highway administration ( fhwa ) uses definitions of urban and rural areas similar to those of the census bureau , but sets a higher population threshold to qualify as an urban area ( over 5,000 residents , as opposed to 2,500 ) .

fhwa's definition also considers population density .

these differences mean that a larger area is considered rural by fhwa than by the census bureau .

in general , rural residents are more dependent on automobiles than urban residents and have little access to public transportation .

automobile commuting is more common for workers living outside of metropolitan areas ( 91% ) compared with commuters living in a large central city ( 78% ) .

generally , vehicle availability rates are high in rural areas: only 2.3% of workers who live outside of a principal city lack access to a vehicle .

despite this , a high proportion of low - income rural households are characterized by "carlessness. .

according to 2017 national household travel survey data , nearly 20% of rural households with incomes below $15,000 lack access to a vehicle .

agriculture and mining continue to be major rural industries but because of productivity increases and more rapid growth of other sectors , agriculture ( 2% ) and mining ( 3% ) together provide less than 5% of wage and salary jobs in rural counties .

the leading sources of rural employment are education and health ( 25% ) ; trade , transportation , and utilities ( 20% ) ; manufacturing ( 15% ) ; and leisure and hospitality ( 11% ) .

increased oil and gas drilling has been an important source of rural job growth in recent years .

most other industries added jobs in rural areas at rates below nationwide trends between 2001 and 2015 .

rural manufacturers , who are concentrated in the eastern states , shed 700,000 jobs over that period .

nonetheless , manufacturing still provides a higher share of jobs and earnings in nonmetropolitan areas than in metropolitan areas .

manufacturing and mining workers have the highest median wages in rural areas .

conceptually , the national roadway system serves two fundamental travel needs: access and mobility .

within these concepts , each road is assigned a classification that defines its role in serving the flow of traffic through the network .

according to federal highway administration statistics , 2.9 million miles , or 71% , of the 4.1 million miles of public - access roads in the united states are rural roads .

roughly 45% ( 1.3 million miles ) of this rural mileage is unpaved .

more than three - quarters of rural road mileage comprises minor collectors and local roads , which are generally not eligible for federal funds .

about 23% of the nation's rural roads are eligible for federal funding under the federal - aid highway program ( fahp ) .

table 1 sets forth the scope of rural road categories relative to the national totals .

over the last 30 years the share of centerline miles of road categorized as rural has declined from 82% to 71% , primarily because of road reclassification due to urbanization .

based on the 2016 national bridge inventory , there are 443,610 bridges over 20 feet long on rural roads .

these bridges make up 72% of the national total of 614,386 bridges .

roughly 57% of these rural bridges are not considered part of the federal - aid highway system , but all bridges in the inventory are eligible for fahp funding .

although rural roads account for 71% of road mileage , only about 30% of annual vehicle miles traveled ( vmt ) are on rural roads .

the usage of rural roads differs substantially from that of urban roads ( table 2 ) .

cars and other light vehicles account for 84.5% of vehicle miles traveled on rural roads , whereas they account for 92% of vmt on urban roads .

over 20% of rural interstate system vmt is driven by combination trucks , compared with 7.5% on urban interstates .

in absolute terms , the majority of combination truck vmt occurs on rural interstate highways .

highway construction has involved a federal - state partnership since passage of the federal aid road act of 1916 ( 39 stat .

355 ) .

the initial program was specifically created for the "construction of rural post roads. .

however , not all rural roads are eligible for federal assistance .

state highway agencies own 610,674 miles of rural roads , of which 426,675 ( 64% ) are federal - aid eligible .

these roads include the interstate system highways , most of the national highway system highways , and most other roads marked as state routes .

of the 1,576,416 miles of rural county roads , 216,362 miles ( 13.7% ) are eligible for federal aid .

most off - system county roads are maintained with local funds , sometimes supplemented with state funds .

another 556,325 rural road miles are the responsibility of township or municipal governments .

of these roads , 11,033 miles are federal - aid eligible .

in addition , 133,349 miles of rural roads are under federal ownership .

this includes roads in national parks , national forests , and other federal lands ; 5,953 miles are eligible under fhwa's programs .

the rest are funded by the federal agencies that own them .

most federal highway funds are apportioned to the states by formula .

within broad guidelines , decisions about which road and bridge construction projects to undertake with this money are left primarily to state departments of transportation , which determine how much of their federal funding should be spent in rural or urban areas .

the states are required to provide 20% of the cost of non - interstate system projects and 10% for interstate system projects .

state departments of transportation largely determine which projects are funded , let the contracts , and oversee project development and construction .

a limited amount of federal money is distributed through grants awarded at the discretion of the u.s. secretary of transportation .

local public entities , as well as states , may apply for these grants under the nationally significant freight and highway projects program and the better utilizing investments to leverage development ( build ) program ( formerly known as the tiger program ) .

of 41 tiger grants approved in fy2017 , 26 were for projects in rural areas , according to dot .

the department stated in april 2018 that "underinvestment in rural transportation systems has allowed a slow and steady decline in the transportation routes that connect rural american communities," and that it "intends to award a greater share of build transportation discretionary grant funding to projects located in rural areas that align well with the selection criteria than to such projects in urban areas. .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) requires that at least 30% of build funds must be awarded to projects located in rural areas , and allows dot to pay more than 80% of the cost of such projects .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 also appropriated $225 million for a discretionary bridge grant program , which is limited to states with a population density of fewer than 100 people per square mile .

also , 10% of the secured loans , loan guarantees , and lines of credit provided under the transportation infrastructure finance and innovation act program ( tifia ) are set aside to assist rural projects .

a considerable share of the funds distributed through several other programs , including the tribal transportation program , the federal lands transportation program , the federal lands access program , the appalachian development highway system , and the construction of ferry boats and ferry facilities program , is spent in rural areas as well .

published nationwide funding statistics that distinguish between rural and urban road spending are limited .

table 5 sets forth the obligation of federal funds by rural or urban functional classification for fy2009 through fy2015 .

in 2016 , fhwa began using geospatial data to determine whether projects were rural or urban .

adjustments made for fy2016 and fy2017 created data not comparable to the data in previous years .

because of these data issues the figures in table 5 are limited to fy2009-fy2015 .

annually , rural roads received an average of 37.4% of federally obligated highway funds during fy2009-fy2015 .

this is more than rural roads' 29% share of vmt on federal - aid highways but less than the roughly 65% of federal - aid highway centerline miles that are classified as rural .

the data also indicate that the rural share of obligations was relatively stable across these years .

table 6 sets forth the outlays by the states for capital expenditures on fahp rural and urban roads .

the data indicate that , on average , spending per vehicle mile traveled on rural roads is approximately 10% higher than on urban roads .

this spending pattern shows up in evaluations of pavement quality: 2.1% of rural interstate highway miles were judged to be in poor condition in 2014 , compared with 5.3% of miles on urban interstates ( see appendix a ) .

nationwide data indicate that federal - aid highways in rural areas are generally in acceptable condition .

the condition of rural roads not on the federal - aid system is less clear , due largely to the lack of comparable data .

although traffic congestion exists in some rural areas , it is not equal in intensity or duration to that in urban areas .

deficient rural bridges , however , remain a problem since states and counties have trouble raising the funds to fix them .

over the long term , the main constraint on spending federal - aid highway funds for rural projects is the amount of funding available rather than the structure of the federal aid .

in most states , a major increase in federal funds under the current programs would lead to more spending on rural roads .

recent improvements in pavement condition and declines in the number of deficient rural bridges indicate that many states have kept rural roads in mind during their highway spending decisionmaking , even without a specific formula program devoted to rural roads and bridges .

a number of organizations have called for a major expansion of lane miles on the interstate system and other national highway system roads in rural areas .

a 2007 transportation research board report recommended adding a total of 173,000 lane miles to the national highway system over a 30-year period at a cost in 2007 dollars of $3.1 trillion ( $3.8 trillion in 2018 dollars ) .

the proposal called for 73,600 lane miles of metropolitan road and bridge improvements and 68,000 lane miles of freight logistics improvements in both urban and rural areas , and also recommended adding 16,000 lane miles to existing interstate system highways in rural areas .

a less ambitious program might be to build on the existing system for designating future interstate highways .

states and combinations of states may request additions to the interstate system either by administrative procedure or by congressional action , and the designations are made on a case - by - case basis .

new routes have to meet all the standards of a highway on the interstate system and be a logical addition or connection to the interstate system .

states may use funds from existing federal highway programs to finance construction of new interstates .

only one addition has been completed .

should congress decide to create a separate program specifically to finance new interstate highways , it could distribute funds based on cost - to - complete estimates , as was the case with the original interstate program .

even this would be an expensive program and would be as much an urban program as a rural one .

the fhwa's road classification system is in part an attempt to come to grips with the question of the extent to which federal road spending should serve a national purpose .

major roads , such as interstate system highways , are deemed to have a national purpose because they facilitate the interstate movement of goods and people .

congress has implicitly determined that local roads , neighborhood streets , and rural local collectors do not serve a national purpose and should not receive federal funding .

the major exceptions to this are grants for off - system bridges and safety improvements .

congress could address rural road conditions by allowing states to designate rural local connectors or certain other local rural roads as part of the federal - aid highway system or simply by allowing states to spend their federal funds on any public - access roads .

there are , however , potential drawbacks to expanding the scope of federal - aid highway system roads and bridges .

without a net increase in federal spending , expanding the system to include lightly traveled rural collector and local roads would cause the states to spread their federal funds more thinly across the expanded network .

this could make it harder for states to concentrate federal funds on their more expensive or higher - priority road projects .

adding local roads and rural collectors to the federal - aid highway system could raise the costs of road improvements if local governments were required to comply with the same federal regulations and engineering standards that now apply to projects using federal funds .

in states with declining rural populations there may be more roads and bridges in some areas than can be sustained financially .

closing lightly used roads and bridges or pulverizing their pavement back to gravel could save maintenance and resurfacing costs , allowing states and counties to devote their funds to maintaining a smaller , more heavily used network of local roads .

while all of the roads and bridges that would be downgraded or abandoned would likely be off the federal - aid system , spending less money on them could have indirect effects on federal - aid spending in that the savings might make it more likely that counties could accumulate sufficient funds to , for example , provide the local match to federal aid for off - system bridge repairs .

congress could consider providing an incentive for pulverizing underused paved rural roads or permanently closing underused rural bridges that have nearby alternatives .

for example , congress could allow the use of federal funds to cover the cost of pulverizing a road or closing a bridge , or might offer a higher federal share for a rural bridge project that involves the permanent closure of a deficient bridge nearby .

the highway safety improvement program ( hsip ) , one of the formula programs administered by fhwa , was established to provide funding for highway infrastructure safety improvements .

this funding can be used for improvements to any public - access road .

these improvements can range from adding side striping or rumble strips to intersection reconfiguration .

congress could increase funding for safety projects on rural roads by altering the rules for state use of hsip grants or by eliminating the ability of states to transfer hsip funds to other highway programs .

in the past , the federal - aid highway program incorporated numerous programs for specific purposes .

over time , congress has reduced the number of programs ; the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century act ( map - 21 ; p.l .

112-141 ) of 2012 , for example , reduced the number of programs by two - thirds to roughly 30 programs .

creating a separate program for rural roads would assure that federal funds are spent for this purpose , although this could be seen as reversing recent efforts to provide the states greater flexibility in the use of federal funding .

federal regulations require the consideration of economic development in the statewide transportation planning process .

the fhwa has published a primer to provide guidance to state and local officials on how to do this .

the primer suggests that highway project decisions should be made based on their broader transportation benefits , not solely on expected job creation .

it asserts that transportation can shape development but cannot create development where there is no demand .

in rural areas , particularly areas that are losing population or have experienced persistent poverty , it is common for local officials to focus on highway improvements as a means of attracting industry .

for example , some states have gradually expanded two - lane state highways into limited - access four - lane roads for safety purposes but also in the hope that greater rural road capacity would lead to more economic development .

if there are no other substantive reasons for employers to locate in a particular community , however , construction could produce little - used infrastructure which might provide few of the hoped - for benefits .

there would be opportunity costs for not spending the highway funds elsewhere .

fully autonomous vehicles that can navigate the entire public access road network could provide major benefits to rural areas .

the vehicles have the potential to provide the kind of mobility to rural areas that public transportation does to urban areas .

getting elderly or carless rural residents to appointments , lowering accident rates , and increasing the efficiency of freight movements are examples of the kinds of benefits that autonomous vehicles could bring to rural areas .

currently there are no fully autonomous vehicles available for public use .

the availability of vehicles that can drive autonomously at all times on all rural roads is likely far into the future .

however , autonomous vehicles that can safely and effectively operate within a limited domain of roads may come into use considerably sooner .

in rural areas , interstate system roads are likely to be the first roads on which autonomous vehicles operate because of their design uniformity .

unpaved rural roads may offer greater challenges to autonomous vehicles , due to the lack of road markings and uniform design features .

the need for predictability of road design will make road design standards an important factor in the adoption of autonomous vehicles .

appendix a .

percentages of good , fair , and poor ride quality appendix b .

structurally deficient rural bridges by stat .

