paragraphs 2 and 3 of senate rule xix identify language that is considered to violate standards of decorum in debate .

such "disorderly" language includes directly or indirectly imputing to another senator or senators "any conduct or motive unworthy or unbecoming a senator" ( paragraph 2 ) and referrin g "offensively to any state of the union" ( paragraph 3 ) .

rule xix prohibits imputing conduct or motive "by any form of words" to a sitting senator .

the presiding officer has stated that this prohibition includes language taken from "quotes , articles , or other materials," not just original words spoken by a senator in debate .

from a historical standpoint , these explicit statements of words that constitute disorderly language are relatively recent additions to the senate's standing rules .

the language of paragraph 2 related to impugning motives and of paragraph 3 against speaking offensively of any state were both adopted on april 8 , 1902 .

while these explicit examples of disorderly language are newer to senate rules , the prohibitions they codify are not .

the senate has , from its earliest days , stressed the importance of decorum in debate and had a mechanism in its rules to sanction senators who use disorderly language .

senators could have been , and were , called to order for imputing motives or maligning a state prior to the adoption of these paragraphs .

the concepts of decorum in debate made explicit by rule xix are clearly stated in section xvii of thomas jefferson's manual of parliamentary practice ( " jefferson's manual " ) and stem from english parliamentary practice prior to the 1 st congress under the constitution .

the statements listed in rule xix are not considered to be a comprehensive recitation of language that may be considered disorderly and violate decorum in senate debate .

for example , while there is no specific senate rule governing such statements , chamber precedents indicate that the body has , on occasion , ruled certain references made in debate to the character or conduct of the house of representatives and its members to be disorderly .

the application of rule xix does not , however , "extend to remarks made about the president of the united states , the vice president , or administration officials," and a senator cannot be called to order under the rule for comments or remarks made in debate about such individuals .

likewise , general criticism of the action of a congressional committee does not constitute a violation of the rule as to motives .

as is discussed below , the presiding officer decides if a senator has used disorderly language in debate in violation of rule xix , subject to an appeal to the full senate .

as previously mentioned , the rule xix call to order is rarely formally invoked .

however , references to the rule in floor debate have been a much more common occurrence and served as warnings or reminders that decorum should be maintained .

both methods of practice are examined in more detail below .

crs conducted full - text searches of the congressional record and the senate journal using the legislative information system of the u.s. congress ( lis ) and the proquest congressional database in order to identify instances in which a call to order under senate rule xix had been formally invoked since june 14 , 1962 .

these instances are identified in table 2 .

the most recent example of a formal call to order being made occurred on february 7 , 2017 .

in that case , a senator was called to order by the majority leader for quoting a former senator and reading passages from a letter written to the committee on the judiciary by a notable private individual , both of which negatively characterized a sitting senator .

the presiding officer had previously warned the speaking senator that her remarks could be in violation of the rule xix provisions regarding disorderly language .

when called to order , the speaking senator asked unanimous consent to proceed in order , but objection was heard to the request .

the presiding officer then instructed the senator in question to take her seat , and she appealed the ruling of the chair .

after a quorum was established , the ruling of the chair was upheld on appeal .

a subsequent motion to allow the speaking senator to proceed in order was rejected by a vote of 43-50 .

in practice , senators have utilized a number of different techniques to draw a speaker's attention to rule xix without formally invoking a call to order .

senators have , for example , stated that they considered raising a rule xix call to order , indicated their belief that certain words transgressed the rule , cautioned their colleagues to be mindful of rule xix when speaking , made parliamentary inquiries of the chair about the application of the call to order mechanism , or directly asked the chair to read from the rule .

these practices afforded senators the opportunity to express their displeasure with a speaker's remarks without having to formally call a colleague to order .

this informal manner of lessening tensions and enforcing decorum in debate is perhaps unsurprising in a chamber that has traditionally valued comity and senatorial courtesy over a rigid adherence to procedure .

most recently , at the urging of a senator , the presiding officer of the senate , on january 21 , 2018 , read paragraph 4 of rule xix aloud to the senate immediately following a request by a senator that it be read aloud .

while it is not clear what specific words prompted the request that the rule be read , the incident occurred in the course of an animated floor debate regarding government funding during a lapse in appropriations .

in another example , on october 4 , 2013 , a senator stated in debate that , in his judgment , certain statements made by another senator violated rule xix standards of decorum but that he was not going to raise a call to order related to them .

in response to the senator's statement , the presiding officer read paragraph 2 of rule xix aloud "for the edification of all senators. .

there have been numerous other examples in recent years in which rule xix was mentioned in floor debate but a call to order was not formally invoked .

