congress has been active in establishing federal policy for the agricultural sector on an ongoing basis since the 1930s .

over the year s , as economic conditions and technology have evolved , congress has regularly revisited agricultural policy through periodic farm legislation .

across these decades , the breadth of policy areas addressed through such farm bills has expanded beyond providing support for a limited number of agricultural commodities to include establishing programs and policies that address a broad spectrum of related areas , such as agricultural conservation , credit , rural development , domestic nutrition assistance , trade and international food aid , organic agriculture , forestry , and support for beginning and veteran farmers and ranchers , among others .

on june 21 , 2018 , the house voted 213-211 to approve h.r .

2 , the agriculture and nutrition act of 2018 , an omnibus farm bill that would establish farm and food policy for the next five years , covering fy2019-fy2023 .

the vote to approve h.r .

2 followed a failed vote of 198-213 on the same bill on may 18 , 2018 .

the final passage vote on june 21 followed a vote of 233-191 approving a motion to reconsider , which was made after the unsuccessful vote on final passage of may 18 .

the senate passed its version of h.r .

2 , the agriculture improvement act of 2018 , on june 28 , 2018 , on a vote of 86-11 .

both the house - and senate - passed versions of h.r .

2 continue the tradition of multi - year farm bills that would establish policy for farm programs and nutrition assistance .

to this end , h.r .

2 addresses agriculture and food policy across 11 titles in the house bill and 12 titles in the senate bill .

these titles cover commodity support programs , agricultural conservation , trade and international food aid , domestic nutrition assistance , credit , rural infrastructure and economic development , research and extension , forestry , horticulture , and a variety of other policies and initiatives .

the disparity in the number of titles between the two bills reflects the provision of a separate title for energy programs in the senate bill , whereas the house bill would eliminate what had been a separate energy title in the 2014 farm bill and place these agricultural energy programs within the title on rural infrastructure and economic development .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) issued its scores of h.r .

2 as passed by the house and the senate on july 24 , 2018 .

cbo projected that spending on mandatory programs in the senate bill would total $867 billion over the 10-year period fy2019-fy2028 and $865 billion in the house bill .

these totals compare with cbo's estimate of the cost of extending the current 2014 farm bill for 10 years of $867 billion .

according to cbo , the estimated costs across titles and individual programs frequently differ between the house - passed bill and the senate - passed bill as well , reflecting the program priorities and policy preferences of each chamber .

the budget impact section of this report includes a breakdown of these differences in the two bills .

both versions of h.r .

2 would supersede the current slate of farm programs and policies authorized by the 2014 farm bill , p.l .

113-79 , many of which are to expire in 2018 unless congress acts to reauthorize or extend them .

certain programs , such as crop insurance , are permanently authorized and would continue to operate in the absence of new farm legislation or an extension of the current farm bill .

the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) could continue to operate as long as funding is appropriated .

but if the current farm law were to expire , many other programs — such as revenue support programs for producers of major agricultural commodities — including corn , wheat , milk , sugar , and others — would be governed by so - called permanent laws , which date from the late 1930s and 1940s and do not expire .

these permanent laws , including the agricultural adjustment act of 1938 ( p.l .

75-430 ) and agricultural act of 1949 ( p.l .

81-439 ) , rely on supply controls to buttress price support regimes that would raise market prices of these basic farm commodities above existing levels .

a change in farm policy along these lines could restrict production and prove to be broadly disruptive for farmers , farm input suppliers , agricultural exporters , food manufacturers , and consumers .

many other programs , such as conservation programs and rural development programs , would cease to function .

in the past , when congress has faced the prospect of expiring farm legislation without enacting successor legislation , it has acted to extend the existing policies , as it did when the 2002 and 2008 acts expired .

a change in the current policy environment from the situation that prevailed when the 2014 farm bill was being debated and enacted is the reduced profitability of the u.s. farm economy .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) forecasts that for 2017 and 2018 , net cash farm income — a measure of the profitability of farming — will be about one - third below the high levels reached in 2012 and 2013 , when congress was considering the 2014 farm bill .

the decline in net cash farm income over this period reflects declining prices for many commodities .

more recently , trade disputes involving major u.s. agricultural export markets — including china , canada , mexico , and the eu — has led to imposition of tariffs by these trading partners on a range of u.s. farm product exports .

agricultural exports provide critical support to u.s. commodity prices and farm profitability .

the tariffs have coincided with a further decline in prices for some u.s. agricultural products while fostering uncertainty about the near - term prospects for u.s. agricultural exports and , by extension , farm income .

this report provides a title - by - title summary of the policies and provisions in the house - and senate - passed versions of h.r .

2 and compares them with current law .

following an analysis of the budgetary implications of both bills , summaries of some of the changes that the house and senate bills would make in each of their 11 and 12 titles , respectively , are provided .

these summaries are followed by title - specific side - by - side comparison tables that briefly describe the provisions in the house - and senate - passed versions of h.r .

2 and compare them with the current law or relevant existing policy .

a farm bill authorizes funding in two ways .

it authorizes and pays for mandatory outlays with multiyear budget estimates when the law is enacted .

it also sets the parameters for discretionary programs and authorizes them to receive future appropriations but does not provide funding .

mandatory programs often dominate farm bill policy and the debate over the farm bill budget .

