g roundwater , the water in aquifers accessible by wells , is a critical component of the u.s. water supply .

it serves as a water source for domestic use and as irrigation water for agriculture , and it is used in mining , oil and gas development , industrial processes , livestock , and thermoelectric power , among other uses .

managing groundwater resources largely has been the purview of states rather than the federal government .

how each state manages its groundwater resources differs and depends on a mix of common law emerging from the 19 th century , state law , court decisions , water settlements , and , to a lesser extent , federal law .

the federal role in managing groundwater includes activities under federal trust responsibilities to indian tribes and reservations .

it also includes management responsibilities for certain federal reservations if the purposes of those reservations require water , such as some national monuments , national forests , military bases , and other federal land holdings .

in addition , the federal government is involved in groundwater monitoring and assessment and in aspects of groundwater recharge , storage , and recovery .

much of the recent congressional interest in groundwater has been broadly related to policies for increasing water supplies generally , as a response to recent droughts , and in preparation for future droughts .

in recent congresses , some members have introduced legislation that could affect how groundwater resources may be managed to better ensure a sufficient and reliable supply , and several such bills ( or portions of such bills ) have been enacted into law .

drought conditions and constrained supplies of surface water have helped to spur legislative action .

these conditions continue to affect many regions in western states , although droughts can occur anywhere in the nation .

congress could continue to explore its authority to affect policy , conduct oversight , and provide appropriations for federal activities that influence groundwater supply management in the united states .

this report is intended to provide context and a broad summary of federal authorities and activities affecting the supply and use of groundwater resources .

whereas the states primarily manage groundwater supply , the federal government plays a more direct role in managing the nation's groundwater quality .

for example , the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( 42 u.s.c .

§§9601 et seq. ) .

authorizes federal cleanup and enforcement actions to respond to releases of hazardous substances to the environment , including groundwater .

in addition , the safe drinking water act ( 42 u.s.c .

§§300f et seq. ) .

authorizes the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) to regulate underground injection activities to protect underground sources of drinking water , including injection wells used for aquifer recharge .

this report focuses on issues related to groundwater supply , not groundwater quality .

this report is divided into two parts .

the first part discusses general background related to groundwater supply and management , including selected major issues before congress .

the second part provides a more detailed primer on groundwater resources , including relevant federal activities and authorities .

in recent years , congressional interest in groundwater has generally been in three major areas aquifer storage , recharge , and recovery ; groundwater rights ( including among other things , groundwater / surface water interaction and federal reserved water rights ) ; and groundwater supply monitoring and assessment .

in some cases , these issues overlap .

numerous bills introduced in the 115 th congress would address several groundwater - related topics .

table 1 includes bills that would affect , in some manner , groundwater topics discussed in this report , including aquifer storage and recharge , groundwater - surface water interaction , treatment of groundwater rights by the federal government , aspects of tribal water rights , reclamation water recycling and reuse programs , drought relief , groundwater studies , and groundwater monitoring and assessment .

table 1 does not include all bills introduced in the 115 th congress that touch on the topic of groundwater ; some of the bills omitted , for example , provide definitions for groundwater but do not affect the policy issues introduced above .

other omitted bills pertain to groundwater quality ( i.e. , bills addressing groundwater protection or remediation ) , which is not addressed in this report .

background on selected topics of interest in the 115 th congress , including relevant legislation , is discussed in more detail below .

groundwater science has advanced markedly in the last century ; this primer presents an introduction to fundamental concepts relevant to groundwater use , management , and recharge .

groundwater is found in aquifers .

an aquifer is composed of ( 1 ) solid materials , such as rocks and mineral grains ; ( 2 ) interconnected spaces or openings ( pore space ) ; and ( 3 ) groundwater , which completely fills the pore space ( figure 2 ) .

strictly speaking , an aquifer is sufficiently permeable ( i.e. , groundwater can move readily through the interconnected pores ) to transmit economic quantities of water to wells or springs .

in other words , if a farmer drills a well into a water - bearing layer of rock or sediments ( sometimes called a formation ) and can pump sufficient quantities of groundwater to irrigate crops , water livestock , or use for drinking water and washing , then that formation can be considered an aquifer .

if the same farmer drilled a well but could not pump enough water to satisfy any needs , then the formation would not be considered an aquifer .

the federal government directly and indirectly influences how groundwater is managed in the united states .

several federal agencies monitor groundwater directly or with partners — through measurements at wells and springs — and remotely using satellites or other remote sensing devices to provide information on groundwater flow , storage , depletion , and other characteristics that help inform state and local groundwater management .

these include the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) , the national aeronautics and space agency ( nasa ) , the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) , and the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

congress has provided other federal agencies with the authority to make water delivered from or water stored at federal water resource projects available for groundwater recharge , storage , and recovery .

these include the two principal federal water resources agencies: the u.s. army corps of engineers ( which operates nationwide ) and the u.s. bureau of reclamation ( which operates in the 17 coterminous states west of the mississippi river ) .

additionally , when the federal government reserves lands for a particular purpose ( such as for a tribal reservation or national monument ) , it impliedly reserves a right to water necessary to accomplish the purposes for which the reservation was created .

that federal reserved water rights doctrine has long been recognized for surface water ; more recently , it is also being considered for groundwater .

 ( see discussion under " groundwater rights ." ) .

long - term changes to the climate affecting the united states , particularly rising temperatures and changes in the patterns , quantities , and type of precipitation ( i.e. , rain versus snow ) , could affect the availability of groundwater in the future .

changes in temperature and precipitation could affect the amount of water that recharges aquifers and therefore could shape how much groundwater is available for irrigation , domestic water supply , and other uses .

however , the amount of natural recharge is just one variable ( albeit an important one ) influencing groundwater supply — its amount and availability .

in some important aquifers , such as the central valley aquifer in california , the largest portion of recharge comes from irrigation return flow: excess water applied to the crops that is not lost to evapotranspiration or runoff .

changes in irrigation practices and technology could significantly alter irrigation return flow in the central valley .

for example , more efficient irrigation would use less water for the same yield yet conversely would contribute less return flow as recharge to the aquifer .

policies that would enable greater artificial recharge , such as current authorities at reclamation and usace or new authorities in pending legislation ( see table 1 ) , also may create long - term changes to groundwater supply and availability .

in addition , broad changes in water demand , such as a transition to less irrigation and more municipal use , could influence how groundwater is used .

all of these factors complicate any precise projection of changes to u.s. groundwater supply .

data collected and distributed by the usgs , nasa , noaa , and the usda will likely improve the understanding of long - term trends in groundwater storage and use .

the long - term trends can be assessed against the effects of climate change in the future .

congress generally has deferred management of u.s. groundwater resources to the states , and that practice appears likely to continue .

several bills introduced in the 115 th congress , for example , contain language directing that the federal government not "assert any connection between surface and groundwater that is inconsistent with such a connection recognized by state water laws. .

 ( see , for example , s. 1230 , s. 2563 , h.r .

23 , and h.r .

2939 . ) .

those same bills also would prohibit the federal government from requiring the transfer of water rights to the united states , or obtaining a water right in the name of the united states , as a condition for receiving , renewing , amending , or extending "any permit , approval , license , lease , allotment , easement , right - of - way , or other land use or occupancy agreement. .

in addition , the bills contain language asserting that federal reserved water rights would not be limited or expanded by the legislation .

while confirming congressional deference to state water law , several bills would address the effects of drought in part authorizing or recognizing activities that could increase the ability to artificially recharge aquifers and provide for aquifer storage and recovery ( eg , s. 1460 , s. 2563 , and h.r .

23 , and others ) .

severe and widespread droughts over the last 10 years in california , the midwest , and texas and a longer period of drier - than - normal conditions in the southwest have contributed to increasing congressional attention to the effects of drought on increased groundwater pumping and the depletion of groundwater supplies .

this has led to legislation in the 115 th and earlier congresses that would support augmentation of water supplies by enhanced aquifer recharge and the ability to store groundwater in an aquifer for later recovery when surface water supplies are curtailed by drought .

existing authorities for reclamation and usace allow for federal projects to be involved in aquifer recharge , storage , and recovery in some way , and proposed legislation ( such as s. 2563 and other bills ) would augment those authorities .

a connection between federal water projects and groundwater enhancement already exists in arizona , as part of the central arizona project , and is implemented via state law .

more recently , california enacted three groundwater laws known collectively as the sustainable groundwater management act ( sgma ) , which directed the california department of water resources to identify water available for replenishing groundwater in the state .

because the central valley project is integral to the water supply and delivery infrastructure of the state , it also recognized as part of the surface water resources potentially available for recharging aquifers as the sgma is implemented .

other western states with significant reclamation water infrastructure also may look to enhance their sources of water for aquifer recharge by tapping the federal projects .

further technological developments in desalinating brackish or saline groundwater could help make those water supplies available for domestic , agricultural , or other uses .

congress authorized an assessment of brackish groundwater in section 9507 ( c ) of p.l .

111-11 in 2009 , and usgs released its assessment report in 2017 .

in general , the assessment found that deeper wells had more brackish groundwater than shallower wells .

seventy percent of wells between 1,500 feet and 3,000 feet below the surface were brackish or highly saline , whereas less than 20% of wells 50 feet deep or shallower were brackish .

usgs reports that many water providers are turning to brackish groundwater to augment or replace freshwater for drinking and other uses , such as power generation , irrigation , aquaculture , and uses in the oil and gas industry ( eg , hydraulic fracturing ) .

for greater use of this potential resource , more detailed evaluations of specific aquifers likely are required .

technological and economic analyses would be needed to determine if brackish groundwater , especially from the deeper wells , could be used economically on a greater scale in the future .

