on april 27 , 2018 , the house of representatives passed the faa reauthorization act of 2018 ( h.r .

4 ) , a measure to reauthorize federal civil aviation programs , including the federal aviation administration ( faa ) , for a six - year period .

h.r .

4 does not include a controversial proposal to privatize air traffic control ( atc ) laid out in an earlier bill , h.r .

2997 .

on may 9 , 2018 , the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation reported a four - year faa reauthorization bill ( s. 1405 , s.rept .

115-243 ) that does not address atc privatization .

despite many similarities , there are a number of differences in the two bills , including the length of authorization , funding amounts , and other provisions .

if either bill is enacted , it would be the first long - term faa reauthorization act since the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-95 ) expired at the end of fy2015 .

disagreement regarding atc reforms has stalled action on a subsequent long - term faa bill for almost three years , leading the 114 th congress to approve a series of extensions , including a one - year extension ( p.l .

114-190 ) that expired at the end of fy2017 .

that act included a number of provisions addressing key aviation safety and security concerns .

the 115 th congress passed a six - month extension ( p.l .

115-63 ) of aviation funding and programs through the end of march 2018 .

subsequently , the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) , further extended authorization for aviation programs and airport and airway trust fund revenue authority through the end of fy2018 .

proposals to reform atc have been central to the legislative debate .

faa reauthorization measures considered in the house during the 114 th congress ( h.r .

4441 ) and the 115 th congress ( h.r .

2997 ) both included detailed provisions to establish a not - for - profit private corporation to provide the air traffic services currently delivered by faa .

in contrast , the senate bills ( s. 2658 , 114 th congress , and s. 1405 ) have not included any atc reforms .

on january 27 , 2018 , representative bill shuster , chairman of the house committee on transportation and infrastructure , announced that he would no longer insist on restructuring of atc operations , and on april 13 , 2018 , he introduced h.r .

4 , which did not include atc privatization language .

an alternative plan to move atc out of faa but retain it under the department of transportation ( dot ) was proposed as an amendment to h.r .

4 , but the amendment was not adopted .

while privatization of atc is no longer moving forward in either house , many in congress continue to be interested in encouraging privatization of airports by expanding an existing pilot program .

changes to grant allocations for airport improvements remain in both h.r .

4 and s. 1405 , but proposals to raise long - standing caps on passenger facility charges collected by airports have not been included in either the house bill or the senate committee bill .

other key issues in the debate have included concerns related to implementation of nextgen , faa's plan for modernizing atc , including options for encouraging aircraft owners to install needed avionics and addressing community noise impacts associated with flight path changes implemented to improve air traffic efficiency and capacity .

both bills include language to promote adoption of unmanned aircraft for commercial uses , such as inspection of critical infrastructure and package delivery , that involve flight beyond the aircraft operator's line of sight .

the legislation also seeks to address aircraft parts certification processes , air carrier and repair station safety oversight , consolidation of atc facilities , and faa's oversight of the rapidly growing commercial space industry .

in addition to faa , the reauthorization bills would extend the essential air service ( eas ) program , which subsidizes commercial flights to small communities , and would address various airline consumer issues including the manner in which airfares are advertised and the size and spacing of aircraft seats .

most faa programs are financed through the airport and airway trust fund ( aatf ) , sometimes referred to as the aviation trust fund .

the aatf was established in 1970 under the airport and airway development act of 1970 ( p.l .

91-258 ) to provide for expansion of the nation's airports and air traffic system .

between fy2014 and fy2018 , the aatf has provided between 80% and 95% of faa's total annual funding , with the remainder coming from general fund appropriations .

revenue sources for the trust fund include passenger ticket taxes , segment fees , air cargo fees , and fuel taxes paid by both commercial and general aviation aircraft ( see table 1 ) .

in addition to excise taxes deposited into the trust fund , faa imposes air traffic service fees on flights that transit u.s. - controlled airspace but do not take off from or land in the united states .

these overflight fees partially fund the eas program .

in 2017 , the aatf had revenues of over $15 billion and maintained a cash balance of nearly $15 billion .

the uncommitted balance was estimated to be approximately $5.9 billion at the end of fy2018 , reversing several years of decline following the onset of the global economic crisis in 2008 .

the trust fund balance is projected to grow in the near term , as aatf revenue continues to rise and airport capital needs are projected to decline over the next five years .

changes in airline business practices may pose a risk to the aatf revenue structure .

trust fund revenue is largely dependent on airlines' ticket sales , and the spread of low - cost air carrier models has held down ticket prices and therefore aatf receipts .

in addition , airlines increasingly impose fees for a variety of options and amenities , such as checked bags and onboard meals , rather than including them in the base ticket price .

generally , fees not included in the base ticket price are not subject to federal excise taxes .

air carriers generated over $4.57 billion in baggage fees alone in 2017 , which would have brought more than $343 million into the trust fund had they been subject to the 7.5% ticket tax .

this subject is not addressed in either h.r .

4 or s. 1405 .

in recent years , faa funding has totaled between $15 billion and $18 billion annually .

most recently , the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) , provided funding through the end of fy2018 .

faa funding is divided among four main accounts .

the largest account , operations and maintenance ( o&m ) , principally funds air traffic operations and aviation safety programs .

the airport improvement program ( aip ) provides federal grants - in - aid for projects such as new runways and taxiways ; runway lengthening , rehabilitation , and repair ; and noise mitigation near airports .

the facilities and equipment ( f&e ) account provides funding for the acquisition and maintenance of air traffic facilities and equipment , and for engineering , development , testing , and evaluation of technologies related to the federal air traffic system .

the research , engineering , and development account finances research on improving aviation safety and operational efficiency and on reducing environmental impacts of aviation operati ons .

proposed a uthorizations and appropriations for these accounts are shown in table 2 .

the federal government supports the development of airport infrastructure in three different ways: ( 1 ) aip grants to airports , mainly for capital projects related to aircraft operations ; ( 2 ) authorization for individual airports to assess a local passenger facility charge ( pfc ) on each boarding passenger ; and ( 3 ) preferential income tax treatment on interest income from bonds issued by state and local governments for airport improvements ( subject to compliance with federal rules ) .

airports may also draw on state and local funds and on operating revenues such as lease payments and landing fees .

different airports use different combinations of aip funding , pfcs , tax - exempt bonds , state and local grants , and airport revenues to finance particular projects .

small airports are more likely to be dependent on aip grants than large or medium - sized airports .

larger airports are much more likely to issue tax - exempt bonds or finance capital projects with the proceeds of pfcs .

each of these funding sources places various legislative , regulatory , or contractual constraints on airports that use it .

the availability and conditions of one source of funding may also influence the availability and terms of other funding sources .

the aviation safety and capacity expansion act of 1990 allowed the secretary of transportation to authorize public agencies that control commercial airports to impose a passenger facility charge ( pfc ) on each paying passenger boarding an aircraft at their airports to supplement their aip grants .

the pfc is a state , local , or port authority fee and is not deposited into the treasury .

to impose a pfc above $3 , an airport has to show that the funded projects will make significant improvements in air safety , increase competition , or reduce congestion or noise impacts on communities , and that these projects could not be fully funded by aip funds .

unlike aip grants that fund airside projects , pfc funds may be used to pay for a broader range of "capacity enhancing" projects , including for landside projects such as terminals and transit systems on airport property and for interest payments servicing debt incurred to carry out projects .

large and medium hub airports imposing pfcs above the $3 level forgo 75% of their aip formula funds .

because of the complementary relationship between the aip and pfcs , pfc provisions are generally folded into faa reauthorization legislation dealing with the aip .

initially , there was a $3 cap on each airport's pfc and a $12 limit on the total pfcs that a passenger could be charged per round trip .

legislation in 2000 raised the pfc ceiling to $4.50 , with an $18 limit on the total pfcs that a passenger can be charged per round trip .

the central legislative issue related to pfcs is whether to raise or eliminate the $4.50 per enplaned passenger ceiling .

in general , airports argue for increasing or eliminating the ceiling , whereas most air carriers and some passenger advocates oppose higher limits on pfcs .

neither the house - passed h.r .

4 nor the corresponding senate bill , s. 1405 , would change the current pfc ceiling .

the permissible uses of revenues are another ongoing point of contention .

airport operators , in particular , would like more freedom to use pfc funds for off - airport projects , such as transportation access projects , and want the process of obtaining faa approval to be streamlined .

carriers , on the other hand , often complain that airports use pfc funds to finance proposals of dubious value , especially outside airport boundaries , instead of high - priority projects that offer meaningful safety or capacity enhancements .

the major air carriers are also unhappy with their limited influence over project decisions , as airports are required only to consult with resident air carriers instead of having to get their agreement on pfc - funded projects .

a provision in h.r .

4 would expand permissible uses of pfc revenues to include projects to prevent airport power outages .

there is no similar provision in s. 1405 .

almost all commercial service airports in the united states are owned by local and state governments , or by public entities such as airport authorities or multipurpose port authorities .

in 1996 , congress established the airport privatization pilot program ( appp ) to explore the prospect of privatizing publicly owned airports and using private capital to improve and develop them .

in addition to reducing demand for government funds , privatization has been promoted as a way to make airports more efficient and financially viable .

privatization refers to the shifting of governmental functions , responsibilities , and sometimes ownership , in whole or in part , to the private sector .

with respect to airports , "privatization" can take many forms , up to and including the transfer of an entire airport to private operation and / or ownership .

in the united states , most cases of airport privatization fall into the category of "partial privatization" ; full privatization , either under or outside the appp , has been rare .

section 149 of the federal aviation reauthorization act of 1996 ( 49 u.s.c .

§47134 ; p.l .

104-264 ) authorizes the faa administrator to exempt airports participating in the appp from some or all of the requirements to use airport revenue for airport - related purposes , to repay federal grants , or to return airport property acquired with federal assistance upon the lease or sale of the airport deeded by the federal government .

the law originally limited participation in the appp to no more than five airports .

the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-95 ) increased the number of airports that may participate from five to 10 .

only one large hub commercial airport may participate in the program , and that airport may only be leased , not sold .

only general aviation airports can be sold under the appp .

airport operators have generally not found privatization an attractive option .

since its inception , 11 airports have applied to enter the appp ; two airports , stewart international airport in upstate new york and luis muñoz marín international airport in puerto rico , have completed the entire privatization process .

however , stewart international airport later reverted to public ownership .

there are three active applicants in the program .

the others applied to privatize , but eventually chose not to proceed .

language in h.r .

4 would allow more airports to enter the pilot program .

such a change , by itself , would not address the factors that have discouraged airports from entering the program .

these include the requirement under the appp that 65% of air carriers serving the airport approve a lease or sale of the airport ; restrictions on increases in airport rates and charges that exceed the rate of increase of the consumer price index ( cpi ) ; and a requirement that a private operator comply with grant assurances made by the previous public - sector operator to obtain aip grants .

an airport privatized under the appp may use aip formula grants to cover only 70% of the cost of improvements , versus the normal 75% - 90% federal share at publicly owned airports .

this serves as a disincentive to privatize an airport .

in addition , publicly owned airports can make use of tax - exempt bonds , often secured by airport revenue .

such bonds offer less costly financing than is generally available to private entities .

privatization outside the framework of the appp is generally unattractive to both airport owners and potential investors .

streamlining the appp application and review process might make privatization somewhat more attractive by reducing the risks arising from a long application period , such as changes in economic and capital market conditions .

however , significantly increasing interest in airport privatization is likely to require structural change to the existing airport financing system .

options might include offering the same tax treatment to private and public airport infrastructure bonds ; changing aip requirements ; relaxing aip grant assurances ; liberalizing rules governing fees ; and easing limits on the use of privatization revenue .

nextgen refers to the next generation air transportation system , a large - scale modernization of air traffic technologies and procedures intended to expand national airspace system capacity to meet future demand .

nextgen is a multiyear initiative to modernize and improve the efficiency of the national airspace system , primarily by migrating to technologies and procedures using satellite - based navigation and aircraft tracking .

initiated in legislation in 2003 ( see p.l .

108-176 ) , the nextgen system targets full - scale implementation by 2025 .

core components of the nextgen system include the following: automatic dependent surveillance - broadcast ( ads - b ) .

a system for broadcasting and receiving aircraft identification , position , altitude , heading , and speed data derived from onboard navigation systems such as a gps receiver .

"ads - b out" functionality refers to a basic level of aircraft equipage that transmits position data .

"ads - b in" incorporates aircraft reception of ads - b signals from other air traffic and / or uplinks of traffic , weather , and flight information from ground stations .

faa funds support the installation , operation , and maintenance of the ground network and associated infrastructure to receive ads - b transmissions and relay them to air traffic facilities and other aircraft .

most aircraft will be required to have ads - b out capability by 2020 .

system wide information management ( swim ) .

a system for aviation system data sharing , consisting of a seamless infrastructure for data exchange , similar to the internet .

as envisioned , swim will consist of an extensive , scalable data network to share real - time operational information such as flight plans , flight trajectories , weather , airport conditions , and temporary airspace restrictions across the entire airspace system .

data communications ( datacomm ) .

a digital voice and data network , similar to current wireless telephone capabilities , to transmit instructions , advisories , and other routine communications between aircraft and air traffic service providers .

collaborative air traffic management technologies ( catmt ) .

a suite of technologies , including various automation and decision support tools , designed to enhance existing aircraft flow management functions by exploiting other nextgen technologies and capabilities such as swim .

national airspace system voice system ( nvs ) .

upgraded digital voice communications infrastructure that will replace existing analog equipment .

nextgen weather .

an integrated platform for providing a common weather picture to air traffic controllers , air traffic managers , and system users .

p.l .

112-95 required faa to develop a plan for integrating unmanned aircraft systems ( uas ) , commonly referred to as drones , into the national airspace .

it also established a test site program to study integration issues under operational conditions in airspace shared with manned flights .

the 2012 act also required faa to issue final rules covering civilian drones .

those rules allow commercial operations of small uas weighing less than 55 pounds , provided they are operated within visual line of sight , remain below 400 feet , do not fly over people not involved in the operation , and maintain speeds under 100 miles per hour .

drone flights are allowed in the vicinity of airports and in other controlled areas only with prior permission of atc .

operators must pass a written test to obtain an faa remote pilot certification and must pass a security threat assessment conducted by the transportation security administration .

faa does not certify the airworthiness of small commercial drones , but does require the remote pilot in command to conduct preflight checks to ensure that the vehicle is safe to fly .

while faa may waive most of these regulatory restrictions on a case - by - case basis , routine drone operations beyond visual line - of - sight , over crowds , and in congested airspace are not yet permitted .

this limits some potential applications , including drone delivery services , newsgathering in large urban areas , inspections of farm fields , and inspections of power lines , pipelines , and other linear infrastructure .

these limitations have been imposed largely in recognition that reliable technologies for remote identification , collision avoidance , and uas traffic management in low - altitude airspace are still being developed and tested .

s. 1405 would extend the existing uas integration test site program for six years .

it also seeks to facilitate testing of government - operated drones at the test sites , and to require study of beyond - visual - line - of - sight operations , sense - and - avoid technologies , and uas traffic management concepts .

h.r .

4 would extend the test site program for six years and would encourage the study of beyond - visual - line - of - sight operations and facilitate the testing of government - operated drones at the test sites .

both bills would direct faa to issue regulations within one year of enactment establishing a certification process for drone package delivery operations , including commercial fleet operations with highly automated uas .

the bills would also establish a collegiate training initiative program with a curriculum for uas and would incorporate faa positions related to uas into its veterans employment programs .

the senate bill would also direct faa to use available remote detection and identification capabilities for safety oversight and enforcement and establish civil and criminal penalties for airspace violations and drone attacks against federal buildings .

it would require faa to establish a searchable public database of commercial and governmental uas operators , including details regarding aircraft identification ; the locations , times , and purposes of flights ; and aircraft capabilities , including capabilities to collect personally identifiable information , including facial recognition .

news organizations protected under the first amendment would generally be exempted and excluded from the database .

the senate bill also contains language establishing an expectation that commercial drone operators establish written privacy policies consistent with an overarching u.s. policy that operations be conducted in a manner that respects and protects personal privacy afforded under the constitution and applicable federal , state , and local laws .

it also states that violations of privacy by commercial drones may be construed as unfair and deceptive trade practices enforceable by the federal trade commission .

faa has responsibility for overseeing compliance with safety regulations at airlines , charter aircraft operators , repair stations , aircraft and aircraft parts design organizations and manufacturers , and other regulated entities .

it maintains a safety workforce of more than 7,000 aviation safety workers including more than 4,000 field inspectors .

both h.r .

4 and s. 1405 would require faa to review and revise its safety workforce training strategy to ensure that it aligns with faa's risk - based approaches to safety oversight , seeks knowledge - sharing opportunities with industry , and includes appropriate milestones and metrics for meeting these objectives .

h.r .

4 would additionally require the government accountability office ( gao ) to carry out an independent review and assessment of training needs at faa's office of aviation safety .

maintenance of u.s. air carrier aircraft at both foreign and domestic locations is subject to regulation and oversight by faa .

repair stations are regulated under 14 c.f.r .

part 145 , and thus faa - certificated repair stations are sometimes referred to as part 145 repair stations .

to be certified under part 145 , a repair station must develop faa - approved documentation and processes including quality control procedures and training programs .

faa may also approve foreign repair stations based on a foreign certification issued by a country that has a bilateral aviation safety agreement with the united states .

faa has adopted a compliance philosophy rooted in risk - based targeting of oversight activity that is informed by information voluntarily shared by regulated entities .

the compliance philosophy , which guides faa oversight of equipment design and manufacture , airline operations and maintenance , aircraft repair stations , general aviation , and other aspects of civil aviation , is in line with faa's broad approach of encouraging workers in safety - sensitive jobs to freely report errors without fear of reprisal .

with regard to airlines and airline maintenance repair stations , however , concerns have been raised that faa has been too lenient in carrying out enforcement actions , particularly with respect to repair stations located outside the united states .

h.r .

4 would require a gao study of the effectiveness of faa's new compliance philosophy , assessing whether it has resulted in greater reporting of safety incidents , whether reducing enforcement penalties has increased safety incidents , and whether faa safety staff have complained that reduced enforcement has impacted regulatory compliance .

additional concerns have been raised that faa field offices do not consistently interpret regulations in carrying out their duties and providing oversight to regulated entities .

faa has sought to establish quality management systems to standardize processes across offices to minimize variations in the interpretation and application of regulations , including the establishment of a regulatory consistency committee .

that committee identified three root causes of inconsistencies at faa: unclear requirements , inadequate and nonstandard training , and a culture content with the status quo and reluctant to resolve inconsistencies .

to date , there has been no independent assessment of the progress made or the effectiveness of revised certification practices .

s. 1405 would require faa to establish a centralized , publicly accessible database for all issued safety guidance and interpretations with appropriate links to specific regulations .

the bill would also mandate that faa establish a task force on reforming flight standards and maintain a regulatory consistency communication board to recommend processes for handling regulatory interpretation matters .

significant global competition exists in the rapidly growing commercial space industry , with russia , france , and increasingly china vying for commercial space launch business .

faa's regulates and licenses commercial space launch providers and is also charged with promoting private - sector space launches .

this parallels faa's former dual role as a safety regulator and an industry promoter of the commercial aviation industry ; concern about the potential conflicts this created led to a provision in the faa reauthorization act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-264 ) that directed faa to focus on safety and transferred its promotional role to dot .

gao has noted that faa's dual mandate with regard to commercial space activity may pose a potential conflict of interest .

faa's authority encompasses launch and reentry of space vehicles , but does not extend to orbital activities and operations .

currently , there are 10 licensed launch sites in the united states .

since 1989 , faa has licensed 286 commercial space launches and issued permits for 44 launches , including 18 licensed launches and 1 permitted launch in fy2017 and 19 licensed launches so far in fy2018 .

faa has also licensed 16 reentries since 2010 , including 3 in fy2017 and 2 so far in fy2018 .

h.r .

4 would establish a designated office of spaceports within faa's office of commercial space transportation to provide technical assistance , promote infrastructure improvements , and support licensing activities for launch sites .

it would also require a gao study of spaceport activities , detailing funding options including user funding options and matching infrastructure grants .

s. 1405 did not include similar language , but includes language that would require aeronautical studies to evaluate any proposed construction of structures that might interfere with launch or reentry sites as is currently required for areas around airports .

faa research and development focuses on aviation system safety , efficiency , and the reduction of environmental impacts .

historically , about half of faa research funding has addressed efficiency and economic competitiveness , largely supporting modernization efforts like nextgen .

about 37% of funding has gone toward research addressing safety issues , and the remainder has funded projects addressing energy and environmental impacts .

faa receives advice and recommendations regarding its research program from industry through the research , engineering , and development advisory committee ( redac ) , which assesses research needs in five major areas: operations , airport technology , aviation safety , human factors , and environment and energy .

pursuant to 49 u.s.c .

§44501 ( c ) , faa is required to develop an annual national aviation research plan that is to be submitted to congressional oversight committees prior to the submission of the president's budget to congress .

the plan lays out the five - year research and development goals and anticipated funding requirements .

a 2017 gao review of faa strategic planning for research and development recommended that faa improve its processes for identifying long - term research priorities , improve transparency regarding how projects are selected and funded , and ensure that annual reviews and plans meet applicable statutory requirements regarding content .

faa indicated that it is revising its approach to research planning but has not issued an updated national aviation research plan since 2016 .

in addition to specific research , engineering , and development amounts , faa research activities are funded by faa's other major accounts .

about 47% of faa research is funded through the facilities and equipment ( f&e ) account , including that related to advanced technology development and prototyping and nextgen system development , and another 11% is derived from aip funds .

h.r .

4 calls for direct funding of $186 million in fy2019 , increasing to $204 million in fy2023 , and s. 1405 specifies $175 million annually through fy2021 for faa research , engineering , and development .

however , the fy2019 budget request proposes to reduce direct faa research , engineering , and development funding by roughly $100 million to $74 million .

while some additional research funding may come from other faa accounts beyond what has been provided in years past , this may have a considerable impact on faa grants and research partnerships with industry and academia as well as faa staffing in research positions .

the airline deregulation act of 1978 ( p.l .

95-504 ) gave airlines almost total freedom to determine which domestic markets to serve and what airfares to charge .

this raised the concern that communities with relatively low passenger levels would lose service as carriers shifted their operations to serve larger and often more profitable markets .

congress established the eas program to help ensure a continuation of service to those small communities that were served by certificated air carriers before deregulation , with subsidies if necessary .

the eas program is administered by the office of the secretary of transportation , which determines the minimum level of service required at each eligible community by specifying a hub through which the community is linked to the national network ; a minimum number of round trips and available seats that must be provided to that hub ; certain characteristics of the aircraft to be used ; and the maximum permissible number of intermediate stops to the hub .

over the years , congress has limited the scope of the program , mostly by eliminating subsidy support for communities within a reasonable driving distance of a major hub airport .

the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 adopted additional eas reform measures , including section 421 , which amended the definition of an "eas eligible place" to require a minimum number of daily enplanements .

the faa extension , safety , and security act of 2016 and the subsequent extensions did not make significant changes to the eas program .

under the 2012 act , for locations to remain eas - eligible , they must have participated in the eas program at any time between september 30 , 2010 , and september 30 , 2011 .

an eas - eligible place is now defined as a community that , during this period , either received eas for which compensation was paid under the eas program or received from the incumbent carrier a 90-day notice of intent to terminate eas following which dot required it to continue providing service to the community ( known as "holding in" the carrier ) .

since october 1 , 2012 , no new communities may enter the program should they lose their unsubsidized service , except for locations in alaska or hawaii .

communities eligible for eas in fy2011 remain eligible for eas subsidies if they are located more than 70 miles from the nearest large or medium hub airport ; they require a rate of subsidy per passenger of $200 or less , unless the community is more than 210 miles from the nearest hub airport ; the average rate of subsidy per passenger is less than $1,000 during the most recent fiscal year at the end of each eas contract , regardless of the distance from hub airport ; and they have an average of 10 or more enplanements per service day during the most recent fiscal year beginning after september 30 , 2012 , unless these locations are more than 175 driving miles from the nearest medium or large hub airport , or unless dot is satisfied that any decline below 10 enplanements is temporary .

these limitations apply only to the contiguous 48 states and puerto rico .

eas communities in alaska and hawaii are exempt from these requirements .

the 1978 deregulation of the airline industry in the united states eliminated federal control over many airline business practices , including pricing and domestic route selection .

however , the federal government continues to legislate and enforce certain consumer protections for airline passengers .

congress largely determines the degree to which the rights of airline passengers are codified in law or developed through regulatory rulemaking .

most of dot's consumer rules are based on 49 u.s.c .

§41712 , which directs it to "protect consumers from unfair or deceptive practices. .

some are based on dot's authority to require air carriers in interstate transportation to provide "safe and adequate service" ( 49 u.s.c .

§41702 ) .

the interpretation of the phrase "unfair or deceptive" can significantly affect the scope of dot's enforcement authority .

both bills address crowding aboard airplanes .

h.r .

4 would require faa to issue regulations establishing minimum dimensions for passenger seats .

s. 1405 would require faa to initiate a study of minimum seat pitch within 18 months of enactment and review whether changes in seat size and legroom affect the ability to evacuate an aircraft in an emergency .

both bills address the needs of passengers with disabilities as well as consumer complaint process improvement .

h.r .

4 would make involuntary bumping of passengers after boarding an unfair and deceptive practice .

it would also allow an air carrier to advertise base airfare rather than the final cost to the passenger , as long as it discloses additional taxes and fees via a link on its website .

such action would have allowed airlines to advertise base airfares , even though consumers would not be able to purchase transportation at those prices .

this practice is currently deemed "unfair and deceptive" by a dot consumer protection rule , which requires that airline and travel websites give most prominent display to the total cost of a flight , including taxes and fees .

