t he financial services and general government ( fsgg ) appropriations bill includes funding for the department of the treasury ( title i ) , the executive office of the president ( eop ; title ii ) , the judiciary ( title iii ) , the district of columbia ( title iv ) , and more than two dozen independent agencies ( title v ) .

the bill typically funds mandatory retirement accounts in title vi , which also contains additional general provisions applying to the funding provided to agencies through the fsgg bill .

title vii typically contains general provisions applying government - wide .

the fsgg bill has also often contained provisions relating to the u.s. policy toward cuba .

the house and senate fsgg bills fund the same agencies , with one exception .

the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) is funded through the agriculture appropriations bill in the house and the fsgg bill in the senate .

where the cftc is funded upon enactment depends on which chamber originated the law , which typically alternates annually .

thus , the enacted amounts for the cftc typically are in the agriculture appropriations bill one year and fsgg the following year .

this structure has existed in its current form since the 2007 reorganization of the house and senate committees on appropriations .

although financial services are a major focus of the bill , the fsgg appropriations bill does not include funding for many financial regulatory agencies , which are instead funded outside of the appropriations process .

it is not uncommon for legislative provisions addressing various financial regulatory issues to be included in titles at the end of the bill .

although financial services are a focus of the fsgg bill , the bill does not actually include funding for the regulation of much of the financial services industry .

financial services as an industry is often subdivided into banking , insurance , and securities .

federal regulation of the banking industry is divided among the federal reserve , the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) , the office of comptroller of the currency ( occ ) , and the bureau of consumer financial protection ( generally known as the consumer financial protection bureau , or cfpb ) .

in addition , credit unions , which operate similarly to many banks , are regulated by the national credit union administration ( ncua ) .

none of these agencies receives its primary funding through the appropriations process , with only the fdic inspector general and a small ncua - operated program currently funded in the fsgg bill .

insurance is generally regulated at the state level , with some federal reserve oversight at the holding company level .

there is a relatively small federal insurance office ( fio ) inside the treasury , which is funded through the departmental offices account , but fio has no regulatory authority .

federal securities regulation is divided between the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) and the cftc , both of which are funded through appropriations .

the cftc funding is a relatively straightforward appropriation from the general fund , whereas the sec funding is provided by the fsgg bill , but then offset through fees collected by the sec .

although funding for many financial regulatory agencies may not be provided by the fsgg bill , legislative provisions affecting financial regulation in general and some of these agencies specifically have often been included in fsgg bills .

in the 115 th congress , h.r .

6258 and h.r .

6147 as passed by the house included many provisions , particularly in title ix , that would have amended the 2010 dodd - frank act and other statutes relating to the regulation of financial institutions and the authority and funding of financial regulators .

many of these provisions were included in other legislation , notably h.r .

10 , which passed the house on june 8 , 2017 , and s. 488 as amended by the house , which passed the house on july 17 , 2018 , though neither of these bills were enacted in the 115 th congress .

of particular interest from the appropriations perspective , h.r .

6258 and h.r .

6147 as passed by the house would have brought the cfpb under the fsgg bill instead of receiving funding from outside of the appropriations process , as is currently the case .

s. 3107 and h.r .

6147 as passed by the senate did not include similar provisions affecting the cfpb or other aspects of financial regulation as in title ix of the house bills .

in the 116 th congress , the bills passed by the house ( h.r .

21 and h.r .

648 ) did not include financial regulatory provisions similar to those in the 115 th congress house - passed bill , and neither did the enacted p.l .

116-6 .

the house and senate committees on appropriations reorganized their subcommittee structures in early 2007 .

each chamber created a new financial services and general government subcommittee .

in the house , the fsgg subcommittee's jurisdiction is primarily composed of agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the subcommittee on transportation , treasury , housing and urban development , the judiciary , the district of columbia , and independent agencies , commonly referred to as tthud .

in addition , the house fsgg subcommittee was assigned four independent agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the science , state , justice , commerce , and related agencies subcommittee: the federal communications commission ( fcc ) , the federal trade commission ( ftc ) , the sec , and the small business administration ( sba ) .

in the senate , the new fsgg subcommittee's jurisdiction is a combination of agencies from the jurisdiction of three previously existing subcommittees .

most of the agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the transportation , treasury , the judiciary , and housing and urban development , and related agencies subcommittee were assigned to the fsgg subcommittee .

in addition , the district of columbia , which had its own subcommittee in the 109 th congress , was placed under the purview of the fsgg subcommittee , as were four independent agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the commerce , justice , science , and related agencies subcommittee: the fcc , ftc , sec , and sba .

as a result of this reorganization , the house and senate fsgg subcommittees have nearly identical jurisdictions , except that the cftc is under the jurisdiction of the fsgg subcommittee in the senate and the agriculture subcommittee in the house .

 table 4 below lists various departments and agencies funded through fsgg appropriations and the crs experts' names pertaining to these departments and agencies .

