in an effort to reduce and ultimately eliminate billions of dollars in improper payments made by federal agencies each year , congress passed the improper payments information act ( ipia p.l .

107-300 ) in 2002 .

ipia requires agencies to identify programs susceptible to improper payments through risk assessments , estimate the annual amount of improper payments related to those programs , and report to congress on corrective actions planned to reduce improper payments .

under ipia , an improper payment is defined as a payment that should not have been made or that was made in an incorrect amount , including both overpayments and underpayments .

this definition includes payments made to ineligible recipients , duplicate payments , payments for a good or service not received , and payments that do not account for applicable discounts .

the data reported between fy2004 — the first year of improper payments reporting — and fy2009 showed that a small subset of programs accounted for 85% to 96% of the government's total improper payments each year .

in november 2009 , president barack obama signed executive order ( e.o. ) .

13520 , which required the director of the office of management and budget ( omb ) to work with agencies to identify "high - priority" programs ( those which account for the "highest dollar value or majority of improper payments" across the government ) , establish annual targets for reducing improper payments under high - priority programs , and submit a report to the agency's inspector general that detailed how the agency planned to meet those targets .

the executive order also required agencies to publish data on improper payments estimates and targets for the high - priority programs they administer .

in response to e.o .

13520 , omb created a central website , paymentaccuracy.gov , which includes data for all high - priority programs , as the executive order required .

omb also revised omb circular a - 123 , appendix c , to incorporate the new requirements for high - priority programs .

under the revised circular , a program is deemed high - priority if it has reported more than $750 million in improper payments in the most recent fiscal year ; not reported an improper payments amount for the most recent fiscal year , but has reported more than $750 million in improper payments in a previous fiscal year ; or not yet reported on improper payments for the program as a whole , but has determined that the total amount of improper payments for program components that have been measured exceeds $750 million .

in fy2010 , congress passed the improper payments elimination and recovery act ( ipera ; p.l .

111-204 ) , which amended ipia to require improvements in agency risk assessments , improper payment estimation procedures , and corrective action plans .

ipera also requires agencies to establish recovery audit programs for the purpose of recapturing overpayments .

in addition , ipera requires the inspector general ( ig ) of each agency to determine whether the agency is in compliance with ipera and report the findings to the head of the agency , the comptroller general , the house committee on oversight and government reform , and the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

an agency is deemed in compliance if it has published an annual financial statement ; conducted risk assessments for each program or activity ; published improper payment estimates , corrective action plans , and improper payment reduction targets for all risk - susceptible programs and activities ; and reported no improper payment rate that met or exceeded 10% .

in 2012 , congress passed the improper payments elimination and recovery audit improvement act ( iperia ; p.l .

112-248 ) .

iperia codifies e.o .

13520 .

it requires that omb identify a list of "high - priority" federal programs for greater levels of oversight .

these programs must be chosen on the basis of the relatively high dollar value or error rate of improper payments , or because they are deemed more susceptible to improper payments when compared to other high - risk programs , regardless of size .

iperia does not establish a dollar threshold for high - priority programs .

iperia requires omb to establish annual targets , as well as quarterly and semi - annual actions for reducing improper payments for the high - priority programs .

in addition , each agency with a high - priority program is required to submit an annual report on the steps it has taken , and plans to take , to prevent and recover future improper payments .

the report is to be submitted to the agency's ig and posted on a website accessible to the public .

the ig , in turn , must submit a report to congress that assesses the quality of the improper payment estimates for each high - priority program , determines whether proper controls are in place to identify and prevent future improper payments , and makes recommendations to congress on how agency plans might be modified to improve their improper payment estimates and internal controls .

iperia also requires agencies to verify recipient eligibility by reviewing available databases prior to issuing a payment or award .

in 2015 , congress passed the federal improper payment coordination act ( fipca ; p.l .

114-109 ) which amended iperia to expand access to federal agency data that could be used to verify payment eligibility of recipients and payment amounts .

in 2016 , congress passed the fraud reduction and data analytics act ( p.l .

114-186 ) which requires agencies to implement financial and administrative controls related to fraud , including improper payments .

under ipia , as amended , agencies are required to identify programs susceptible to significant improper payments , estimate the amount of improper payments issued under those programs , and notify congress of the steps being taken to address the root causes of the improper payments .

generally , a program is deemed susceptible to "significant" improper payments if it has ( 1 ) improper payments that exceed both $10 million and 1.5% of total program payments , or ( 2 ) more than $100 million in total improper payments .

for fy2017 , agencies reported data on 91 risk - susceptible programs that issued more than $141 billion in improper payments that year .

since fy2004 , when agencies first began reporting improper payments , the government has identified approximately $1.3 trillion in erroneous payments .

table 1 shows the total amount of annual improper payments reported from fy2004 through fy2017 .

the data in table 1 show that the amount of improper payments reported was relatively flat from fy2004 through fy2007 , after which it increased by 188% through fy2010 , declined slightly from fy2011 to fy2013 , and then increased again by 36% through fy2016 , and declined slightly in fy2017 .

the increase in improper payments from the end of fy2007 to the end of fy2010 can be partially attributed to the inclusion of new programs .

a number of programs with billions of dollars in annual outlays lacked valid improper payments estimates and did not begin reporting until fy2008 .

the department of health and human services ( hhs ) first reported on medicaid and medicare part c , for example , in fy2008 , estimating $25.4 billion in improper payments for the two programs combined that year .

in addition , government expenditures for public assistance increased as the economy weakened , which further increased the amount of improper payments issued under many risk - susceptible programs .

expenditures increased by more than one - third , for example , under the earned income tax credit program ( 48% ) , medicaid ( 34% ) , and medicare part c ( 33% ) , between fy2007 and fy2010 .

in some cases , increased expenditures corresponded with an increase in the error rate .

the medicare fee - for - service program , for example , saw its expenditures increase from $276 billion in fy2007 to $326 billion in fy2010 , while the program's error rate rose from 3.9% to 9.1% in that same time period .

the second period of increase , from fy2014 through fy2016 , appears to have a similar set of dynamics .

improper payment estimates were reported for new programs after the end of fy2013 , including two programs run by the department of veterans' affairs that reported a combined total of $4.8 billion in improper payments in fy2016 .

expenditures increased for many programs from fy2013 to fy2016 , including medicare part c , where program outlays grew by 31% and the amount of improper payments increased by 37% , or $4.4 billion .

finally , growth in expenditures sometimes coincided with an increase in a program's error rate .

the medicaid program saw its expenditures increase from $247 billion in fy2013 to $346 billion in fy2016 , and its error rate increased from 5.8% to 10.5% at the same time .

as a consequence , the amount of improper payments reported for medicaid increased by $22 billion in three years .

as noted in the previous section , 20 programs have accounted for a significant portion of the government's total improper payments .

omb and federal agencies are required to establish annual targets for reducing improper payments under these high - priority programs and submit a report to the agency's ig that details how the agency plans to meet those targets .

table 2 identifies the amount of improper payments issued by each of these high - priority programs from fy2004 through fy2017 .

the data in table 2 show that 20 high - priority programs issued more than $1.2 trillion in improper payments since fy2004 .

overall , 18 of the 20 high - priority programs that have reported improper payments data so far have seen an increase in the amount of annual improper payments between their first year of reporting and fy2017 .

the data also show that a subgroup of four high - priority programs — medicare advantage , medicaid , medicare fee - for - service , and the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) — account for a large proportion of the government's total improper payments .

in fy2017 , those four programs accounted for $103 billion of the government's total improper payments of $141 billion .

restated , four programs accounted for an estimated 73% of all of the government's improper payments in the most recent fiscal year for which data are available .

taken as a whole , high - priority programs have accounted for a large percentage of the government's total annual improper payments each fiscal year .

as table 3 shows , high - priority programs accounted for 85% to 98% of the improper payments reported by agencies annually from fy2004 through fy2017 .

the data in table 3 show that after some fluctuation during the first five years of reporting , high - priority programs have accounted for a relatively stable portion of the government's total improper payments .

between fy2004 and fy2008 , high - priority programs accounted for as much as 98% and as little as 85% of the government's total improper payments , a variance of 13 percentage points .

by comparison , between fy2009 and fy2017 , high - priority programs accounted for as much as 98% and as little as 94% of the government's total improper payments — a variance of 4 percentage points .

the first five years of reporting may have displayed greater variance because agencies were in the initial stages of developing improper payment estimates for their programs .

this may have , in turn , increased year - to - year variations in total improper payments — variations that should theoretically diminish over time as agencies develop more accurate measures .

should the current trend continue into future fiscal years , high - priority programs would account for 9 out of every 10 dollars reported as improper payments .

omb's guidance on high - priority programs was intended to focus agency efforts on the subset of programs with the highest dollar amounts of improper payments .

as the data in table 4 show , the results have been mixed .

while some high - priority programs have seen a steady decline in their improper payments error rates , others have shown little or no improvement — and some have seen their error rates increase over time .

the data show that the government - wide error rate increased from 4.4% in fy2004 to its peak of 5.4% in fy2009 , and then declined again to 4.5% in fy2017 .

while a number of factors likely contributed to this pattern , changes in the government - wide error rate mirrored changes in the error rates of several of the largest high - priority programs: medicare fee - for - service , earned income tax credit , medicare part c , supplemental security income ( ssi ) , and the national school lunch program .

these five programs have accounted for a majority of the government's total improper payments between fy2004 and fy2017 , so changes in their error rates could drive changes in the government - wide error rate .

during the period of fy2004 through fy2009 , the error rates for all five programs increased , and during the period of fy2010 through fy2017 the error rates for all but medicare fee - for - service decreased .

given that high - priority programs account for such a large percentage of the government's overall improper payments , reducing the amount of funds paid erroneously depends in large part on reducing the error rates of these 20 programs .

the data show , however , that nearly half of the high - priority programs have shown no improvement .

specifically , the error rates for seven programs have increased since they first began reporting data , and the error rate for one program has remained unchanged .

moreover , while the error rates for twelve programs have decreased , the decline has been less than 10% for five programs .

in some cases , program error rates have not improved despite having been subject to improper payments requirements for more than a decade .

for example , eitc's error rate has remained virtually unchanged over 13 years of reporting .

in fy2004 , eitc's error rate stood at 24.5% , and at the end of fy2017 it stood at 23.9% .

moreover , the error rate for unemployment insurance increased from 10.3% to 12.5% during that same time frame .

in sum , while the government - wide error rate has fallen from its peak of 5.4% , there has been little progress made reducing the error rates for a number of high - priority programs .

as a consequence , 13 years after agencies first reported improper payment rates and amounts , the government still issues more than $100 billion a year in improper payments .

