on april 19 , 2018 , the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc , or the commission ) initiated a proceeding to review its policies and procedures for the certification ( permitting ) of interstate natural gas pipelines .

rapid expansion of the u.s. natural gas pipeline network to accommodate new supplies of domestic shale gas has been a focus of congress , prompting hearings and legislative proposals over the last decade regarding the federal role in pipeline siting .

nine related bills have been introduced in the 115 th congress , including the promoting interagency coordination for review of natural gas pipelines act ( h.r .

2910 ) , which passed in the house in july 2017 , and provisions in the energy and natural resources act of 2017 ( s. 1460 ) .

ferc's review of its permitting policies is the most recent development in an ongoing series of legislative proposals , executive orders , court rulings , and commission orders which address the federal role in gas pipeline permitting .

ferc's review provides both advocates and opponents of gas pipeline development a new opportunity to express their views about how the commission considers such projects .

it may also identify issues of focus for future congressional oversight and legislation .

given that the united states is the world's largest producer of natural gas , policy changes by ferc affecting natural gas infrastructure could have significant implications for u.s. natural gas resource development , prices , and associated environmental impacts .

therefore , they would likely be subject to scrutiny within congress and among a wide range of stakeholders .

this report provides an overview of the federal certification process for interstate natural gas pipelines and current policy challenges which have been the subject of debate and litigation .

it reviews recent executive orders intended to facilitate or expedite federal approval of natural gas pipeline projects .

the report summarizes legislation proposed since the 111 th congress intended to change the federal review of interstate natural gas pipeline certificate applications .

it also summarizes ferc's examination of its policy statement for natural gas pipeline certification , which serves as the basis of its review of pipeline certificate applications .

the report concludes with a discussion of policy issues for congress .

the united states' supply of natural gas is growing due to technological improvements , such as horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing , which have increased producers' ability to extract natural gas from shale formations .

shale gas is projected to become the dominant source of the u.s. natural gas supply by 2030 .

the growth in u.s. shale gas production is driving the expansion of natural gas pipeline infrastructure at the local level ( to gather and process the gas ) and at the national level to transport natural gas from producing regions to consuming markets , typically in other states .

over 300,000 miles of high - capacity transmission pipeline already transport natural gas across the united states ( figure 1 ) .

however , if the growth in u.s. shale gas continues as projected , the need for new pipelines could be substantial .

one recent analysis by the ingaa foundation , a pipeline industry research organization , projected the need for approximately 26,000 miles ( 1,400 miles annually ) of new natural gas transmission pipeline between 2018 and 2035 ; total capital expenditure for these projects could range from $154 billion to $190 billion .

figure 2 shows annual additions to natural gas transmission pipeline mileage in the united states since 2004 .

as the figure indicates , federal and state agencies have approved significant additions to the pipeline system over the last 15 years , especially after the onset of the shale gas expansion in 2006-2008 .

pipeline construction slowed for a five - year period through 2016 as newly added capacity absorbed new shale gas supplies , but construction has since increased .

altogether , over 24,000 miles of gas transmission pipeline have been constructed since 2004 or are anticipated for construction .

additional gas pipeline capacity has also become available through conversion of pipelines carrying other commodities or flow reversal of existing natural gas pipelines .

under section 7 ( c ) of the natural gas act of 1938 ( nga ) , ferc is authorized to issue certificates of "public convenience and necessity" for "the construction or extension of any facilities ... for the transportation in interstate commerce of natural gas" ( 15 u.s.c .

§717f ( c ) ) .

therefore , companies seeking to build interstate natural gas pipelines must first obtain certificates of public convenience and necessity from ferc .

the commission's regulatory process for the review of certificate applications consists of several principal steps , explained below , which may vary somewhat depending upon whether or not a pipeline developer opts to enter into a voluntary pre - filing process before formally applying for a pipeline certificate .

over the last decade , proposals for new interstate natural gas pipelines have become increasingly controversial .

many certificate applications have been subjected to heavy public scrutiny , and some have faced significant delays in review , as well as protracted litigation .

a may 2018 report by the department of energy inspector general stated that "nothing came to our attention to indicate that ferc had not generally performed the natural gas certification process in accordance with applicable laws , regulations , policies , and procedures. .

nonetheless , aspects of ferc's current practices remain a focus of attention among policymakers because they have been the subject of ferc dissent , debate in congress , or litigation in federal court .

the development of pipelines has been a focus of the last three presidents .

the bush , obama , and trump administrations issued a series of executive orders intended to facilitate or expedite the federal permitting of infrastructure projects , specifically including energy infrastructure .

exactly how all of these orders have affected , or may affect , federal review of interstate natural gas pipeline siting under ferc's jurisdiction is not entirely clear , however , due to the complexity of the certification process and permit obligations under related statutory requirements ( eg , nepa ) .

over the last 20 years , congress has acted frequently to oversee ferc's certification of interstate natural gas pipelines through hearings and correspondence with the commission .

members of congress also have proposed legislation to change ferc's review of gas pipeline certificate applications , specifically , or as one category among a broader range of infrastructure projects .

table 1 summarizes the key provisions of legislative proposals affecting ferc's pipeline certification in the 111 th - 114 th congresses .

as the table shows , bills which were not enacted sought to increase ferc public hearings , limit eminent domain authority , require regional review of multiple projects , or impose specific deadlines on ferc and cooperating agencies .

title 41 of the fixing america's surface transportation act ( p.l .

114-94 ; fast - 41 ) , which became law on december 4 , 2015 , revises the process for federal approval of a range of major infrastructure projects by establishing best practices , requiring coordination of federal agency review of projects , and shortening the period for challenges to final decisions for issuing project permits .

infrastructure projects covered by the act are those requiring environmental review under nepa and requiring investment exceeding $200 million ( §41001 ) .

as of june 2018 , the permitting dashboard listed four natural gas pipeline projects ( one completed ) covered under fast - 41 with ferc as the lead agency .

some members of congress have introduced legislative proposals in the 115 th congress to change ferc's certification authority or review process .

table 2 summarizes the key provisions in these bills related to natural gas pipeline certification .

as the table shows , the proposals which remain under committee consideration variously would require ferc to collectively review multiple pipelines proposed in the same region , prepare supplemental eiss , hold more public meetings , and more broadly consider greenhouse gas emissions .

some would impose deadlines for permit review and mandate greater cooperation and transparency of permit review by federal agencies .

the promoting interagency coordination for review of natural gas pipelines act ( h.r .

2910 ) , which passed in the house on july 19 , 2017 , would require federal , state , and local agencies involved in environmental review for a proposed pipeline to defer to ferc's approved scope for nepa review .

h.r .

2910 would also require ferc to make a decision on a natural gas pipeline certificate application within 90 days of completing nepa review and would require concurrent review by cooperating federal agencies .

as discussed earlier , ferc's review of pipeline certificate applications is guided by its policy statement on certification of new interstate natural gas pipeline facilities issued in 1999 .

on december 21 , 2017 , the newly appointed ferc chairman announced that the commission would undertake a review of its permitting policies and procedures for interstate natural gas pipelines .

accordingly , on april 19 , 2018 , the commission issued a notice of inquiry ( noi ) "to examine its policies in light of changes in the natural gas industry and increased stakeholder interest in how it reviews natural gas pipeline proposals. .

more specifically , the commission's notice "poses a range of questions that reflect concerns raised in numerous public comments , court proceedings and other forums," and seeks input on "potential changes to both the existing policy statement and the structure and scope of the commission's environmental analysis" as well as "feedback on the transparency , timing , and predictability of its certification process. .

according to its notice , ferc's inquiry focuses on four general aspects of its certificate application review , with specific questions posed under each aspect relying on precedent agreements to demonstrate project need , eminent domain and landowner interests , evaluating project alternatives and environmental effects , and the efficiency and effectiveness of ferc's certificate processes .

ferc's inquiry was opened for public comments through july 25 , 2018 .

however , according to the noi , the commission will ma ke no decisions on possible further action related to its inquiry until it has reviewed the comments filed ; the commission has not stated any timetable for completing this review .

 ( ferc issued its 1999 policy statement over 13 months after publishing a notice of inquiry for that proceeding , but the duration of its current review could be different. ) .

any ferc pipeline certification activities or decisions in the meantime are to be made in accordance with the 1999 policy statement .

because ferc's policy statement is only a guidance document , not a regulation or statute , the commission has considerable discretion regarding if , when , and how it will apply any policy changes to pending certificate applications .

congress has been interested in the development of natural gas pipelines for decades , with a particular focus on siting and environmental impacts in recent years .

some in congress generally see such pipeline development as positive , primarily due to its perceived economic benefits in terms of construction employment , lower natural gas prices , and environmental benefits relative to burning more carbon - intensive fossil fuels ( i.e. , coal ) .

others generally view gas pipeline development more critically , primarily due to environmental concerns from greenhouse gas emissions and possible risks to groundwater .

still others are focused primarily on the local effects of gas pipeline development related to public safety , the impacts on lands , and the acquisition of private property through eminent domain .

pipeline proponents would rather see more and faster pipeline development , whereas opponents would rather see less — preferring instead a greater policy emphasis on energy alternatives , such as renewable electricity generation , they view as more environmentally or socially benign .

because ferc has the statutory authority to approve or deny certificates for interstate natural gas pipelines , the policy views above have led to persistent congressional scrutiny of ferc's pipeline certification process and decisions .

concerns about gas pipelines have motivated repeated attempts at congressional intervention .

in total , at least 18 bills have been introduced since the 111 th congress ( 9 in the current congress alone ) which would affect various aspects of ferc's review of pipeline certificate applications .

of these , only the fast act became law , and it seems to have applied to only a few of ferc's gas pipeline reviews .

therefore , absent any other statutory changes , congress must rely on ferc to address policy concerns on its own volition in response to congressional oversight , federal court decisions , and public input .

ferc's recent notice of inquiry covers a number of the key congressional concerns raised either in oversight hearings or bill provisions in the 115 th congress .

examples include broader examination of greenhouse gas impacts ( h.r .

3241 ) , efficiency of application review ( s. 1460 ) , and determining market need ( s. 1314 ) .

therefore , while ferc's policy review does not guarantee any changes to the gas pipeline certification status quo , it may provide valuable information and context for congressional oversight .

if congress disagrees with ferc's future policy choices based on the findings of its noi , those findings presumably would provide an informed basis and clear policy context for subsequent legislative proposals .

although recent executive and agency actions , including ferc's agreement with other agencies and its noi , may lead to changes in ferc policies or process , they are limited to those aspects of gas pipeline regulation which fall directly within the commission's statutory authority under the natural gas act or within its discretion under other federal statutes .

this is a significant limitation because much of ferc's pipeline certificate review is environmental review in compliance with nepa .

while the bills identified in this report , and ferc's policy review , could change how ferc interprets or fulfills its obligations under nepa , they would not amend nepa itself .

likewise , they would not amend other federal statutes , such as the clean water act or the clean air act , which also may have a bearing on gas pipeline siting approval .

