congress is currently considering reauthorization of the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) for either a shorter or longer term , while the program is still dealing with the financial impact of the 2017 and 2018 hurricane seasons .

total losses ( insured and uninsured ) for the 2017 hurricane season are estimated at a record $273 billion , with losses for hurricane harvey estimated at $128.8 billion , hurricane maria at $92.7 billion , and hurricane irma at $51.5 billion .

total losses for the 2018 hurricane season are estimated at $49.4 billion , with hurricane florence at $24.2 billion and hurricane michael at $25.2 billion .

nfip claims for harvey , irma , and maria amounted to more than $10.1 billion as of january 31 , 2019 , while nfip claims for florence and michael amounted to more than $850 million as of that date .

the nfip is designed to borrow money from the treasury to cover claims for extreme events ; however , the 2017 losses would have pushed the program over its authorized borrowing limit .

rather than increase the borrowing limit , in 2017 , congress canceled $16 billion of nfip debt to allow the program to pay claims .

expanding the role of private insurers , including reinsurers , has been seen by many as an answer to the variability of the financial position of the nfip .

increasing participation by private insurers could transfer more flood risk from policyholders to the private insurance sector , as opposed to transferring the risk to the federal government through the nfip .

in addition to the possible advantage to the nfip , the increased availability of flood insurance as private companies enter the market may benefit households and businesses , as insured flood victims are likely to recover more quickly and more fully after a flood .

private insurer interest in directly providing and underwriting flood risk has increased in recent years .

advances in the analytics and data used to quantify flood risk along with increases in capital market capacities may allow private insurers to take on flood risks that they shunned in the past .

however , increasing the private sector role in providing flood insurance coverage directly to consumers may have implications for the operations and fiscal solvency of the nfip as currently structured .

increased access to private flood insurance could provide individual policyholders with a wider choice of coverage and possibly cheaper premiums , but may also lead to variable consumer protections .

the extent to which private insurance companies participate in the u.s. flood insurance market represents an area of congressional concern .

both the 114 th and 115 th congress addressed the issue with legislation passing the house ; however , no legislation was ultimately enacted .

the nfip is currently operating under a short - term reauthorization until may 31 , 2019 .

this report describes the current role of private insurers in u.s. flood insurance , and discusses barriers to private sector involvement .

the report considers potential effects of increased private sector involvement in the u.s. flood market , both for the nfip and for consumers .

finally , the report outlines the provisions relevant to private flood insurance in house and senate nfip reauthorization bills from the 115 th congress .

it will be updated to reflect legislative developments in the 116 th congress , particularly focusing on private flood insurance .

the nfip is the main provider of primary flood insurance coverage for residential properties in the united states , providing nearly $1.42 trillion in coverage for over 5 million residential flood insurance policies .

in fy2018 , the program collected about $3.5 billion in annual premium revenue , $1.1 billion in assessments , fees , and surcharges and $1.0 billion in payments from private reinsurers .

nationally , over 22,000 communities participate in the nfip .

the role of the federal government in flood insurance is in contrast to the majority of other property and casualty risks , such as damage from fire or accidents , which are covered by a broad array of private insurance companies .

total premiums for private property and casualty insurance in 2018 totaled $611 billion , with the policies backed by over $2 trillion in assets held by private insurers .

private insurers can be involved in the flood insurance market in a number of ways , including ( 1 ) by helping to administer the nfip ; ( 2 ) by sharing risk with the nfip as a reinsurer ; or ( 3 ) by taking on risk themselves as a primary insurer , where the insurer contracts directly with a consumer .

since 1983 , private insurers have played a major role in administering the nfip , including selling and servicing policies and adjusting claims , but they largely have not been underwriting flood risk themselves .

instead , the nfip retains the direct financial risk of paying claims for these policies .

since 2016 , the nfip has purchased a limited amount of reinsurance , thus transferring some of the flood risk to the private sector .

one of the reasons that congress created the nfip in 1968 was the general unavailability of flood insurance from private insurers .

private flood insurance was offered between 1895 and 1927 , but losses incurred from the 1927 mississippi river floods and additional flood losses in 1928 led most insurers to stop offering flood policies .

private flood insurance companies largely concluded that flood peril was uninsurable because of the catastrophic nature of flooding , the difficulty of determining accurate rates , the risk of adverse selection , and the concern that they could not profitably provide risk - based flood coverage at a price that consumers felt they could afford .

currently , the private flood insurance market most commonly provides commercial coverage , secondary coverage above the nfip maximums , or coverage in the lender - placed market .

the 2018 premiums for private flood insurance as reported to the national association of insurance commissioners ( naic ) totaled $644 million , up from $589 million in 2017 and $376 million in 2016 , compared to the $3.5 billion total amount of nfip premiums .

in general , the private flood market tends to focus on high - value properties , which command higher premiums and therefore the extra expense of flood underwriting can be more readily justified .

currently few private insurers compete with the nfip in the primary residential flood insurance market .

one illustration of this is that the naic only began systematically collecting separate data on private flood insurance in 2016 .

as discussed in the following sections , private insurers have identified a number of potential barriers to more widespread private sector involvement in providing flood insurance .

increasing private insurance may present a number of issues for the nfip and for consumers .

the policy debate surrounding nfip and private insurance has evolved over the last few years .

the discussion in 2012 was framed in the context of privatization of the nfip and actions that might be taken to create conditions for private sector involvement .

one of the primary interests of congress at the time was to reduce the federal government's role in flood insurance by transferring its exposure to the private sector , with an expectation that a realignment of roles would allow the federal government to focus on flood risk mitigation while private markets focused on providing flood insurance .

one argument for increasing private sector participation in the u.s. flood market was that competition should lead to innovation in flood risk analytics and modeling and produce new flood insurance products that would better meet customer needs and lead to greater levels of insurance market penetration .

in fact , private sector flood risk analytics and modeling have improved significantly before any sizable entry of private insurers into the market .

another argument was that , in contrast to the nfip , which cannot diversify its portfolio of flood risk by insuring unrelated risks , the insurance industry can diversify catastrophic risks with uncorrelated or less correlated risks from other perils , other geographic regions , non - catastrophic risks , or risks from unrelated lines of business .

fema considered a range of concrete steps by which the barriers to private sector involvement could be addressed .

one of these has been introduced: the purchase of reinsurance .

two others are in progress: the reduction of premium subsidies for some properties and reporting to make premium subsidies and cross - subsidies more transparent .

although bw - 12 directed fema to make a recommendation about the best manner in which to accomplish the privatization of the nfip , fema presented the report without a recommendation , arguing that any privatization strategy is complex and involves significant policy decisions that would require input from a variety of stakeholders .

they concluded that there is no single , clear solution ; it is heavily politicized ; and harsh criticism of any change is inevitable .

currently the discussion is more focused on sharing risk , with the recognition that neither the nfip nor the private sector is likely to be able to write all of the policies needed to cover all of the flood risk in the united states .

fema has identified the need to increase flood insurance coverage across the nation as a major priority for nfip reauthorization , and this also forms a key element of their 2018-2022 strategic plan .

fema has developed a "moonshot" with the goal of doubling flood insurance coverage by 2023 through the increased sale of both nfip and private policies .

the 2017 hurricane season highlighted the flood insurance gap in the united states , where many people that are exposed to flood risk are not covered by flood insurance .

for example , in texas and florida , less than a third of the flooded residential structures in sfhas were insured , and no more than 10% - 12% of flooded residential structures outside the sfha were insured .

recent floods have also demonstrated that insured flood victims generally receive significantly more from nfip flood insurance than from fema individual assistance ( ia ) .

for example , in the 2015 south carolina floods , the average nfip claim was $35,172 , while the average ia payment was about $3,199 .

in the 2016 louisiana floods , the average nfip claim was $91,507 , while the average ia payment was about $9,349 .

for hurricane harvey , the average nfip claim was $116,823 , while the average ia payment in texas was about $4,426 .

for hurricane irma , the average nfip claim in florida was $51,773 , while the average ia payment was about $1,315 .

fema's view is that both the nfip and an expanded private market will be needed to increase flood insurance coverage for the nation and reduce uninsured flood losses .

however , the private market is unlikely to expand significantly without congressional action .

the concerns of private companies related to the mandatory purchase requirement and continuous coverage and the concerns of some members of congress about adverse selection are among the most pressing issues likely to be addressed in any long - term nfip reauthorization .

the provisions in the 115 th congress legislation that related to private flood insurance , and the issues raised as barriers to private sector involvement , are summarized below and compared side - by - side in table a - 1 .

all of the bills also included provisions related to administrative reforms of the nfip , some of which may be relevant to private insurance companies , which are not described in this report .

h.r .

2874 , 21 st century flood reform act h.r .

2874 , section 102 , would have phased out the pre - firm subsidy for primary residences at a rate of 6.5% - 15% ( compared to the current rate of 5% - 18% ) , except that in the first year after enactment , the minimum rate increase would have been 5% ; in the second year after enactment , the minimum rate increase would have been 5.5% ; and in the third year after enactment , the minimum rate increase would have been 6% .

the phaseout of the pre - firm subsidy for other categories of properties ( non - primary residences , non - residential properties , severe repetitive loss properties , properties with substantial cumulative damage , and properties with substantial damage or improvement after july 6 , 2012 ) would have remained at 25% .

this section would have made it possible , but not certain , for fema to raise premiums more rapidly than under current law by increasing the minimum rate at which the pre - firm subsidy could be removed for primary residences .

h.r .

2874 , section 201 , would have revised the definition of private flood insurance previously defined in bw - 12 .

this section would have struck existing statutory language describing how private flood insurance must provide coverage "as broad as the coverage" provided by the nfip .

instead , the new definition would have relied on whether the insurance policy and insurance company were in compliance in the individual state ( as defined to include certain territories and the district of columbia ) where the policy applies .

further , "private flood insurance" would have been specifically defined as including surplus lines insurance .

though the majority of regulation of private flood insurance would have rested with individual states , federal regulators would have been required to develop and implement requirements relating to the financial strength of private insurance companies from which such entities and agencies accepted private insurance , provided that such requirements not affect or conflict with any state law , regulation , or procedure concerning the regulation of the business of insurance .

the dollar amount of coverage would still have had to meet federal statutory requirements and requirements relating to the financial strength of such companies offering flood insurance could still be implemented .

this section would also have specified that if a property owner purchased private flood insurance and decided then to return to the nfip , they would be considered to have maintained continuous coverage .

this section would have allowed private insurers to offer policies that provide coverage that might differ significantly from nfip coverage , either by providing greater coverage or potentially providing reduced coverage that could leave policyholders exposed after a flood .

h.r .

2874 , section 202 , would have applied the mandatory purchase requirement only to residential improved real estate , thereby eliminating the requirement for other types of properties ( eg , all commercial properties ) to purchase flood insurance from january 1 , 2019 .

this would likely have affected the policy base of the nfip by reducing the number of commercial properties covered .

however , it is uncertain how many would have elected to forgo insurance coverage ( public or private ) entirely .

h.r .

2874 , section 203 , would have eliminated the non - compete requirement in the wyo arrangement with fema that restricted wyo companies from selling both nfip and private flood insurance policies .

this would have allowed the wyo companies to offer their own insurance policies while also receiving reimbursement for their participation in the wyo program to administer the nfip policies .

this section was largely pre - empted by fema's proposed changes for fy2019 to remove the wyo non - compete clause .

h.r .

2874 , section 204 , would have required fema to make publicly available all data , models , assessments , analytical tools , and other information that is used to assess flood risk or identify and establish flood elevations and premiums .

this section would also have required fema to develop an open - source data system by which all information required to be made publicly available may be accessed by the public on an immediate basis by electronic means .

within 12 months after enactment , fema would have been required to establish and maintain a publicly searchable database that provides information about each community participating in the nfip .

this section provided that personally identifiable information would not have been made available ; the information provided would be based on data that identifies properties at the zip code or census block level .

h.r .

2874 , section 506 , would have established that the allowance paid to wyo companies would not be greater than 27.9% of the chargeable premium for such coverage .

it would also have required fema to reduce the costs to wyo companies participating in the program .

h.r .

2874 , section 507 , would have increased the civil penalties from $2,000 to $5,000 on federally regulated lenders for failure to comply with enforcing the mandatory purchase requirement .

in addition , the federal entities for lending regulations , in consultation with fema , would have been required jointly to update and reissue the guidelines on compliance with mandatory purchase .

h.r .

2874 , section 513 , would have required gao to issue a report , within 18 months of enactment , on the implementation and efficacy of the mandatory purchase requirement .

h.r .

2874 , section 511 , would have required that , no later than 18 months after enactment , fema begin to annually transfer a portion of the risk of the nfip to the private reinsurance or capital markets to cover a fema - determined probable maximum loss target expected to occur in the fiscal year .

s. 1313 , flood insurance affordability and sustainability act of 2017 s. 1313 , section 101 , would have required annual transfer of a portion of the risk of the nfip to the private reinsurance or capital markets in an amount sufficient to maintain the ability of the program to pay claims , and limit the exposure of the nfip to potential catastrophic losses from extreme events .

s. 1313 , section 102 , would have required fema to conduct a study in coordination with the national association of insurance commissioners to address how to increase participation in flood insurance coverage through programmatic and regulatory changes , and report to congress no later than 18 months after enactment .

this study would have been required to include but not be limited to options to ( 1 ) expand coverage beyond the sfha to areas of moderate flood risk ; ( 2 ) automatically enroll customers in flood insurance while providing customers the opportunity to decline enrollment ; and ( 3 ) create bundled flood insurance coverage that diversifies risk across multiple - peril insurance .

s. 1313 , section 401 , would have allowed any state - approved private insurance to satisfy the mandatory purchase requirement , and allowed private flood insurance to count as continuous coverage .

this section would also have changed the amount of insurance required for both private flood insurance policies and nfip policies in order to satisfy the mandatory purchase requirement .

s. 1313 , section 402 , would have provided temporary authority during the first two years after enactment for wyo companies to sell private flood insurance for certain properties ( eg , non - residential properties , severe repetitive loss properties , business properties , or any property that has incurred flood - related damage in which the cumulative amount of payments equaled or exceeded the fair market value of the property ) with the possibility of expanded participation after two years and further study .

s. 1313 , section 403 , would have required fema to study the feasibility of selling or licensing the use of historical structure - specific nfip claims data to non - governmental entities , while reasonably protecting policyholder privacy , and report within a year of enactment .

this section would also have authorized fema to sell or license claims data as the administrator determines is appropriate and in the public interest , with the proceeds to be deposited in the national flood insurance fund ( nfif ) .

s. 1313 , section 404 , would have required an insurance company issuing a policy for private flood insurance to impose and collect an annual surcharge equivalent to the federal policy fee ( fpf ) , to be transferred to the fema administrator and deposited in the nfif .

s. 1313 , section 602 , would have required fema , not later than one year from enactment , to create and maintain a publicly searchable database that includes the aggregate number of claims filed each month , by state ; the aggregate number of claims paid in part or in full ; and the aggregate number of claims denials appealed , denials upheld on appeal , and denials overturned on appeal ; without making personally identifiable information available .

s. 1368 , sustainable , affordable , fair , and efficient [safe] national flood insurance program reauthorization act of 2017 s. 1368 , section 302 , would have established that the total amount of fema reimbursement paid to wyo companies could not be greater than 22.46% of the chargeable premium for such coverage .

s. 1368 , section 303 , would have required fema to develop a fee schedule based on recovering the actual costs of providing flood insurance rate maps ( firms ) and charge any private entity an appropriate fee for use of such maps .

this requirement would have provided a mechanism by which private insurance companies could contribute to the costs of floodplain mapping in lieu of paying the fpf .

s. 1368 , section 304 , would have required fema , within 12 months of enactment , to develop a schedule to determine the actual costs of wyo companies , including claims adjusters and engineering companies , and reimburse the wyo companies only for the actual costs of the service or products .

s. 1368 , section 410 , would have required fema to conduct a study and report to congress within one year of enactment on the percentage of properties with federally backed mortgages located in sfhas that satisfy the mandatory purchase requirement , and the percentage of properties with federally backed mortgages located in the 500-year floodplain that would satisfy the mandatory purchase requirement if the mandatory purchase requirement applied to such properties .

s. 1571 , national flood insurance program reauthorization act of 2017 s. 1571 , section 302 , would have specified that fema may consider any form of risk transfer , including traditional reinsurance , catastrophe bonds , collateralized reinsurance , resilience bonds , and other insurance - linked securities .

s. 1571 , section 303 , would have required the federal banking regulators to conduct an annual study regarding the rate at which persons who are subject to the mandatory purchase requirement are complying with that requirement .

section 303 would also have required fema to conduct an annual study of participation rates and financial assistance to individuals who live in areas outside sfhas .

