as of fy2018 , the department of veterans affairs ( va ) administers benefits under six gi bills: the post - 9 / 11 veterans educational assistance program ( post - 9 / 11 gi bill ) , survivors' and dependents' educational assistance program ( dea ) , montgomery gi bill — selected reserve ( mgib - sr ) , montgomery gi bill — active duty ( mgib - ad ) , reserve educational assistance program ( reap ) , and post - vietnam era veterans educational assistance program ( veap ) .

the gi bills provide financial assistance to eligible servicemembers and veterans and their families while pursuing education and civilian job or career training .

in general , gi bill benefits are available for pursuit of a variety of education and training programs from apprenticeships to graduate education over 36 months ( or the equivalent in part - time pursuit ) .

in fy2017 , the gi bills provided over $12 billion in payments to or on behalf of almost one million participants .

during the 114 th congress and early in the 115 th congress , members introduced several pieces of legislation intended to update and improve the gi bills ® .

three bills were enacted in the 114 th congress to enhance gi bill benefits , protect gi bill participants , and collect outcome data on participants , among other purposes .

for a description of the bills enacted in the 114 th congress , see crs report r44586 , gi bill legislation enacted in the 114th congress .

despite the legislation enacted in the 114 th congress , several issues and stakeholder requests remained outstanding .

the harry w. colmery veterans educational assistance act of 2017 ( colmery act ; p.l .

115-48 ) was introduced on july 13 , 2017 , as a compilation of several bills , some of which had previously received committee and subcommittee hearings .

the house committee on veterans' affairs ( hvac ) marked up and approved the bill on thursday , july 19 , 2017 .

on tuesday , july 24 , 2017 , the house suspended its rules and passed the bill , by a vote of 405-0 .

in the following week , the senate passed the house version of the bill by unanimous consent on august 2 , 2017 .

the president signed the bill into law on august 16 , 2017 .

on september 29 , 2017 , the department of veterans affairs expiring authorities act of 2017 ( p.l .

115-62 ) was enacted , making several technical corrections to the colmery act .

this report describes the provisions of the colmery act , as amended .

the first section describes amendments made by the law to the post - 9 / 11 gi bill .

the two subsequent sections describe amendments that affect multiple gi bills and gi bills other than the post - 9 / 11 gi bill .

the final sections describe amendments to other programs and a new program .

the post - 9 / 11 veterans educational assistance act of 2008 ( "post - 9 / 11 gi bill" ) — originally established by title v of the supplemental appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .

110-252 ) and enacted on june 30 , 2008 — is the newest and most widely used gi bill .

in fy2017 , the post - 9 / 11 gi bill provided over $11 billion in payments to or on behalf of over 750,000 participants .

the following sections describe changes to the post - 9 / 11 gi bill , as enacted by the colmery act .

the first section describes changes to participant eligibility criteria .

the second section explains changes to the eligible benefit payments .

the third section indicates changes to the period during which the benefits must be used .

the final sections illustrate new institutional reporting requirements and claims processing requirements for the department of veterans affairs ( va ) .

although the post - 9 / 11 gi bill represents the overwhelming majority of gi bill participants and spending , there are five other gi bills that also provide educational assistance .

the following sections describe colmery act provisions that affect benefits under multiple gi bills and under gi bills other than the post - 9 / 11 gi bill .

the first section describes changes to participant eligibility criteria .

the second section explains changes to eligible benefit payments and their administration .

prior to and following the enactment of the colmery act , the va is accountable for administrative functions in addition to administering gi bill benefit payments to eligible individuals .

these include approving and reviewing programs of education in accordance with statutory and regulatory requirements , providing outreach and disclosures to gi bill - eligible individuals , and training personnel at educational institutions and training establishments .

the following sections provide a description of colmery act provisions that affect the general administration of the gi bills .

the first three sections relate to the funding , functions , and oversight of state approving agencies ( saas ) .

the fourth and fifth sections describe changes that directly impact educational institutions and training establishments approved for gi bill purposes by establishing new requirements and providing additional resources .

the remaining sections explain additional colmery act provisions intended to increase information disclosure and transparency in order to maximize positive gi bill outcomes ; expand the types of approved programs of education in response to 21 st century training innovations ; and extend the committee that provides recommendations to the va to improve gi bill administration and outcomes .

the following sections describe colmery act provisions that affect educational programs that are related to the gi bills and administered by the va. first , the act amends the eligible activities under the existing va work study program .

second , the act authorizes the administratively created vetsuccess on campus program .

third , the act authorizes a new pilot program to promote veterans education .

finally , the act modifies eligibility under the existing vocational rehabilitation & employment ( vr&e ) program .

during world war ii , thousands of american servicemembers were exposed to nitrogen mustard gas , sulfur mustard gas , and lewisite as part of weapons testing programs .

prior to the enactment of the colmery act , these veterans ma y have been eligible for disability compensation if it were determined that they had disabilities caused or aggravated by their exposure to mustard gas or lewisite during service .

prior to and following the colmery act , pursuant to va regulations , there is a presumption that certain medical conditions are caused or aggravated by a veteran's exposure to mustard gas or lewisite and thus are service - connected for the purposes of eligibility for disability compensation .

prior to the enactment of the colmery act and despite this presumptive eligibility regulation , there have been concerns that many veterans who should be eligible for disability compensation on the basis of mustard gas or lewisite exposure may have been denied compensation by the va due to inaccurate service records and information on the chemical weapons testing programs , including incomplete information on sites where testing occurred .

section 502 ( a ) of the colmery act requires the va to reconsider claims for disability compensation based on exposure to mustard gas or lewisite during world war ii that had been denied before the date of the enactment of the colmery act .

claims are eligible for reconsideration if they allege exposure at one of the 22 sites listed in section 502 or any other site determined appropriate by the va .

these reconsidered claims are to be presumed to be eligible for disability compensation on the basis of mustard gas or lewisite exposure unless there is affirmative evidence to deny the claim .

in making determinations on reconsidered claims , the va must consider that records of exposure may be unavailable and that many veterans were sworn to secrecy as part of their participation in the testing programs .

the va may not deny claims solely on the basis of information on the department of defense and department of veterans affairs chemical biological warfare database or any list of known testing sites maintained by dod or the va. benefits for reconsidered claims are retroactive to the date of first application for benefits .

section 502 ( b ) of the colmery act requires , within 180 days of enactment , dod to investigate sites in which the army corps of engineers has uncovered evidence of chemical weapons testing during world war ii to assess the effects of full - body exposure of mustard gas and lewisite on humans ; and sites for which more than two veterans have previously been denied compensation in connection with exposure to mustard gas or lewisite .

dod is required to provide a report to congress which includes a list of all sites where chemical weapons testing occurred , including sites investigated pursuant to the colmery act , the dates of such testing , and number of veterans who were exposed to mustard gas or lewisite during such testing .

section 502 ( c ) of the colmery act also requires , within 180 days , the va to investigate and report to congress the actions taken by the agency to contact veterans who were exposed to mustard gas and lewisite during chemical weapons testing and the number and percentage of denied claims for compensation related to exposure to mustard gas and lewisite .

