a private bill is one that provides benefits to specified individuals ( including corporate bodies ) .

individuals sometimes request relief through private law when administrative or legal remedies are exhausted , but congress seems more often to view private legislation as appropriate when no other remedy is available and when enactment would , in a broad sense , afford equity .

from 1817 through 1971 , most congresses enacted hundreds of private laws , but since then the number has declined significantly as congress has expanded administrative discretion to deal with many of the situations that tended to give rise to private bills .

since 2007 , four private laws have been enacted .

private provisions are also occasionally included in public legislation .

the senate considers private bills using the same procedures that are used to consider other legislation .

no house rule defines what bills qualify as private , but most private bills have official titles stating them to be "for the relief of" named individuals .

house rule xii , clause 4 , prohibits the introduction or consideration of private bills for granting pensions , constructing certain bridges , correcting military or naval records , or settling claims eligible for action under the tort claims act ( u.s. code , title 28 ) .

subjects of contemporary private bills ( and house committees receiving referral of those bills ) include the following: immigration ( eg , residency status , visa classification ) : judiciary domestic claims against the government: judiciary foreign claims against the government: foreign affairs patents and copyrights: judiciary vessel documentation: transportation and infrastructure taxation ( eg , income tax liability , tariff exemptions ) : ways and means public lands ( eg , sales , claims , exchanges , mineral leases ) : natural resources veterans' benefits: veterans' affairs civil service status: oversight and reform medical ( eg , drug approvals , hmo enrollment requirements ) : energy and commerce military decorations: armed service .

private bills are introduced and referred in the same way as other measures .

they are commonly introduced by the member who represents the individual to be benefitted .

seldom are companion bills introduced in both chambers .

although house rule xii , clause 7 , permits no cosponsors on private bills , cosponsors have occasionally appeared on private bills that attract broad interest .

immigration and claims matters have long been the most common subjects of private bills .

the committee on the judiciary refers these to its subcommittee on immigration and citizenship , which handles them routinely under established committee rules .

it generally takes no action on a private bill unless its sponsor submits specified documentation and requests a hearing .

the sponsor is generally the only witness at such a hearing .

the subcommittee makes available to member offices information on what documentation it requires and the kinds of bills on which it is likely to take favorable action .

it usually declines to report a bill if its records show few precedents for favorable house action in similar cases .

panels that handle other kinds of private legislation have no similarly institutionalized procedures .

house rule xv , clause 5 , establishes special procedures for the consideration of private bills .

when reported , private bills go on a dedicated calendar , the private calendar ( house rule xiii , clause 1 ) .

on the first tuesday of each month , the speaker is to direct the clerk to call the bills and resolutions that are pending on the private calendar .

each bill is called up automatically in the order in which it was reported and placed on the calendar .

the bills are considered under a hybrid set of procedures known as "the house as in committee of the whole," meaning that there is no period of general debate , but debate and amendment may occur under the five - minute rule .

usually , however , no debate occurs , and private measures are disposed of by voice vote .

at his or her discretion , the speaker may also , on any other day of the month , call up for consideration a bill or resolution that has been pending on the private calendar for at least seven days , providing he or she has given two legislative days' notice of his or her intention to do so .

during the call of the private calendar , if two members object to the consideration of any bill , it is automatically recommitted .

during a congress , each party is to appoint official "objectors" who are responsible for examining bills on the private calendar and objecting to those they deem inappropriate .

sometimes , a member of a subcommittee dealing with immigration or claims has served simultaneously as an official objector .

in practice , instead of objecting , objectors may ask that a bill be passed "over , without prejudice," which gives sponsors an opportunity to discuss concerns with them informally before the next calendar call .

if a private bill is recommitted , the committee may re - report it as a paragraph of an omnibus private bill , which has priority for consideration under rule xv .

at this stage , the substance of each original private bill may be defeated by majority vote by means of a motion to strike the paragraph out of the omnibus bill .

otherwise , each paragraph may be amended only by reducing amounts of money or providing limitations .

after an omnibus private bill is passed , it is broken up again into separate bills for further action .

in recent practice , committees seldom re - report private measures once they are recommitted , and the house does not appear to have considered an omnibus private bill in decades .

the house has sometimes considered private bills using other parliamentary mechanisms , such as the suspension of the rules procedure or by unanimous consent .

further proceedings on private bills follow the general lawmaking process .

presidents have vetoed private bills , sometimes by pocket veto .

otherwise , congress may override the veto in the same way as with public measures .

either house of congress may also , by resolution , refer a private claims bill to the court of claims for a recommendation from a trial commissioner .

these recommendations are requested occasionally and are strictly advisory , but they are often followed when requested .

