an officially secular nation , india has a long tradition of religious tolerance ( with periodic and sometimes serious lapses ) , which is protected under its constitution .

although religious discrimination and intolerance of social dissent is hardly new to india , the 2014 election of the hindu nationalist bharatiya janata party ( bjp ) to majority status at the federal level — the party won 52% of parliament's lok sabha ( lower - house ) seats in that year's national elections — triggered concerns among human rights advocates that agents of overt hindu majoritarianism would be empowered .

indian prime minister narendra modi , leader of the bjp , took office after serving as chief minister of the western gujarat state for nearly 13 years .

for some observers , prime minister modi's 2016 u.s. visit — and address to a joint session of congress — completed the "political rehabilitation" of a foreign leader who was at one time viewed by many in the united states as a pariah: in 2005 , modi had been denied a u.s. visa over concerns about his role in government during lethal anti - muslim violence in gujarat in 2002 .

the visa denial had been lauded by some members of congress .

in the weeks leading up to modi's june 2016 visit to washington , dc , some members issued public criticisms of india's human rights record .

in early 2017 , the bjp won a sweeping state - level victory in north - central uttar pradesh ( up ) , india's most populous state with more than 200 million residents , one - fifth of them muslim .

with modi's blessing , the party then sat a vitriolic hindu cleric and hardliner , yogi adityanath , as up chief minister .

the choice surprised and baffled many analysts , and elicited new fears of rising hindu chauvinism that chill many among the country's large muslim minority of up to 180 million persons , as well as in significant christian and other minority communities that number in the tens of millions .

after four years of bjp rule at the federal level and expanded bjp power in state governments since 2014 , indicators of increasing hindu chauvinism and bigotry are more common in india .

at present , reporting by the u.s. government and international human rights watchdogs indicates that india's minority religious communities face mounting repression .

in its 2018 annual report , the u.s. commission on international religious freedom ( uscirf ) stated conditions for religious minorities have deteriorated over the last decade due to a multifaceted campaign by hindu - nationalist groups… .

[religious minorities] face challenges ranging from acts of violence or intimidation , to the loss of political power , to increasing feelings of disenfranchisement and "otherness. .

in 2017 , a bipartisan group of five u.s .

senators penned a letter urging president donald trump to raise the issue of india's deteriorating religious freedom during prime minister modi's mid - year visit to washington , dc .

it is unclear if the president did so .

surveys indicate that prime minister modi remains fairly popular across india , especially in the country's western and some southern regions .

a pew research center poll conducted in 2017 found 88% of indians holding a favorable view of their prime minister , and modi enjoyed a favorable rating 30 points higher than that of congress party leader rahul gandhi , his key rival on the national political stage .

yet skepticism about modi / bjp performance in office may be growing: a large - scale 2018 survey found that — while the bjp remains well - placed to win another narrow lok sabha majority in 2019 — nearly half ( 47% ) of respondents believed the modi government did not deserve reelection .

india — the world's largest democracy — is south asia's dominant actor with about 1.3 billion citizens and the world's third - largest economy in purchasing power terms .

the country is often characterized by top u.s. officials as a nascent great power and "indispensable partner" of the united states .

many analysts view india as a potential counterweight to china and its growing clout .

for more than a decade , washington and new delhi have been pursuing a "strategic partnership. .

in 2005 , the united states and india signed a 10-year defense framework agreement to expand bilateral security cooperation ; in 2015 , the agreement was renewed for another decade .

bilateral trade in goods and services has grown significantly , valued at over $126 billion in 2017 , nearly triple the 2006 total of $45 billion .

indians receive about two - thirds of all h1-b ( nonimmigrant work ) u.s. visas , and more than 100,000 indian students are attending u.s. universities .

the influence of a relatively wealthy and outspoken indian - american community of roughly 3 million is reflected in senate and house india caucuses , congress's largest country - specific caucuses .

the united states views india as an important economic and strategic partner in advancing common interests .

india's rising middle - class population , infrastructure and energy needs , and digital connectivity present u.s. commercial opportunities , but challenges are significant .

for 2018 , india ranked 100 th out of 190 countries in world bank index on ease of doing business .

the earlier optimism of many u.s. policymakers and stakeholders about the likelihood of expanding u.s. - india commercial ties under the modi government has given way to intensifying concerns over existing trade and investment barriers .

india continues to be the site of numerous reported human rights violations , some of them seen to be undertaken or facilitated by state actors .

according to the state department's country reports on human rights practices 2017 , many of india's citizens suffer abuses , the most significant of which include police and security force abuses , such as extrajudicial killings , disappearances , torture , arbitrary arrest and detention , rape , harsh and life - threatening prison conditions , and lengthy pretrial detention .

widespread corruption ; reports of political prisoners in certain states ; and instances of censorship and harassment of media outlets , including some critical of the government continued .

there were government restrictions on foreign funding of some nongovernmental organizations ( ngos ) , including on those with views the government stated were not in the "national interest," thereby curtailing the work of these ngos .

legal restrictions on religious conversion in eight states ; lack of criminal investigations or accountability for cases related to rape , domestic violence , dowry - related deaths , honor killings , sexual harassment ; and discrimination against women and girls remained serious problems .

violence and discrimination based on religious affiliation , sexual orientation , and caste or tribe , including indigenous persons , also persisted due to a lack of accountability.… a lack of accountability for misconduct at all levels of government persisted , contributing to widespread impunity .

investigations and prosecutions of individual cases took place , but lax enforcement , a shortage of trained police officers , and an overburdened and under - resourced court system contributed to a small number of convictions [emphasis added] .

international human rights watchdogs also identify widespread abuses .

new york - based human rights watch ( hrw ) , for example — which in 2018 removed laudatory language about india's "strong civil society , vigorous media , and an independent judiciary" found in previous annual reports — lists serious human rights concerns , and argues that , "vigilante violence aimed at religious minorities , marginalized communities , and critics of the government — often carried out by groups claiming to support the ruling bjp — became an increasing threat in india in 2017": the government failed to promptly or credibly investigate the attacks , while many senior bjp leaders publicly promoted hindu supremacy and ultra - nationalism , which encouraged further violence .

dissent was labeled anti - national , and activists , journalists , and academics were targeted for their views , chilling free expression .

foreign funding regulations were used to target nongovernmental organizations critical of government actions or policies .

hrw also notes impunity and lack of accountability for indian security forces .

meanwhile , london - based amnesty international's annual world report for 2017 / 18 offers similar criticisms , contending that , in 2017: religious minority groups , particularly muslims , faced increasing demonization by hardline hindu groups , pro - government media and some state officials .

authorities were openly critical of human rights defenders and organizations , contributing to a climate of hostility against them .

mob violence intensified , including by vigilante cow protection groups .

press freedom and free speech in universities came under attack .

india failed to respect its human rights commitments made before the un human rights council .

the supreme court and high courts delivered several progressive judgments , but some rulings undermined human rights .

impunity for human rights abuses persisted .

when asked about the content of annual state department reports on human rights , religious freedom , and human trafficking , indian government officials often respond by saying , "india does not take cognizance of internal reports of a foreign country. .

reported abuses of religious freedom in india attract international attention , in particular when the modi government and its allies are assumed to be moving forward with emotive , hindu nationalist initiatives promised in the bjp manifesto and eagerly sought by hindu groups .

perceived abuses have produced friction in the u.s. - india relationship , including within the u.s. congress .

domestically , the bjp's 2014 national victory appears to have empowered extremist groups in ways that can undercut both india's and the modi government's international standing .

some top indian business leaders have voiced concern that religious intolerance will harm the country's economic interests .

as noted above , independent india's tradition of religious tolerance has seen occasional and sometimes catastrophic fatal lapses .

the population of approximately 1.3 billion includes a hindu majority of about 80% , as well as a large muslim minority of some 185 million ( about 14% ; india's muslim community is the world's third - largest , after indonesia's and pakistan's ) .

christians account for more than 2% of the population ( roughly 30 million ) and sikhs slightly less than 2% ( about 22 million ) .

buddhists , jains , and others account for the remaining 2% ( see figure 1 ) .

present - day demographics reflect a long - term and ongoing shift: upon independence , india's hindu majority accounted for about 85% of the population , and the muslim minority around 10% .

major incidents of lethal large - scale communal violence in india have targeted: hindus in hyderabad in 1948 ( up to 40,000 killed ) ; sikhs in delhi in 1984 ( more than 3,000 killed ) ; muslims primarily in mumbai in 1993 and gujarat in 2002 ( up to 3,000 combined deaths ) ; and christians in the eastern state of odisha ( formerly orissa ) in 2008 ( up to 100 deaths ) .

2 and figure 3 show the distribution of india's muslim and christian minorities in india's 640 administrative districts , respectively ( at the time of new delhi government's 2011 national census ) .

muslims comprise a majority of the population in 32 districts , according to the data .

of these , they account for at least 90% of residents in 12 .

half of india's muslim - majority districts are in the northern state of jammu and kashmir , india's only muslim - majority state , home to about 8.6 million muslims ( see figure 4 ) .

assam houses another eight muslim - majority districts .

uttar pradesh , where nearly one in five citizens is muslim , is home to more than 38 million muslims — the most of any indian state .

the eastern state of west bengal , bordering bangladesh , is about 27% muslim , with 25 million muslim residents ( see table 1 ) .

other large concentrations are found in and near mumbai ( in the east - central state of maharashtra ) and in the telangana capital of hyderabad , which is 43% muslim .

the most populous muslim - majority district is west bengal's murshidabad , where two - thirds of about 7.1 million residents are muslim .

christians represent a majority of residents in 35 indian districts .

of these , they account for at least 90% of residents in 19 districts , and all but 4 are in the small northeastern states of manipur , meghalaya , mizoram , and nagaland .

the combined population of these four states is about 9 million .

larger numbers of christians are found in the southern states of kerala ( more than 6 million ) and tamil nadu ( 4.4 million ) .

kerala's coastal ernakulam district is itself home to more than 1.2 million christians — more than one - third of the population .

the most populous christian - majority district is meghalaya's east khasi hills abutting bangladesh , where two - thirds of about 826,000 residents are christian .

in 2005 , then - congress party prime minister manmohan singh appointed a government commission led by rajinder sachar , a former chief justice of the delhi high court , to examine the social , economic , and educational status of india's muslim community .

the resulting 2006 "sachar report" concluded that the community "exhibits deficits and deprivation in practically all dimensions of development.… poor roads and lack of proper transport , sanitation , water , electricity and public health facilities pervade muslim concentration localities. .

the report was criticized by hindu nationalist groups for focusing on muslims while ignoring india's other minority communities .

in 2013 , while narendra modi was gujarat chief minister , the state petitioned the indian supreme court to find the commission unconstitutional ( the effort failed ) .

one longtime observer has argued that new delhi's reluctance to take a major role in addressing the crisis faced by ethnic rohingya in neighboring burma is rooted in communal anxiety , with many hindus , especially bjp supporters , viewing muslim refugees as a threat to india .

article 25 of the indian constitution states that "all persons are equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess , practice and propagate religion" in a manner that does not adversely affect public order , health , or morality .

india's federal law provides "minority community" status for six religious groups — buddhists , christians , jains , muslims , parsis ( zoroastrians ) , and sikhs — that together comprise about one - fifth of india's population .

the laws state that the government will protect the existence of these minorities and encourage conditions for the promotion of their individual identities .

a majority ( 59% ) of india's 90 "minority concentration districts" are in four states: assam , bihar , uttar pradesh , and west bengal .

according to the u.s. state department , india's constitution "provides for freedom of conscience and the right of all individuals to freely profess , practice , and propagate religion ; mandates a secular state ; requires the state to treat all religions impartially ; and prohibits discrimination based on religion. .

the department's international religious freedom report for 201 7 notes ongoing significant problems in practice , including five indian states that enforce "anti - conversion laws" ( see " anti - conversion laws and forced conversions ," below ) : authorities often did not prosecute violence by vigilantes against persons , mostly muslims , suspected of slaughtering or illegally transporting cows or trading in or consuming beef .

members of civil society and religious minorities stated that under the current government , religious minority communities felt increasingly vulnerable due to hindu nationalist groups engaging in violence against non - hindu individuals and their places of worship .

representatives of religious minority communities stated that , while the national government sometimes spoke out against incidents of violence , local political leaders often did not , and at times made public remarks individuals could interpret as condoning violence .

in its 2018 annual report , uscirf again designated india as a "tier 2" country , defined as one where the violations engaged in or tolerated by the government are serious and are characterized by at least one of the elements of the "systematic , ongoing , and egregious" standard for "countries of particular concern" ( cpcs , a formal state department designation ) .

uscirf found that , in 2017 , "religious freedom conditions continued a downward trend in india": india's history as a multicultural and multireligious society remained threatened by an increasingly exclusionary conception of national identity based on religion .

during the year , hindu - nationalist groups sought to "saffronize" india through violence , intimidation , and harassment against non - hindus and hindu dalits .

both public and private actors pursued this effort.… at the federal level , prime minister narendra modi has made statements decrying mob violence , but members of his own political party have affiliations with hindu extremist groups and many have used discriminatory language about religious minorities .

despite indian government statistics indicating that communal violence has increased sharply over the past two years , the modi administration has not addressed the problem .

since 2001 , uscirf has attempted to visit india to assess religious freedom conditions on the ground .

however , on three different occasions — in 2001 , 2009 , and 2016 — the new delhi government has refused to grant visas for a uscirf delegation despite requests being supported by the u.s. state department .

the new delhi government regularly "rejects" the findings of uscirf reports and expresses "serious doubts about their credibility. .

india's home ministry reported 111 deaths in 822 incidents of communal violence in the country during 2017 , representing a 29% increase in deaths and a 17% increase in incidents as compared to 2016 , when the figures were 86 and 703 , respectively .

at least 10 of the 2017 deaths were linked to so - called "cow protection" vigilantism ( see " cow slaughter and vigilantism ," below ) .

the ministry administrates the autonomous national foundation for communal harmony to "provide assistance to the children / youth rendered orphan / destitute in communal , caste , ethnic or terrorist violence for their rehabilitation besides promoting communal harmony and national integration through various activities. .

despite serious ongoing concerns , positive developments in 2017 have been noted .

for example , uscirf lauds india's "active and independent judiciary" for deciding several cases in favor of protecting the rights of minority communities , at times citing provisions of the indian constitution that guarantee the right to freedom of expression and that prohibit religious instruction in state - funded schools .

moreover , the federal ministry of minority affairs and the national commission for minorities are addressing issues of security , education , and employment for religious minorities .

for 2018 , the ministry received a 12% boost in its operating budget .

for roughly 500 years before british rule became direct in 1857 , the asian subcontinent had been dominated by muslims politically .

many hindu nationalists , along with some historians , assert that hindu traditions and institutions were suppressed during this period .

as the indian independence movement grew in the early 20 th century , some were energized to "correct" this historic trend .

secularism became a more - or - less enshrined value for the independent indian state , although its conception in both theory and practice varies widely .

because hinduism does not have a specific sacred text to which conformity can be demanded , "hindu fundamentalist" is not an accurate term to describe a purveyor of "hindutva" or "hindu - ness. .

moreover , as conveyed by one scholar , "india's diversity along linguistic , regional , and caste line means defining a 'hindu culture' is problematic. .

for political parties such as the bjp and its antecedents , hinduism as a concept is almost always concurrent with nationalism , the core belief being that india is an inherently hindu nation , even if establishment of a strictly hindu state is not a goal .

in this regard , it is the proselytizing religions — islam and christianity , in particular — that can be characterized as representing a threat to the "hindu nation. .

in simple terms , the key tenets of the hindutva ideology are three: ( 1 ) hindus are the rightful rulers of india , which is a hindu nation ; ( 2 ) the christian and , especially , muslim minorities are viewed with ambivalence because their religious allegiances are not indigenous to india ( in a way that those of sikhs , buddhists , and jains are ) ; and ( 3 ) caste divisions undermine hindu unity .

according to close observers , despite fronting an overtly hindu nationalist party , modi's 2014 national political campaign touched upon these hindutva themes only minimally , and instead stressed development and good governance as its guiding lights .

yet modi himself repeatedly has emphasized his view that "hinduism is a way of life and not a religion. .

according to uscirf , hindutva "forms the basis of an exclusionary national narrative focused exclusively on the rights of hindus. .

in commenting on the role of nationalism in indian politics , a group of australian academics offers that , "the hindu nationalists seek not so much to preserve existing social hierarchies in hindu cultures as they do to rewrite social order fascistically to the benefit of hindu populations. .

the sangh parivar ( "family of organizations" ) is an umbrella organization for hindu nationalist groups .

the bjp was born as the political wing of the rashtriya swayamsevak sangh ( rss or "national volunteer organization" ) , a hardline hindu nationalist and social service group , and leading component of the "sangh. .

prime minister modi is a lifelong rss member , and his 2014 elevation to the head of india's government evoked widespread fears that a victorious bjp would pursue hindu majoritarian policies .

many sangh parivar groups share a core motive to protect india's assumed hindu identity from the perceived threats of islam and christianity , by some accounts through "purging" those religions from indian society .

the rss was established in 1925 in the central indian city of nagpur to unite hindus and restore their national pride after centuries of muslim invasions and foreign rule .

this entailed resistance to both british colonialism and muslim separatism in the region .

it is a male - only group focused on daily regimens ( " shakhas " ) of physical exercise , patriotic songs , and hindu literature and prayer ( there is a correlate organization for women ) .

the rss today claims up to 5 million members ( the actual number may be closer to 2 million ) and 6,000 full - time workers ( " pracharaks " ) , but membership is not formalized .

its stated goal is to "carry the nation to the pinnacle of glory through organizing the entire society and ensuring protection of hindu dharma. .

its labor wing , the bharatiya majdoor sangh ( indian workers' union ) , is the country's largest trade union , claiming more than 8 million members .

narendra modi began joining shakhas as an 8-year - old and became a pracharak at age 20 .

during his prime ministership , rss participation appears to be seeing unprecedented growth: the number of shakhas held in 2016 was up nearly 11% over the previous year to about 57,000 .

scholars attribute the apparently growing appeal of the rss in recent decades to india's rapid economic and social development , with urbanization and new communication technologies facilitating expansion beyond the "hindi - speaking heartland" of north india .

the rss has had a controversial history in india , including connections to the 1948 assassination of mohandas ( mahatma ) gandhi .

the organization has since been directly implicated in domestic terrorism .

rss members have been implicated in several incidents of "saffron" ( hindu extremist ) terrorism in india , including the 2007 samjhauta express bombings that killed 68 people on a train that runs between delhi and lahore , pakistan .

in 2011 , former rss activist swami aseemanand confessed to involvement in this and other attacks , contending that some high - level rss leaders had prior knowledge and were complicit .

in 2016 , maharashtra's former senior - most police official reportedly called for banning the rss as "the country's largest terror organization. .

the sangh's foremost international entity is the mumbai - based , service - oriented , vishva hindu parishad ( vhp or "world hindu council" ) , established in 1964 by a group of hardline rss leaders ( its american affiliate was founded 10 years later ) .

it is the largest of some 40 sangh - affiliated groups , claiming more than 7 million members worldwide .

a notable affiliate is the bajrang dal ( "army of hanuman" ) , the vhp's militant youth wing created in uttar pradesh in 1984 .

the vhp is a leading organizer of " ghar w apsi " ( "coming home" ) or "reconversion" ceremonies , which ostensibly allow indian muslims and christians to return to their "original religion" ( see section below ) .

the vhp also is a leading force calling for a nationwide ban on religious conversions .

according to the most recent uscirf annual report , the rss "and other hindutva extremist groups" have expanded educational efforts that "teach their intolerant ideology" to nearly 4 million students .

in 2018 , in its online listing of "political pressure groups and leaders," the u.s. central intelligence agency for the first time publicly labeled the vhp and bajrang dal as "militant religious organizations" ( it also the named the rss as a "nationalist organization ) .

the designations , which carry no legal weight , angered some in india , with the vhp threatening to launch a "national agitation" in response .

the vhp's india general - secretary reportedly expressed disbelief that the cia , "which created terrorists like osama bin laden," would disregard the vhp's administration of 60,000 schools in india and a claimed 1,000 other social development activities .

as cited by human rights watch in the 2002 report "'we have no orders to save you': state participation and complicity in the communal violence in gujarat," figures from the bjp , vhp , and bajrang dal all were implicated in leading organized attacks on muslims in ahmedabad and other gujarati cities in 2002 ( see text box , below ) .

more than 16 years after the gujarat riots , international human rights groups continue to express concerns about obstacles faced by victims seeking justice , the continuing internal displacement of thousands of families who lack basic necessities , and large numbers of uninvestigated related criminal cases ( despite the indian supreme court's 2004 order to reopen nearly 1,600 such cases ) .

narendra modi's critics did not cease to accuse him of failing to provide public answers to numerous outstanding questions about his actions during the 2002 rioting .

the bjp ( along with its 1951-1977 antecedent , the bharatiya jana sangh ) has been a primary political purveyor of hindutva in indian society .

narendra modi and current bjp president amit shah are credited with orchestrating the party's national surge after 2013 .

throughout the country's history , india's muslims have consistently favored the congress party over the bjp .

while at least one - third of muslim votes nationwide were cast for the congress in the 21 st century , the bjp's share of the muslim vote dropped from 7% in 2004 to 3% in the 2009 cycle .

some surveys suggest that modi's party and its electoral allies received up to 8% of the muslim vote in 2014 , with the main opposition congress party and its allies garnering 38% .

of 1,400 bjp members serving in various indian state assemblies in 2017 , 4 were muslim .

muslims comprise about 19% of uttar pradesh's population , but 6% of its state assembly .

muslim representation in the lok sabha peaked at 10% in 1980 and lingered at about 6% until dropping to 4% in 2014 .

a 2016 assessment found that muslims were vastly underrepresented in the legislative assemblies of bjp - controlled states , an imbalance only exacerbated by subsequent state - level wins for the party .

the problem was starker when examining state ministers: at the time , only a single muslim was among the 151 in bjp - controlled states .

a study by india's daily hindustan times found that , although only a small proportion of the more than 50,000 national and state - level politicians assessed were facing criminal charges for inciting religious violence or hatred ( less than one - half of one percent ) , the bjp had the highest proportion ( 1.3% ) of any party , more than triple that of the congress party .

moreover , the politicians facing such charges — including such high - profile figures as a federal cabinet minister and uttar pradesh's chief minister — were nearly five times more likely to win their elections than those not facing them .

hindu nationalists have a relatively short , but long - standing list of political goals .

many of these are found in the bjp's 2014 election manifesto .

rss leaders were mostly disappointed by the bjp - led government that ruled india from 1999 to 2004 , in large part because then - prime minister vajpayee and his lieutenants were not seen to be taking up core rss issues .

while out of power in the latter half of the 2000s , the rss and bjp suffered a degree of mutual alienation ; at one point in 2010 the then - rss chief suggested that the bjp be dissolved and replaced by a new party .

yet the organization's leaders appeared to view the bjp victory in 2014 as crucial to the very existence of the rss .

its leaders thus threw the full weight of their organization behind modi's campaign while enjoying a correlate spike in participation in 2014 .

leading hindutva and widely - held rss aspirations include scaling back laws and government programs designed to benefit the religious minorities , muslims in particular ; establishing a uniform civil code ( to replace current personal law based on religious customs and thus standardizing all national laws regarding such topics as marriage , divorce , and inheritance ) ; repealing article 370 of the indian constitution , which grants limited autonomy to the state of jammu and kashmir ( a step that would , if implemented , allow citizens from other states to buy property in jammu and kashmir , see " the kashmir dispute ," below ) ; redrafting public school textbooks to remove what are alleged to be insults to hindu gods and excessive praise of the subcontinent's past muslim rulers ; constructing a ram temple on the ayodhya site of the babri mosque that was razed in 1992 ; and preventing cow slaughter through legislation ( cows are revered animals in hinduism ) .

of india's 29 states , 8 have legislation restricting religious conversions , with laws in force in 7 of those states .

arunachal pradesh , chhattisgarh , gujarat , himachal pradesh , madhya pradesh , odisha , and uttarakhand have so - called "freedom of religion act ( s ) ," commonly referred to as anti - conversion laws .

rajasthan state's parliament passed an anti - conversion bill , but it was never signed by the state's chief minister .

although such state - level legislation predates the rise of the bjp after 1980 — and some congress party governments supported restrictions in the past — six of the seven states listed are run by bjp chief ministers .

in most cases , existing anti - conversion laws require government officials to perform a legal review of conversions , and they provide for fines and imprisonment for anyone who uses force , fraud , or "inducement" to convert another citizen .

indian authorities explain these laws as protective measures meant to shield vulnerable individuals from being induced to change their faith .

according to uscirf , although these laws have resulted in few arrests and no convictions , they "have created a hostile atmosphere for religious minorities , particularly christians," and "christian communities have long reported harassment and violent attacks in the states that have adopted anti - conversion laws," largely as reaction to perceived proselytizing activities .

among the commission's 10 key recommendations to the u.s. government is , "advocate for the central indian government to press states with anti - conversion and anti - cow slaughter laws to repeal or amend them to conform with international human rights standards. .

proponents of "religious freedom laws" say , contrary to the characterizations of critics , the laws do not restrict a person's freedom to convert and are meant only to protect "vulnerable populations" from forced conversion .

in 2017 , the press began reporting more frequently on allegations of so - called "love jihad" campaigns by muslim extremists purportedly coercing hindu women to marry muslim men and convert to islam .

such reporting was blamed for inciting violent attacks on innocent muslims .

india's pending citizenship ( amendment ) bill of 2016 would change the definition of "illegal migrants" and allow certain hindu , sikh , buddhist , jain , parsi , and christian migrants from afghanistan , bangladesh , and pakistan to become citizens , but it excludes muslims .

if enacted , it thus could violate the indian constitution's equal protection provisions .

in 2018 , the bjp - led assam government has faced a destabilizing debate between proponents of the bill , who say it will help to end the alienation of bengali hindus who came to assam from bangladesh ( the former east pakistan ) after 1971 , and opponents , who decry the bill as a blatant effort at religious discrimination .

in july , the assam government published a national register of citizens draft that elicited criticism for seeking to oust the ( mostly muslim ) bengali population from assam .

the indian constitution and 21 of india's 29 state governments significantly restrict or ban the killing of cows , which are considered sacred animals in the hindu religion .

such restrictions — which can lead to prison sentences of 6 months to 14 years , if violated — were found constitutional by india's supreme court in 2005 .

according to the indian agriculture ministry's 2002 national commission on cattle report , "the cow has always had a very special place in the social fabric of the country," and it suggests that cow protection laws are not incompatible with a secular society .

cow protection through vigilante action largely is a new phenomenon in india .

the rss has called for a nationwide ban on cow slaughter .

in may 2017 , the federal government issued new rules banning sale of cows for slaughter , a decree taken by some observers as imposition of an indirect ban on beef .

several state governments expressed opposition ; those in west bengal and kerala said they would not follow the "arbitrary" order , which subsequently was struck down by the supreme court in a ruling that emphasized the bans' potential to adversely impact the livelihoods of those ( largely muslims ) engaged in the country's beef and leather industries .

according to uscirf , enforcement of such provisions economically marginalizes muslims and dalits , who adhere to various religious faiths , and even mere accusations of violations have led to violence .

according to human rights watch , "mob attacks by extremist hindu groups affiliated with the ruling bjp against minority communities , especially muslims," continued throughout 2017 and , "instead of taking prompt legal action against the attackers , police frequently filed complaints against the victims under laws banning cow slaughter," suggesting official sympathy toward the attackers .

the widely reported 2015 lynching of a muslim man in uttar pradesh after ( unfounded ) rumors that his family had killed and eaten a cow during the muslim eid holiday was half - heartedly condemned by prime minister modi , and after an eight - day delay .

the incident sparked a nationwide debate on religious intolerance and brought the modi government under considerable criticism for its alleged inattention , with one commentator arguing that modi cared "more about the killing of cows than he does about the killing of muslims. .

the 2017 seating of a hardline hindu cleric as chief minister of india's largest state sparked a spate of "cow protection" vigilantism in uttar pradesh , and the shuttering of dozens of slaughterhouses and some 50,000 meat - selling shops , reportedly contributing to a 15% drop in india's multi - billion dollar beef export industry , among the world's largest .

in mid - 2017 , even after prime minister modi ( finally ) condemned such violence , the rss announced plans to recruit 5,000 "religious soldiers" to "control cow smuggling and love jihad. .

under pressure again more recently , modi reiterated words of condemnation in august 2018: i want to make it clear that mob lynching is a crime , no matter the motive .

no person can , under any circumstances , take the law into his or her own hands and commit violence .

state governments need to adopt effective measures to prevent mob violence and lynching , protect innocent citizens irrespective of caste , creed , place , time and religion , and take stringent action as per law against the perpetrators of such violence .

he went on to assert that a "high - level" government committee would soon provide recommendations for government action on the issue .

by some accounts , hindu nationalists seek to impose a vegetarian culture and deprive muslims of access to meat , a staple of their diets , including through more outright bans .

hindu extremist leaders have called on christians to be deported from india wholesale if they do not stop eating beef and pork .

human rights watch and amnesty international are among the groups that call on indian authorities to end impunity for instigators of public lynchings and other hate crimes , "who seem to be operating in some cases with the tacit approval of state authorities. .

human rights watchdogs have found their activities constrained under the modi government , and they express concerns about modi's commitment to minority rights , his past willingness to tolerate suppression of free expression , and the vigor with which some of his supporters have quashed dissent .

according to reporting on a leaked 2014 internal indian government intelligence document , the united states is the top source of foreign donations to indian ngos , providing more than three times as much as britain , the next largest donor .

india's 2010 foreign ( contributions ) regulation act regulates the use of money received from foreign individuals , associations , or companies that may fund activities "detrimental to the national interest. .

in 2015 , india's home ministry revoked the licenses of nearly 9,000 charitable organizations operating in india , claiming the r evocations were a result of non compliance with the act 's reporting requirements .

however , numerous affected religious and nonreligious ngos contended that the action was taken in retaliation for highlighting of the government's allegedly poor human rights record .

in 2015 , two senior u.s. government officials — the state department's newly - appointed ambassador for monitoring and combatting human trafficking , and its special envoy for lgbt rights — met with difficulties in arranging visits to india ; both officials worked on issues where the washington and new delhi governments have divergent policy perspectives .

in 2016 , researchers from the u.s. commission on international religious freedom were denied visas for a long - planned visit to india , a development that left the u.s. government "disappointed. .

in 2017 , india's federal government blocked the bill and melinda gates foundation from accepting foreign donations , jeopardizing the operations of one of the country's largest nonprofit public health organization .

at least 11,000 ngos operating in india have been barred from accepting foreign donations since modi took office .

some hindutva extremists are concerned that india's nearly 200 million dalits are vulnerable to conversion by christian missionaries .

such concerns appear to have been behind the 2017 shutdown of india operations by the colorado - based , christian ngo compassion international , which had been the largest religious - affiliated charity working in india , reportedly providing services to some 150,000 indian children .

for most of 2016 , senior u.s. government officials , including then - secretary of state john kerry , had engaged in a behind - the - scenes effort to dissuade the new delhi government from taking such action .

the house foreign affairs committee held a december 2016 hearing entitled , "american compassion in india: government obstacles. .

witnesses decried new delhi's crackdown on ngos as representing thinly veiled religious discrimination .

the indian constitution provides for freedom of speech and expression , but does not explicitly mention freedom of the press .

according to the state department's annual country reports on human rights , in 2017 , the new delhi government "generally respected these rights , although there were instances in which the government allegedly pressured or harassed media outlets critical of the government. .

the report lists numerous incidents of abuse , and notes that , "online and mobile harassment , particularly of female journalists , was prevalent. .

the 201 8 world press freedom index , issued by paris - based reporters without borders , ranked india 138 th out of 180 countries in measures of press freedoms , identifying a "deadly threat" in modi's brand of hindu nationalism .

many independent analysts are more urgent in their warnings , with one scholar offering that , "the modi era is witnessing concerted assaults on dissent not seen since the 1975-1977 emergency" ( when then - prime minister indira gandhi suspended the constitution and ruled by decree ) .

according to one senior u.s. - based analyst , writing in 2015 , the modi government's "studied silence in the aftermath of other communal and religious violence ... suggests it may well be seeking to usher in a new social order — one that privileges india's dominant hindu community over everyone else. .

there are signs of growing disenchantment with the bjp among some of its own supporters , including public resignations , due to "the arrogance with which the bjp disregards genuine concerns , crushes dissent , and peddles propaganda. .

studies by an indian think tank have found that the incidence of "religio - cultural hate speech" on indian social media is rising sharply , with most examples inciting violence against indian muslims .

topics eliciting hate speech include opposition to interfaith marriage between hindus and muslims , positions on universal human rights , and the issues of cow protection and beef consumption .

an august 2018 report warned that india's social media platforms provide "both tacit and overt sanction for rising incidents of majoritarian violence. .

hundreds of notable indian figures from the fields of science , art , filmmaking , history , and elsewhere have publicized their alarm at what they see as efforts by the modi government and its supporters to "rewrite history by distorting facts about a glorious hindu past," and many have signed open letters calling on modi to protect india's tradition of secularism and diversity .

in early 2018 , it was revealed that in 2016 the bjp government , via its minister of culture , had appointed a commission of scholars to prove that modern hindus descended from the region's original inhabitants .

the search for a scientific basis for claims that india is an inherently hindu nation suggests that the hindutva project aims to fundamentally revise india's history , shifting away from the more multicultural , migration - based conception of its roots that has held sway for at least two centuries .

the bajrang dal and other youth wing groups are said to use intimidation and violence on college campuses "to silence secular or non - hindu classmates and shut down events that challenge their viewpoints. .

in 2014 , a bjp official asserted that the party will seek to "showcase indian social values through movies. .

three years later , hindu extremist groups rioted and burned down cinemas in response to allegations that a bollywood film had depicted a hindu queen daydreaming romantically about a muslim king .

a major 2016 hrw report , "stifling dissent: the criminalization of peaceful expression in india," contended that , "indian authorities routinely use vaguely worded , overly broad laws" — a colonial - era sedition law perhaps the most abused among them — "as political tools to silence and harass critics. .

more recently , hrw warned that , "journalists faced increasing pressure to self - censor due to threat of legal action , smear campaigns and threats on social media , and even threats of physical attacks. .

in september 2017 , unidentified gunmen shot dead publisher and editor gauri lankesh , a vocal critic of militant hindu nationalism , outside her home in bengaluru .

evidence suggests the existence of organized campaigns to silence critics of the hindutva movement , sometimes called "rationalists" for their opposition to the insertion of religion into politics .

indian journalists report coming under increasing pressure and bullying to remove stories critical of the hindu nationalist government , and self - censorship by media organizations is seen to be a worsening problem by many .

even before modi's national elevation , his supporters were known for bellicose social media activity ; in 2012 , one former senior indian intelligence officer wrote , "the style of the online blitzkrieg adopted by [modi's] die - hard followers in india and abroad are reminiscent of the methods of the nazi stormtroopers. .

the bjp has since been accused of cultivating "an army of cyber warriors to propagate its message of hindu chauvinism and hyper - nationalism , and to launch vicious attacks on its opponents. .

"modi's troll army" is , by some accounts , an orchestrated effort by the bjp to target critics on social media .

whether officially sanctioned or not , some of the most notable offenders — who openly celebrate the murder of critics for the mere act of exercising their right to free speech — are followed by modi on twitter .

one u.s. - based commentator opined that , earlier in his prime ministership , modi could afford to associate himself with "foul - mouthed trolls on twitter," but his 2017 choice to allow yogi adityanath as uttar pradesh chief minister "makes it much harder to argue that power will moderate the [bjp's] more feral instincts. .

although india suffers from several militant regional separatist movements , the kashmir issue has proven to be the most lethal and intractable .

armed conflict has plagued the region continuously since 1989 .

both india and pakistan formally claim the entire territory of the former princely state , with india controlling roughly two - thirds of that territory , including the fertile , muslim - majority valley region .

jammu and kashmir is india's only state with a muslim majority .

although conflict in the kashmir valley was more intense in the 1990s and 2000s , it continues to kill , maim , and disrupt daily life for citizens , and today "is probably driven less by geopolitics than by internal indian politics , which have increasingly taken an anti - muslim direction. .

after 1989 , as many as 250,000 kashmiri hindus , known as "pandits," fled the valley and have been unable to return .

most remain internally displaced inside their own country , with many living in camps in jammu or around delhi .

article 370 of india's 1950 constitution was crafted to provide extra governance space for jammu and kashmir's leaders , who were operating in special circumstances .

the main purpose of the law — which appears in the document's "temporary and transitional provisions" section — was to prevent the central government from imposing any new laws on jammu and kashmir without the concurrence of the state legislature .

vital exceptions were made for matters of defense and foreign affairs .

however , the "autonomy" originally granted to the state has been significantly eroded by executive action over intervening years .

few substantive differences from other states remain ; those that do mainly are laws for permanent residents and their rights , along with a ban on altering the state's borders without its legislature's approval .

bjp leaders , including modi , typically contend that the jammu and kashmir's special status has only served to encourage ( muslim ) kashmiri separatist elements , and hindu nationalists have long sought its removal from the constitution .

the bjp's 2014 manifesto stated , "the return of kashmiri pandits to the land of their ancestors with full dignity , security , and assured livelihood will figure high on the bjp's agenda. .

in office , the bjp has taken little substantive action on that agenda item , causing some among the pandit community to accuse the party of making hollow claims .

still , the issue is another with the power to animate hindu nationalists .

