the shale revolution , as it is commonly referred to , has seen u.s. production of hydrocarbons rise significantly over the last 10 years .

u.s. natural gas production has risen 33% since 2008 , and crude oil production has jumped 87% .

both commodities are also being exported in growing quantities .

in between natural gas and crude oil is a group of hydrocarbons referred to as natural gas liquids ( ngls ) .

ngls , which make up about 4% of the u.s. energy mix , include ethane , propane , butane , isobutane , and pentanes ( which includes natural gasoline ) .

the united states is the largest producer of ngls in the world .

ngls are differentiated from one another by the number of carbon atoms in their molecular chain .

natural gas liquids are extracted as a mixture of hydrocarbons and other gases and are produced and separated from one of two sources: natural gas processing or crude oil refining .

 ( see appendix for additional information. ) .

mainly due to the shale revolution , which uses horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing , ngl production in the united states has grown at a rapid rate since 2008 .

this report focuses on ngls and not the various petrochemical products , like plastics or fertilizer , they can create .

however , the report aims to give a general overview of the use , production , price trends , exports / imports , and infrastructure needs for processing and transporting ngls , as well as policy issues .

the united states is the world's largest producer of ngls .

in 2008 , u.s. production of ngls was 653 million barrels , and in 2017 it was 1,381 million barrels , more than doubling in 10 years .

as u.s. production of ngls rises , a subsequent build - out of the necessary infrastructure to process and transport the products downstream is similarly increasing — albeit somewhat delayed .

the distance , cost , and ease of taking ngl products to market can have a significant effect on their market prices and demand .

specific areas of the country , for example texas , benefit from a long history of hydrocarbon extraction and processing .

 ( see figure 1 . ) .

these regions , mostly located on the gulf coast , can take advantage of already existing pipelines , refineries , processing plants , and petrochemical processing sites .

other areas of the country , like the appalachian region , kansas , and north dakota , have had difficulty adding infrastructure to match their growing output of ngls .

in areas of the country , like pennsylvania , where the construction of pipelines is lagging behind the increasing production of ngls , the use of more expensive methods of transportation ( eg , rail cars ) has become necessary , driving up costs .

a department of energy ( doe ) report on ngls in the appalachian region also pointed out that states like pennsylvania are strongly reliant on storage outside of their region .

infrastructure , production , safety , the environment , and economics are all critical to the ngl market and are of interest to congress .

about 30 ngl - related bills have been introduced in the 115 th congress .

for example , h.r .

2568 and s. 1075 propose to have a feasibility study conducted to determine suitable locations in the areas of the marcellus and utica shale formations for ethane storage facilities and to then determine potential economic costs and benefits of such projects .

s. 1340 , the appalachian energy and manufacturing infrastructure revitalization act , is designed to help speed up the permitting process for projects deemed as a "critical energy infrastructure project. .

h.r .

5988 relates to the safety of delivering or retrieving propane containers .

the energy information administration's ( eia's ) data on ngls are limited , especially compared to oil and natural gas .

some stakeholders argue that this contributes to a lack of transparency in the market and hinders analysis , which may affect policymaking related to ngls .

as ngls play a bigger role in the u.s. energy mix , this may become a larger concern .

s. 1972 would require eia to collect additional data on propane , specifically exports .

other bills that have been introduced in the 115 th congress address infrastructure , taxes , safety , and other energy topics , and are not specifically targeting ngls .

as u.s. production of natural gas and oil continues to grow , so will u.s. consumption of ngls .

the rise in production of each ngl — ethane , propane , butane , isobutane , and pentanes — since 2008 has been large .

whether the increase is consumed in the united states or exported will depend on market conditions , especially prices .

nevertheless , the production and consumption of more ngls requires a better understanding of the differences and specificity of each hydrocarbon .

improved data collection and market understanding will help policymakers understand the ramifications of this growing fuel source .

