pension plans are classified by whether they are sponsored by one employer ( single - employer plans ) or by more than one employer ( multiemployer and multiple employer plans ) .

multiemployer pension plans are sponsored by employers in the same industry and maintained as part of a collective bargaining agreement .

multiple employer plans are sponsored by more than one employer but are not maintained as part of collective bargaining agreements .

this report focuses on multiemployer plans .

pension plans may also be classified according to whether they are defined benefit ( db ) or defined contribution ( dc ) plans .

with db plans , participants receive regular monthly benefit payments in retirement ( which some refer to as a "traditional" pension ) .

with dc plans , of which the 401 ( k ) plan is the most common , participants have individual accounts that are the basis of income in retirement .

db plans are the subject of this report .

some members of congress have said that doing nothing is not an option .

in the absence of enacted legislation , beginning in 2025 when pbgc is projected to run out of resources , the benefits that are owed to participants in insolvent plans will be far greater than the pbgc's resources .

at the end of fy2017 , pbgc's multiemployer program had $2.3 billion in assets and received $291 million in premium income in that fiscal year .

once its assets are exhausted , pbgc would be able to provide financial assistance to plans equal only to the amount of its premium revenue .

pbgc indicated that most participants would receive less than $2,000 per year .

further , some policy analysts have raised concerns about possible contagion effects that may exacerbate an already large problem: the insolvency of a multiemployer plan could cause large withdrawal liability assessments for the employers in that plan .

if these increased withdrawal liability assessments cause financial distress for some of these employers , it could affect their contributions to other multiemployer plans in which they participate .

in addition , withdrawal liability amounts might need to be disclosed in employers' financial statements , which some have suggested could limit these employers' access to credit .

some policymakers have noted that a solution to the issues created by the projected insolvencies of multiemployer plans likely will present challenges to stakeholders .

for example , senator orrin hatch indicated that , "there are no magic bullets , and any solutions we come up with are bound to make at least some people unhappy. .

others , for example representative marcy kaptur , have called for a "shared sacrifice" approach .

the considerable size and nature of the problem likely requires some concession from all stakeholders: employers , plans , participants , and u.s. taxpayers .

finding the balance needed to gain the buy - in from each group of stakeholders is likely to be a complex process , but critical to the success of the joint select committee .

some stakeholders argue against providing loans or financial assistance to multiemployer plans .

their concerns include the following: a loan program for multiemployer plans could be viewed as a bailout , particularly if there are provisions that provide for forgiveness of part or all of a loan ; loans and financial assistance to multiemployer plans would be too costly for u.s. taxpayers ; and there is no precedent for the u.s. government providing financial assistance to private - sector pension plans , which could lead to proposals for financial assistance to underfunded state and local government pension plans .

policy options to assist financially - troubled plans include ( 1 ) loans subsidized by the federal government and direct funding and ( 2 ) partitions , which would remove specified liabilities from financially - troubled plans .

a multiemployer plan that receives financial assistance from pbgc must reduce participants' benefits according to a formula based on the number of years of service in the plan .

the formula is for each of service in the plan 100% of the first $11 of the participant's monthly benefit plus 75% of next $33 of the monthly benefit rate .

for example , a participant with 30 years of plan participation could receive up to ( 30* ( 100% * $11 + 75% * $33 ) ) per month or $12,870 per year .

participants with more ( or fewer ) years of service in the plan would receive a larger ( or smaller ) maximum benefit .

for comparison , the multiemployer maximum benefit is lower than that for the single - employer program: the single - employer maximum benefit is about $65,000 per year for individuals who receive their benefits as single - life annuities beginning at the age of 65 .

the multiemployer guarantee is not indexed to inflation and was last increased in the consolidated appropriations act , 2001 ( p.l .

106-554 ) .

as the dollar amount of participants' benefits have increased , an increasing number of participants are likely to see their benefits reduced as a result of the maximum guarantee .

using 2013 data , pbgc estimated that 79% of participants in multiemployer plans that were receiving financial assistance receive their full benefit as earned in the plan .

among participants in plans that were terminated and likely to need financial assistance in the future , 49% of participants have a benefit below the pbgc maximum guarantee , and 51% have a benefit larger than the pbgc maximum guarantee .

among ongoing plans ( neither receiving pbgc financial assistance nor terminated and expected to receive financial assistance ) , the average benefit is almost twice as large as the average benefit in terminated plans .

this suggests that a larger percentage of participants in plans that receive pbgc financial assistance in the future are likely to see benefit reductions as a result of the pbgc maximum guarantee level .

although there are currently no proposals to increase pbgc maximum benefit , some policymakers have indicated that it is too low .

for example , senator sherrod brown called the multiemployer guarantee "miniscule" and a government accountability office ( gao ) report cited experts who described the guarantee level as low and that the "significant increase in premiums since 2005 did not coincide with a comparable rise in the benefit guaranty. .

the effect on household incomes imposed by solvency - driven benefit reductions could be partly offset by increases in the pbgc maximum benefit guarantee .

because of pbgc's role as the insurer of multiemployer db benefits , it has been a focus of discussions regarding the solvency of multiemployer plans .

multiemployer plans currently pay a flat - rate premium to pbgc of $28 per participant per year .

the pbgc multiemployer premium was $2.60 / participant from 1988 to 2005 , $8.00 / participant in 2006 and 2007 , $9.00 / participant from 2008 to 2012 , $12.00 / participant in 2013 and 2014 , $26.00 / participant in 2015 , $27.00 / participant in 2016 , and $28.00 / participant in 2017 and 2018 .

in fy2017 , pbgc received $291 million in premium revenue .

proposals for changes to pbgc premiums include the following new premiums: ( 1 ) a variable - rate premium based on the amount of underfunding in a plan , ( 2 ) an exit premium when an employer leaves a multiemployer plan , and ( 3 ) a risk - based premium based on the riskiness of a pension plans' investment portfolio .

although increased pbgc's premium revenue could delay its projected insolvency , employers' concerns mean that it is likely not feasible for premiums to rise to a level sufficient to ensure the multiemployer program's long - term solvency .

a major contributor to the current multiemployer problem was the december 2007 to june 2009 economic recession .

a survey of 392 multiemployer plans indicated that in 2007 they had 56.7% of their assets invested in equities .

the accompanying stock market downturn resulted in large losses to plan investments .

in addition , the number of employers participating in multiemployer plans likely decreased as a result of business bankruptcies , leaving larger amounts of orphan liabilities .

in the absence of changes to plan design ( such as variable benefit or composite plans , discussed below ) two factors would need to be present to ensure that db pension plans do not have large amounts of unfunded liabilities and are not at risk of becoming insolvent .

plans would need to be ( 1 ) 100% funded and ( 2 ) invested in relatively safe assets .

a plan that is 100% funded would have sufficient funds from which to pay 100% of the promised benefits .

a plan that is invested in relatively safe assets ( eg , investing in investment grade or better corporate debt and avoiding equities ) would probably never face a situation where its investment portfolio incurred anything other than minor losses .

the effects of stricter funding requirements would likely include some combination of ( 1 ) increased required employer contributions to plans to provide benefits similar to today's promised benefits or ( 2 ) decreased promised benefits to participants .

some stakeholders might find these tradeoffs worthwhile , as some participants currently face a less than 100% chance of receiving their full benefit as earned in a plan .

other stakeholders might find these requirements onerous , too costly to impose on employers and plans , and too large a loss for plan participants .

a pension plan's benefits are a plan's liabilities spread out over many years in the future .

these future benefits are calculated and reported as current dollar values ( also called present value ) .

the discount rate is a key assumption in determining the present value .

the internal revenue code ( irc ) does not require multiemployer pension plans to use a specific discount rate to value their future benefit obligation .

the assumptions a plan uses must be reasonable and offer the best estimate of the plan's expected experience and , in practice , multiemployer plans generally discount plan liabilities using the expected rate of return on the plan's assets .

pension policy experts have several viewpoints on the appropriate discount rate that pension plans should use to value plan liabilities .

the higher the discount rate a plan uses the lower the present value of those benefit obligations .

using a lower discount rate would likely result in either increases in required employer contributions to plans or lower benefits that could be promised in the future .

these discussions , generally speaking , have been between actuaries and economists .

broadly speaking , some actuaries recommend that pension plans discount future benefits using the expected rate of return on plan investments ( which is the current practice for multiemployer db pension plans ) .

some financial economists , by contrast , recommend that plans discount the liabilities using a discount rate that reflects the likelihood that the benefit obligation will be paid ; in general , this would be a lower rate than currently used .

some members of congress have also suggested that the rate that multiemployer plans use to discount their benefits may be too high .

as an alternative to stricter funding requirements , plans would not become underfunded if participants' benefits fluctuated with the plan's investment performance .

for example , one plan design has a conservative assumed investment return ( called a hurdle rate ) .

benefits are adjusted upwards if the investment returns are above the hurdle rate and benefits are reduced if the plan's investment returns are below the hurdle rate .

employer contributions could be unchanged in either scenario .

although this plan structure is available under current law ( and is referred to as a variable annuity benefit plan ) they are not common among db plans .

in addition , legislation has been introduced to allow for composite pension plans , which , like variable annuity plans , combine features of defined benefit and defined contribution pension plans .

h.r .

4997 , the giving retirement options to workers act of 2018 ( or grow act ) , would allow multiemployer db plan sponsors to add a composite plan to their pension plan the composite plan would be a type of plan that provides plan sponsors with options , such as reductions in benefits or negotiated employer contributions , which would keep the plan funded at 120% if the plan's funding ratio fell below that level .

the appeal of these alternative plan structures is that they provide plan sponsors with certainty regarding the amount of their annual contributions .

in addition , the composite plan proposal would not be covered by pbgc ( and the plan would not pay pbgc premiums ) and employers would not be subject to any withdrawal liability .

participants in variable annuity benefit and composite plans would be protected against longevity risk: they would have the certainty that they would receive benefit payments for life , although the dollar amount of the benefit payments would not be certain .

because benefits in composite plans are not guaranteed , some might suggest that a composite plan's investment strategy ( eg , the amounts and types of plan investments ) should be more conservative than in a traditional db pension plan .

one concern is that participants could be subject to potentially large benefit reductions , particularly if the stock market were to experience a steep decline .

this concern could be alleviated by requiring plans to invest some or all of their portfolios in conservative investments to try to ensure a specified level of benefit .

