t he u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) is an agency within the department of defense with both military and civil works responsibilities .

congress directs usace's civil works activities through authorizations legislation , annual and supplemental appropriations , and oversight activities .

this report summarizes usace's annual discretionary appropriations for civil works activities and its supplemental appropriations , principally following major flood and hurricane disasters .

the appropriations described are for those accounts and activities that typically are funded through title i of annual energy and water development appropriations acts .

as part of usace's civil works activities , congress has authorized and appropriated funds for the agency to perform the following: water resource projects for maintaining navigable channels , reducing flood and storm damage , and restoring aquatic ecosystems , among other purposes ; regulation of activities affecting certain waters and wetlands activities ; and remediation of sites involved in the development of u.s. nuclear weapons from the 1940s through the 1960s , administered under the formerly utilized sites remedial action program ( fusrap ) .

for fy2019 , congress has provided the agency with almost $7.00 billion for civil works activities ; these funds are primarily used for the agency's water resource activities , and $200 million is available for usace regulatory activities and $150 million is available for fusrap .

in february 2018 , congress also provided more than $17.40 billion in emergency supplemental appropriations in the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( bba 2018 ; p.l .

115-123 ) to certain usace accounts related to water resource projects .

most of these supplemental funds are directed to repairing damage to existing usace facilities , paying for flood fighting and repair of certain levees and dams maintained by nonfederal entities and constructing new riverine and coastal flood control improvements .

although this report references usace's fusrap and regulatory accounts , its discussion focuses on funding for the agency's water resources projects .

congress generally authorizes usace water resource studies and construction projects prior to funding them .

for information on the authorization process , see crs report r45185 , army corps of engineers: water resource authorization and project delivery processes , by [author name scrubbed] .

the report first addresses usace annual appropriations ; second , it discusses usace supplemental appropriations .

these discussions address various policy issues for congressional and other decisionmakers associated with usace funding .

the appendix to this report focuses on how the trump administration is using the monies provided to usace through bba 2018 .

as shown in figure 1 , congress often appropriates more for usace civil works than is requested by the president .

in the text of enacted appropriations laws , congress generally provides money to usace at the account level .

accompanying appropriations reports ( i.e. , conference reports , committee reports , or explanatory statements ) , which sometimes are incorporated into law by reference , often identify specific usace projects to receive appropriated funds .

with the heightened attention to and restrictions on congressionally directed spending since fy2010 , the projects identified in these reports have been limited largely to the projects included in the president's budget request ; that is , congress has not been adding new project - specific funding amounts .

instead , congressional action on usace appropriations generally has been the provision of additional funding for various types of usace activities ( see below section , " principal documents and process , including additional funding " ) and guidance on the use of the additional funding .

in annual appropriations bills , congress generally provides the majority of the agency's funding to two accounts — the construction account and the operations and maintenance ( o&m ) account .

the o&m account has made up a growing portion of the agency's use of annual appropriations , as shown in figure 2 .

the o&m account has increased from 39% of the usace annual appropriations in fy2005 and 37% in fy2006 and fy2007 to 53% in fy2017 , fy2018 , and fy2019 .

this shift is consistent with efforts by recent administrations and congresses to limit funding for new construction activities ( referred to as new starts or new construction starts ) and to focus instead on completing existing projects and on actions to address aging infrastruct ure .

enacted appropriations bills since fy2014 have allowed the agency to initiate a specified number of usace new start studies and construction projects .

for example , as in fy2018 , congress will allow fy2019-enacted funding to be used to initiate a maximum of five new construction projects .

congress uses the flood control and coastal emergencies ( fcce ) account for usace flood fighting and related emergency response preparedness and for repair of damage to certain nonfederal flood control works .

for more on this account , see the below box titled "flood fighting and the flood control and coastal emergencies ( fcce ) account. .

the mississippi river and tributaries account ( mr&t ) account consists of flood control and navigation projects for the lower mississippi river valley .

usace also undertakes flood fighting activities and other natural disaster response and recovery activities .

in recent years , congress has provided supplemental appropriations through various pieces of legislation , primarily for flood disaster response and disaster recovery .

from fy1990 through fy2018 , congress in total provided usace accounts with almost $50.63 billion in supplemental appropriations , more than $49.20 billion of which was provided from fy2005 through fy2018 .

of the more than $49.20 billion provided since fy2005 , almost $44.63 billion ( 91% ) was for response to and recovery from flooding and other natural disasters , and $4.58 billion ( 9% ) was for economic stimulus under the american recovery and reinvestment act ( p.l .

111-5 ) .

the majority of the $44.63 billion for disaster response and recovery was associated with storms in three years — storms including hurricane katrina in 2005 ( approximately $16 billion ) ; hurricane sandy in 2012 ( $5.3 billion ) ; and hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria in 2017 ( at least $10.5 billion of the almost $17.4 billion of funds provided in bba 2018 ) .

all usace civil works supplemental funding from fy2000 through fy2018 is shown in table 1 and figure 4 .

for context , annual appropriations for usace flood - related activities nationally that were provided in energy and water development appropriations acts from fy2005 though fy2018 totaled around $23.10 billion .

table 1 shows account - level funding in enacted usace supplemental appropriations bills .

figure 4 , using data in table 1 and adjusting the appropriations to 2018 dollars , shows how the amounts provided to usace through supplemental appropriations have increased over the last three decades .

during its deliberations on usace supplemental appropriations , congress often considers various issues and special conditions associated with the provision of these funds .

these considerations include what type of flood damage reduction efforts to support ( eg , repair of existing infrastructure , construction of new infrastructure ) , congress's role in authorizing the construction of usace projects that receive supplemental funds , and whether to maintain or alter requirements for nonfederal cost sharing .

for examples of the special considerations for usace funds provided by bba 2018 , see the appendix to this report .

supplemental usace funding debates also raise broader questions for policymakers , such as the effectiveness and efficiency of processes such as those for post - disaster supplemental appropriations and usace annual budget development , especially in regard to identifying and supporting priority investments in reducing the nation's flood risk .

the following sections discuss three current policy topics related to usace supplemental appropriations in more detail: transparency on the use of usace supplemental appropriations ; funding nonfederal interests to study and construct federal flood control projects ; and the level of supplemental appropriations for construction activities .

this report describes four shifts in the funding of usace activities: shift to operations and maintenance .

an increasing share of annual discretionary appropriations is used on usace o&m activities .

the o&m account has increased from 39% of the usace annual appropriations in fy2005 to 53% in fy2019 .

shift to administration work plans .

congress has provided an increasing portion of usace annual appropriations to various additional funding categories of work .

in fy2012 and fy2019 , congress provided $0.5 billion and $2.2 billion , respectively , in additional funding to usace through the annual appropriations process .

the administration follows congressional guidance to develop post - enactment agency work plans that specify which projects receive the additional funding .

unlike the justification documents that accompany the president's budget request , the project - level details in the work plan are quite limited .

flood - related investments occurring more through supplemental ap p ropriations than annual appropriations .

since fy2005 , congress has provided usace with more than $44.6 billion in supplemental appropriations in response to flood disasters , of which almost $23.8 billion was for construction of control projects .

the administration identifies which eligible usace projects or nonfederal - led usace projects are to receive these funds .

nonfederal entities leading studies and construction may expand to activities funded by supplemental appropriations .

since 2014 , congress has expanded authorizing authorities that allow nonfederal entities to lead usace studies and construction projects ; the administration has released guidance indicating its interest in using the authority in section 1043 of wrrda 2014 to provide federal funds up front for nonfederal - led projects for bba 2018 funds .

at the same time , bba 2018 eliminated the nonfederal cost share for studies and may fund ongoing construction projects .

these trends may raise broader questions for policymakers .

examples of these policy questions include the following: how has congress's role shifted vis - à - vis usace and the agency's appropriations , and does that shift affect the type of information and engagement that congress may pursue in the future regarding usace's use of appropriations ? .

how do these trends affect the effective , efficient , and accountable use of federal funding provided to usace ? .

what do these trends portend for usace's long - term planning , budgeting , and duties ? .

do the ad hoc enactment of usace supplemental appropriations and the waivers and geographic limitations often associated with supplemental appropriations result in an equitable use of federal funding ? .

how effective and efficient are annual and supplemental appropriations processes in identifying and supporting priority investments in reducing the nation's flood risk ? .

in the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( bba 2018 ; p.l .

115-123 ) , congress has provided $17.398 billion in supplemental appropriations to the following u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) accounts: $135 million for investigations for flood risk reduction studies ; $15,055 million for construction ( of which $15,000 million is specifically for construction of flood risk reduction projects and $55 million is for short - term repairs to damaged construction projects ) ; $770 million for mississippi river and tributaries ; $608 million for operations and maintenance ; $810 million for flood control and coastal emergencies ; and $20 million for expenses .

congress has designated all funds provided to usace accounts in the act "as being for an emergency requirement pursuant to section 251 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( a ) ( i ) of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985. .

this means that these funds are not subject to the statutory limits on discretionary spending .

the study and construction funding represents 87% of the $17.398 billion in supplemental appropriations provided by bba 2018 to usace .

of the monies in the construction account , congress has provided that $15.000 billion was to be used for the following: $10.425 billion is designated for expedited construction of flood and storm damage reduction projects in states and territories affected by hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria .

$4.575 billion is to be used for usace flood and storm damage reduction construction activities in any state or territory with more than one flood - related major disaster declaration in calendar year ( cy ) 2014 , cy2015 , cy2016 , or cy2017 .

of this amount , $50 million is set aside for smaller projects that reduce the risk of flooding and storm damage being performed under the agency's programmatic authorities ( known as continuing authorities programs ) .

bba 2018 establishes requirements for states and insular areas to be eligible for bba 2018 study and construction funds .

the geographic constraints on bba 2018 funds mean that some states and territories are eligible for all the funding , some states and territories are eligible for some of the study and construction monies , and some states and territories do not meet the requirements for the bba 2018 study and construction funds .

usace projects in five states ( florida , georgia , louisiana , south carolina , and texas ) and two territories ( u.s. virgin islands and puerto rico ) meet the eligibility requirements for funding from both the $10.425 billion and the $4.575 billion , as shown in figure a - 1 .

a total of 33 states and 3 territories meet the criterion of one flood - related major disaster declaration in cy2014 , cy2015 , cy2016 , or cy2017 , as shown in figure a - 1 ; that is , $4.575 billion in bba 2018 funds are available for use on usace construction projects in these 33 states and 3 territories .

seventeen states ( eg , north carolina , which was affected by hurricane matthew in 2016 and hurricane florence in 2018 ) do not qualify for usace supplemental construction appropriations provided by the bba 2018 .

when using bba 2018 construction funds ( but not when using annual appropriations ) , projects in puerto rico and the u.s. virgin islands and ongoing construction projects are 100% federally funded ; all other construction activities using these funds follow normal cost - sharing arrangements ( eg , typically 65% federal and 35% nonfederal for construction of flood control projects , but these percentages vary by project due to project - specific conditions ) .

on july 5 , 2018 , usace assigned most of the bba 2018 funds provided for construction and studies to specific usace projects ; that is , of the $15.000 billion , $1.131 billion in construction funds remains unassigned .

on august 9 , 2018 , the office of the assistant secretary of the army ( civil works ) issued policy guidance on implementation of supplemental appropriations in the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ; it provides a definition for key terms , including ongoing construction project , and whether the projects on the july 5 , 2018 , list qualify as ongoing construction .

table a - 1 combines the project - level information for construction projects in the july 5 , 2018 , list and the august 9 , 2018 , guidance .

the august 9 , 2018 , guidance identifies ongoing construction projects as: ( 1 ) authorized projects that had received funding from the usace construction account in fy2015 , fy2016 , or fy2017 , and ( 2 ) authorized projects that a nonfederal sponsor was constructing during those three fiscal years pursuant to a potential reimbursement agreement with usace .

of the $135 million for the investigation account , bba 2018 requires that $75 million be available for states and territories affected by hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria ; the statute also states that the remainder ( i.e. , $60 million ) is to be available for "high - priority studies of projects" in any state or territory with more than one flood - related major disaster declaration in cy2014 , cy2015 , cy2016 , or cy2017 .

when using these funds ( but not when using annual appropriations ) , study costs are 100% federal .

construction authorization and role of congress bba 2018 amends the role of congress for some construction projects that receive supplemental usace construction funds provided in the legislation .

the standard process for usace projects is that after the completion of a multistep project development process ( which includes , among other measures , a completed feasibility study and environmental documentation and a report by the agency's chief of engineers known as a chief's report ) , congress authorizes the project's construction .

the authorization is typically in an omnibus water project authorization bill .

division b , title iv of bba 2018 includes the following language , which allows for some projects to proceed to construction without project - specific congressional authorization: $15,000,000,000 is available to construct flood and storm damage reduction , including shore protection , projects which are currently authorized or which are authorized after the date of enactment of this subdivision , and flood and storm damage reduction , including shore protection , projects which have signed chief's reports as of the date of enactment of this subdivision or which are studied using funds provided under the heading "investigations" if the secretary determines such projects to be technically feasible , economically justified , and environmentally acceptable .

a deviation from the standard authorization process also is provided for use of usace funds from the hurricane sandy supplemental appropriation while maintaining a role for the house and senate committees on appropriations .

division b , title x , chapter 4 of p.l .

113-2 states that upon approval of the committees on appropriations of the house of representatives and the senate these funds may be used to construct any project under study by the corps for reducing flooding and storm damage risks in areas along the atlantic coast within the north atlantic division of the corps that were affected by hurricane sandy that the secretary determines is technically feasible , economically justified , and environmentally acceptable .

hurricane sandy projects in the bipartisan budget act of 2018 in section 20402 , bba 2018 transfers unobligated balances from the monies provided by p.l .

113-2 to the usace flood control and coastal emergencies account ( $518.9 million ) and the usace operations and maintenance account ( $210.0 million ) to the construction account for hurricane sandy - related construction projects .

the august 9 , 2018 , assistant secretary of the army for civil works implementation guidance for bba 2018 does not provide explicit guidance on how these transferred funds are to be implemented .

