by exercising its power to determine whether federal and state government actions are constitutional , the supreme court has developed a large body of judicial decisions , or "precedents," interpreting the constitution .

rules and principles established in prior cases inform the court's future decisions .

the role that precedent plays in the court's decisions on highly controversial issues has prompted debate over whether the court should follow or overrule rules it established in prior decisions .

such questions underscore the challenges the court faces in maintaining stability in the law by adhering to precedent under the doctrine of stare decisis so that parties may rely upon its decisions , while at the same time correcting prior decisions that rest on faulty reasoning , unworkable standards , abandoned legal doctrines , or outdated factual assumptions .

one notable example of a precedent that has prompted significant debate is the supreme court's 1992 decision in planned parenthood v. casey .

in casey , a plurality of justices reaffirmed the core aspects of the court's earlier holding in roe v. wade that a woman has a protected constitutional liberty interest in terminating her pregnancy prior to fetal viability , stating that the essential holding of roe "should be retained. .

but the plurality's opinion in casey suggests that several justices who voted to reaffirm roe had significant doubts about the quality of its reasoning .

despite these doubts , the casey plurality decided that other considerations required reaffirming roe 's central holding , including societal reliance on a fundamental constitutional right ; concern for the court's legitimacy as an institution ; and the principle that the court should adhere to rules in its prior decisions ( i.e. , stare decisis ) , particularly when a case implicates a highly divisive issue like abortion .

although the supreme court's decision to retain a precedent may prompt significant debate , the court's overruling of precedent can also be controversial , as the court's 2010 decision in the campaign finance regulation case citizens united v. fec illustrated .

that case established that the first amendment prohibits governments from restricting independent expenditures on political speech related to an election campaign by corporations , labor unions , and other organizations .

in reaching this result , the court overturned its decision in austin v. michigan state chamber of commerce , which had held that the government could prohibit political speech funded from a corporation's general treasury fund based on the fact that the speaker was a corporation .

the court's overruling of austin in citizens united sparked debate about whether the court should have adhered more strictly to the principle of stare decisis .

debate over the role that stare decisis plays in the supreme court's decision making continued during the 2017-2018 term as the justices overruled four longstanding precedents .

for example , in janus v. american federation of state , county , and municipal employees , the court overturned its 1977 holding in abood v. detroit board of education and determined that laws that require public employees to pay "fair share" fees to the union designated to represent their bargaining unit , even if the employees are not members of the union , violated the first amendment by compelling speech on matters of public concern .

and in south dakota v. wayfair , the court overturned holdings in two earlier cases , concluding that the commerce clause does not restrict states from requiring retailers that lack a physical presence in the state to collect and remit taxes on sales made to state residents .

in light of these developments , this report examines how the supreme court determines whether to overrule its prior decisions on questions of constitutional law .

it provides an overview of the doctrine of stare decisis , under which a court generally follows rules adopted in prior decisions in future cases with arguably similar facts .

it discusses how justices who have adopted textualism and originalism as philosophies for interpreting the constitution handle conflicts between precedent and their judicial philosophies .

finally , the report examines various factors that the court weighs when determining whether to overrule or limit its precedents interpreting the constitution , providing examples from the court's recent jurisprudence .

understanding stare decisis may assist the senate in evaluating the judicial philosophy of nominees to the federal courts .

for example , in july 2018 , president donald j. trump announced the nomination of judge brett m. kavanaugh of the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit to fill retiring justice anthony m. kennedy's seat on the supreme court of the united states .

members of congress , the public , and legal scholars expressed interest in judge kavanaugh's views on stare decisis , as they could potentially provide insight into his future decisions in important areas of constitutional law , including abortion , affirmative action , labor law , and separation of powers , among others .

the appendix to this report lists supreme court decisions on constitutional law questions that the court has overruled specifically during its more than 225-year history .

stare decisis , which is latin for "to stand by things decided," is a judicial doctrine under which a court follows the principles , rules , or standards of its prior decisions or decisions of higher tribunals when deciding a case with arguably similar facts .

the doctrine of stare decisis has "horizontal" and "vertical" aspects .

a court adhering to the principle of horizontal stare decisis will follow its prior decisions absent exceptional circumstances ( eg , the supreme court following its decisions unless they have become too difficult for lower courts to apply ) .

by contrast , vertical stare decisis binds lower courts to follow strictly the decisions of higher courts within the same jurisdiction ( eg , a federal court of appeals must follow the decisions of the u.s. supreme court , the federal court of last resort ) .

this report addresses how the u.s. supreme court determines whether to overrule its prior decisions .

thus , this report discusses only horizontal stare decisis .

the supreme court applies the doctrine of stare decisis by following the rules of its prior decisions unless there is a "special justification" — or , at least , "strong grounds" — to overrule precedent .

in adopting this approach , the court has rejected a more formalistic view of stare decisis that would require it to adhere to its prior decisions regardless of the merits of those decisions or the practical implications of retaining or discarding precedent .

instead , while the court has stated that its precedents are entitled to respect and deference , the court considers the principle of stare decisis to be a discretionary "principle of policy" to be weighed and balanced along with its views about the merits of the prior decision and several pragmatic considerations when determining whether to retain precedent in interpreting the constitution or deciding whether to hear a case .

the court may avoid having to decide whether to overrule precedent if it can distinguish the law or facts of a prior decision from the case before it or , rather , limit the prior decision's holding so that it is inapplicable to the instant case .

as noted , in recent decades , the supreme court has often stated that a decision to overrule precedent must be based on some special justification — or , at least "strong grounds" — that extends beyond the court's mere disagreement with the merits of the prior decision's reasoning .

in this vein , the justices have expressed some concern that the court's legitimacy might suffer if it constantly overruled its prior decisions based on such disagreements .

consequently , when deciding whether to overrule a past decision in a constitutional case , the court has historically considered several "prudential and pragmatic" factors that seek to foster the rule of law while balancing the costs and benefits to society of reaffirming or overruling a prior holding .

the court's 2018 decision in janus v. american federation of state , county , and municipal employees sets forth a nonexhaustive list of these factors: the quality of [the precedent's] reasoning , the workability of the rule it establishes , its consistency with other related decisions , developments since the decision was handed down , and reliance on the decision .

this section briefly discusses examples from the supreme court's jurisprudence that illustrate the court's use of each of these factors in its analysis: ( 1 ) the quality of the precedent's reasoning ; ( 2 ) the workability of the precedent's rule or standard ; ( 3 ) the precedent's consistency with other related decisions ; ( 4 ) factual developments since the case was decided ; and ( 5 ) reliance by private parties , government officials , courts , or society on the prior decision .

the supreme court's prior decisions on matters of constitutional law appear to inform the justices' decisions in future cases .

because these precedents may implicate highly divisive and controversial issues , much debate and litigation has turned on the manner in which the court determines whether to retain or overrule its prior decisions .

although this debate has often focused on the doctrine of stare decisis , the court has stated that this doctrine is just one factor , among several others , that it considers when reviewing precedent .

a survey of court decisions , applying the various stare decisis factors , suggests that it is difficult to predict when the court will overrule a prior decision .

this uncertainty stems from a number of sources , including the fact that the court has not provided a complete list of factors that it considers when making that determination or explained how it weighs each factor .

furthermore , sometimes a justice's judicial philosophy may conflict with precedent , potentially requiring a justice to choose between following his or her philosophy or making a pragmatic exception to it in order to maintain stability in the law .

although much about how the supreme court views precedent remains unclear , the court's factors for determini ng whether to retain or overrule precedent provide the justices with significant discretion .

as justice samuel alito stated during his confirmation hearings when asked what "special justifications" counsel for overruling precedent: well , i think what needs to be done is a consideration of all of the factors that are relevant .

this is not a mathematical formula .

it would be a lot easier for everybody if it were .

but it is not .

the supreme court has said that this is a question that calls for the exercise of judgment .

they have said there has to be a special justification for overruling a precedent .

there is a presumption that precedents will be followed .

but it is not — the rule of stare decisis is not an inexorable command , and i don't think anybody would want a rule in the area of constitutional law that ... said that a constitutional decision , once handed down , can never be overruled .

thus , if the court is unable to distinguish a precedent from the case before it , the justices , to preserve the court's legitimacy , generally attempt to strike a delicate balance between maintaining a stable jurisprudence on which parties can rely while preserving sufficient flexibility to correct errors .

the table below lists supreme court decisions on substantive questions of federal constitutional law that the court subsequently overruled .

the table was compiled by searching the lexis database for all supreme court decisions that use the word "overrule" in the headnotes , syllabus , or text of the court's opinion .

decisions supported by a majority of the court that expressly overruled an earlier decision were listed in the table .

the listed cases include decisions identified by the search terms in which the court partially overruled or otherwise qualified a prior case .

these findings were also cross - checked with other sources to ensure that the search had captured any relevant results .

for a decision to be listed as overruled , a majority of the court must have explicitly stated , in a subsequent decision , that the case has been overruled .

consequently , the table does not include cases that the court distinguished or limited or cases identified by concurring or dissenting justices or commentators as overruled , unless such cases have also been expressly overruled by a majority of the court .

the list also does not include cases whose legal foundations have merely been eroded by subsequent decision without explicitly being overruled or that the court treats as discredited .

it also does not include cases in which the court issued a ruling on the merits after having split evenly on the issue previously .

the list does not necessarily reflect the current state of the law .

the table is arranged in chronological order by the date of the overruling decision .

for each overruling decision listed , the table gives ( 1 ) the name of the overruling decision ; ( 2 ) the date of the overruling decision ; ( 3 ) the name of the overruled decision ; ( 4 ) the date of the overruled decision ; and ( 5 ) the exact words used by the overruling court in overturning the earlier decision .

