afghanistan has been a central u.s. foreign policy concern since american forces , in the wake of the september 11 , 2001 , attacks , helped lead a military campaign against al qaeda and the taliban government that harbored it .

since then , the united states , along with nato and other international partners , has deployed tens of thousands of troops and provided tens of billions of dollars in development assistance .

the overarching goal of this effort is to support the elected afghan government and bolster its security forces against a resilient insurgency by the taliban and others , including ( since 2014 ) an active affiliate of the islamic state ( is , also known as isis , isil , or the arabic acronym da'esh ) .

after an afghan opposition coalition known as the northern alliance drove the taliban government out of kabul with the help of american airpower and a small number of u.s. special forces , the u.n. convened afghan leaders in bonn , germany to lay out a roadmap for the creation of a democratic government in afghanistan .

taliban representatives were not invited to participate in the meetings in bonn .

that conference established an interim administration headed by hamid karzai , and called for a june 2002 emergency loya jirga ( a traditional afghan consultative assembly ) .

another loya jirga was convened in late 2003 to endorse a new constitution , which was ratified in january 2004 .

afghanistan held its first presidential election in october 2004 , and karzai was elected with 55% of the vote .

the first parliamentary elections followed in september 2005 .

sporadic taliban attacks continued during this time , with u.s. intelligence collecting evidence of an "organized taliban revival" by early 2004 .

under intense u.s. pressure most al qaeda and taliban fighters had fled into pakistan , where they helped to inspire an islamist insurgency that would later drive the pakistani state into full - scale crisis .

at the same time as they battled al qaeda and other islamist militants at home , pakistan's security institutions aided the afghan taliban , including by providing safe haven to much of its leadership , a legacy of pakistan's formal recognition of the group from 1996 to 2001 .

by 2007 , despite nascent democratic development and improvements in most afghans' quality of life , the american effort in afghanistan , once described as "the good war," appeared "off course," with security deteriorating , narcotics production increasing , and levels of taliban violence steadily rising .

in response , president barack obama increased the number of american forces ( from approximately 36,000 in february 2009 to a high of about 100,000 in 2011 ) as part of an effort to combat the taliban insurgency and increase the capacity of the afghan government and security forces .

most security metrics improved during the "surge," but uncertainty rose as afghan forces took the lead for security nationwide ( in mid - 2013 ) amidst a steady drawdown of u.s. and international forces as part of a planned withdrawal .

that uncertainty was compounded by the 2014 presidential election , which was marred by widespread allegations of fraud and was only resolved with the creation of a fragile unity government formed after months of u.s. mediation .

still , the nato - led international security assistance force ( isaf , 2003-2014 ) mission was replaced by resolute support mission ( rsm , 2015-present ) at the end of 2014 as scheduled .

the killing of taliban leader mullah mansour ( successor to original taliban leader mullah omar , who died of natural causes in 2013 ) in a may 2016 u.s. airstrike in pakistan demonstrated continued taliban vulnerabilities to u.s. military and intelligence capabilities .

at the same time , the taliban expanded their control and influence in rural areas while pressuring urban centers ( as evidenced by their brief seizure of the provincial capital of kunduz in 2015 ) .

in the decade before the september 11 , 2001 , terror attacks , afghanistan was not a major focus of congressional attention .

since then , congress has taken an active role in shaping u.s. policy toward afghanistan .

major initiatives and areas of congressional interest are described below .

u.s. military forces deployed into afghanistan under the 2001 authorization for use of military force ( aumf , p.l .

107-40 ) , which allows the president "to use all necessary and appropriate force against those nations , organizations , or persons he determines planned , authorized , committed , or aided" the september 11 , 2001 , attacks as well as any entities that harbored them .

the taliban regime collapsed after about two months of major combat operations .

u.s. operations in afghanistan against the taliban , al qaeda , and the local islamic state affiliate continue under that resolution , though members have proposed a range of measures to replace the 2001 aumf with a new authorization that could alter u.s. military engagement in afghanistan , as outlined in the chart below .

after the fall of the taliban , u.s. efforts shifted quickly to providing humanitarian support to the afghan people , stabilizing the country , and building up a democratic afghan government .

one of the most important congressional measures in this regard was the 2002 afghanistan freedom support act ( afsa , p.l .

107-327 ) , which authorized a total of $3.8 billion in humanitarian , developmental , counter - narcotics , and security assistance over four years .

the act contains a number of provisions directing u.s. efforts in afghanistan and establishing congressional oversight thereof ; many of these provisions anticipate additional congressional directives enacted in subsequent years .

such provisions include the authorization of funds for specific purposes ( including the creation of positions within executive branch agencies ; see below ) ; regular notification and reporting requirements ; and subjecting aid to afghanistan to the same conditions as assistance provided under other pieces of legislation , like the foreign assistance act of 1961 and the arms export and control act of 1976 .

the u.s. - led invasion of iraq in march 2003 largely overshadowed the war in afghanistan , and much of the legislative attention to afghanistan in the subsequent several years came in bills and legislative provisions that treated the two wars together .

as conditions in afghanistan deteriorated , however , congressional attention returned to afghanistan and some members sought to scrutinize the u.s. - led international project there more closely .

congress mandated a number of reports , which remain among the most important sources for information on u.s. efforts in afghanistan .

one of the most significant congressional oversight actions was the 2008 establishment of a special inspector general for afghanistan reconstruction ( sigar ) , modeled in part on a similar office overseeing iraq .

congress directed that sigar publish quarterly reports detailing the obligation and expenditure of funds appropriated for afghan reconstruction .

congress also required periodic audits and investigations of specific projects and funds .

the fy2008 national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) added more reporting requirements .

section 1230 of the act directed the president , through the department of defense , to submit a biannual report on "progress toward security and stability in afghanistan. .

the first report was submitted under that title in june 2009 .

in the fy2015 ndaa ( p.l .

113-291 ) , congress required a report on "enhancing security and stability in afghanistan," among other reporting requirements , and biannual reports have been submitted under that title since june 2015 ( most recently on july 3 , 2018 ) .

in addition to these ongoing reports , congress has regularly mandated the submission of one - time reports on specific issues in appropriations and defense authorization bills .

individual report directives proposed to and included in legislation in the 115 th congress can be found below .

congress has appropriated $126.3 billion for relief and reconstruction in afghanistan s ince fy2002 , according to sigar's july 30 , 2017 quarterly report .

during the karzai administration , the united states and oth e r international donors "increasingly sought to condition assist ance funds for afghanistan… as a result of inadequate reforms. .

a 2014 report by m ajority s taff of the senate foreign relations committee also recommended that "a higher proportion of u.s. assistance should be conditioned based on specific reforms by the afghan government. .

accordingly , congress has imposed a number of directives and conditions on the use of both security and development assistance to afghanistan ( e.g .

 , economic support fund , esf , and international narcotics control and law enforcement , incle ) for a number of years .

most of those statutory conditions have been enacted through appropriations measures .

as outlined below , fy 2019 appropriations bills would prohibit the use of funds for activities that involve individuals suspected of involvement in corruption , narcotics trafficking , or human rights violations .

a dditionally , they would require the secretary of state to certify that the afghan government is governing democratically , protect ing women's rights , and publicly reporting its national budget ( among other conditions ) before obligating funds .

t here are a number of additional conditions on u.s. assistance not specific to afghanistan , such as the leahy laws prohibiting security assistance to foreign security forces that have perpetrated a gross violation of human rights .

s ome have suggested that afghan forces may have committed such violations .

congress has also played an important role in shaping the bureaucratic structures within the executive branch that are responsible for u.s. policy on afghanistan .

in the 2002 afsa , congress authorized the creation of a "coordinator" for afghanistan and u.s. assistance there , to serve at the rank of ambassador .

in 2007 , the house passed a bill that would have authorized a senate - confirmed special envoy to promote cooperation between afghanistan and pakistan .

the george w. bush administration described the section authorizing the special envoy as "significantly objectionable," and the senate did not take up the bill. .

in 2009 , however , the obama administration created a similar position under state department general authorities by appointing richard holbrooke as the first special representative for afghanistan and pakistan ( srap ) .

various congressional proposals in recent years would have statutorily authorized , altered the mission of , required reporting on , or otherwise addressed the office , which the trump administration closed in september 2017 .

other congressional measures have sought to condition , limit , or end the u.s. military effort in afghanistan .

while no measure limiting or terminating the u.s. military presence in afghanistan has ever passed either chamber , support for such proposals in the house of representatives generally seems to have grown from 2009 to 2014 , the period when most of these measures were introduced .

house bills calling for a "responsible end to the war in afghanistan," for example , attracted 33 cosponsors in 2010 and 72 cosponsors in 2011 ; ndaa amendments that would have cut off funding for u.s. operations ( other than the withdrawal of u.s. forces ) attracted 113 and 153 votes in 2012 and 2014 , respectively .

since the trump administration's announcement of the south asia strategy in august 2017 , congressional interest in afghanistan seems to have increased , with some members assessing the new strategy , events on the ground , and broader u.s. foreign and domestic policy interests as they relate to afghanistan .

the table below provides summaries and information on the status of proposed and enacted afghanistan - related legislation in the 115 th congress .

