since the onset of the nation's civil war and ensuing military coup d'état in 1962 , burma's military , or tatmadaw , and its associated security forces , such as the border guard police and the myanmar police force , have been repeatedly accused of committing murder , rape , and torture against the nation's various ethnic minorities .

between 1990 and 2008 , congress passed legislation imposing various sanctions on burma in part due to the serious human rights violations committed by and / or authorized by the tatmadaw .

such allegations of intentional , pervasive , and systematic abuses arose again following the forced displacement of over 700,000 rohingya from burma's rakhine state in late 2017 , as well as the tatmadaw's renewed offensive against ethnic armed groups in kachin , karen , and shan states ( see map in the appendix ) .

the trump administration has described that tatmadaw's assault on the rohingya as "ethnic cleansing" and has applied "limited targeted sanctions" on five tatmadaw officers and two military units .

on december 13 , 2018 , the house of representatives passed h.res .

1091 ( 116 th congress ) by a vote of 394-1 , stating "the atrocities committed against the rohingya by the burmese military and security forces since august 2017 constitute crimes against humanity and genocide" and calling on the secretary of state to "determine , based on available evidence , whether the actions by the burmese military in northern rakhine state in 2017 constitute crimes against humanity , genocide , or other crimes under international law. .

various organizations — including the united nations independent international fact - finding mission in myanmar ( unffm ) , multiple human rights organizations , and the press — have conducted investigations into allegations that burmese security forces committed serious human rights violations in burma's seven ethnic states since the tatmadaw transferred power to a mixed civilian / military government in 2011 .

these organizations have released at least 17 reports documenting evidence that appears to support some of these allegations , and implicates specific burmese security personnel and units as being responsible for the abuses .

in addition to concluding that burmese security forces were responsible for serious human rights violations , at least two of these reports maintain that the violations were intentional , premeditated , and systemic .

certain burmese officers and units also appear in more than one report , and in some cases , are identified as being responsible for human rights violations in more than one ethnic state and / or at different times .

the reports vary in their conclusions on the severity of the abuses .

some conclude that certain violations may constitute genocide ; in other cases , some describe possible war crimes or crimes against humanity .

this report compiles a list — in tabular form — of the burmese security personnel and units that have been identified as responsible for serious human rights violations by one or more the following reports: 1 .

amnesty international , "all the civilians suffer: conflict , displacement , and abuse in northern myanmar," june 2017 ; 2 .

amnesty international , "we will destroy everything: military responsibility for crimes against humanity in rakhine state , myanmar," june 2018 ; 3 .

fortify rights , "they gave them long swords: preparations for genocide and crimes against humanity against rohingya muslims in rakhine state , myanmar," july 2018 ; 4 .

human rights watch , "all my body was pain: sexual violence against rohingya women and girls in burma," november 2017 ; 5 .

human rights watch , "massacre by the river: burmese army crimes against humanity in tula toli," december 2017 ; 6 .

kachin women's association in thailand , "a far cry from peace: ongoing burma army offensives and abuses in northern burma under the nld government," november 2016 ; 7 .

kachin women's association in thailand , "state terror in the kachin hills: burma army attacks against civilians in northern burma," november 16 , 2017 ; 8 .

karen human rights group , "ongoing militarisation in southeast myanmar," october 2016 ; 9 .

legal aid network and kachin women's association in thailand , "justice delayed , justice denied: seeking truth about sexual violence and war crime case in burma," january 2016 ; 10 .

network for human rights documentation — burma , "report on the human rights situation in burma , january – december 2017," march 2018 ; 11 .

physicians for human rights , "please tell the world what they have done to us: the chut pyin massacre: forensic evidence of violence against the rohingya in myanmar," july 2018 ; 12 .

refugees international , "suffering in shadows: aid restrictions and reductions endanger displaced persons in northern myanmar," december 2017 ; 13 .

simon lewis , zeba siddiqui , clare baldwin , and andrew r.c .

marshall , "tip of the spear," reuters , june 26 , 2018 ; 14 .

ta'ang women's organization , "trained to torture: systematic war crimes by the burma army in ta'ang areas of northern shan state ( march 2011 – march 2016 ) ," june 2016 ; 15 .

united nations fact - finding mission on myanmar , "report of the independent international fact - finding mission on myanmar" ( advanced unedited version ) , august 24 , 2018 ; 16 .

women's league of burma , "if they had hope , they would speak: the on - going use of state - sponsored sexual violence in burma's ethnic communities," november 2014 ; and 17 .

women's league of burma , "long way to go: continuing violations of human rights and discrimination against ethnic women in burma," july 2016 .

crs did not independently confirm the veracity of the findings in these reports .

the unffm report recommends that the united nations security council ( unsc ) refer the human rights abuse allegations to the international criminal court ( icc ) for investigation and possible prosecution .

the report specifically identifies six burmese military leaders — commander - in - chief senior general min aung hlaing ; deputy commander - in - chief vice senior general soe win ; commander , bureau of special operations - 3 , lieutenant general aung kyaw zaw ; commander , western regional military command , major general maung maung soe ; commander , 33 rd light infantry division , brigadier general aung aung ; and commander , 99 th light infantry division , brigadier general than oo — as warranting investigation and possible prosecution by the icc .

the unffm also calls for the creation of an independent , impartial mechanism to collect , consolidate , preserve and analyse evidence of violations of international humanitarian law and human rights violations and abuses and to prepare files to facilitate and expedite fair and independent criminal proceedings in national , regional or international courts or tribunals .

in addition , the unffm recommends the unsc "should adopt targeted individual sanctions , including travel bans and asset freezes , against those who appear most responsible for serious crimes under international law" and impose an arms embargo on burma .

the department of state has conducted a preliminary investigation into alleged human rights abuses in rakhine state .

according to an article in politico , there was sharp disagreement within the state department on whether to categorize the tatmadaw's attacks on the rohingya as genocide or crimes against humanity .

on august 28 , 2018 , then - u.s .

ambassador to the united nations nikki haley presented to the u.n security council some of the details of a then unreleased version of the state department's report .

she stated , "the results are consistent with the recently - released un independent international fact - finding mission on burma. .

among the details haley mentioned were the following: the investigation involved interviews with 1,024 rohingya refugees in camps in bangladesh's cox's bazar region ; 82% of the refugees witnessed the killing of a rohingya ; 51% witnessed sexual violence ; and 20% witnessed violence against 100 or more people ; and burmese military and security forces were the perpetrators "of the overwhelming majority of these crimes. .

on september 24 , 2018 , the state department posted online a 20-page publication entitled documentation of atrocities in northern rakhine state .

the state department issued no press release or statement regarding the release of the summary .

according to the publication's executive summary , "the vast majority of rohingya refugees experienced or directly witnessed extreme violence and the destruction of their homes. .

the summary also concluded "that the recent violence in northern rakhine state was extreme , large - scale , widespread , and seemingly geared toward both terrorizing the population and driving out the rohingya residents. .

the publication is generally consistent with ambassador haley's statement before the unsc , but did not indicate if the state department considers the atrocities to be genocide , crimes against humanity , and / or war crimes .

on july 30 , 2018 , president win myint appointed former philippine deputy foreign minister rosario manalo ; former japanese ambassador to the u.n. kenzo oshima ; the chief coordinator of the union enterprise for humanitarian assistance , resettlement and development in rakhine , aung tun thet ; and the former chair of myanmar's constitutional tribunal , mya thein , to head the independent commission of enquiry ( icoe ) , which "will investigate the allegations of human rights violations and related issues , following the terrorist attacks by arsa. .

president win myint's announcement did not indicate any deadline for the commission to complete its investigation .

deputy commander - in - chief vice senior general soe win reportedly said , "the military is on standby to offer full cooperation with the commission. .

the icoe visited rakhine state on december 21 , 2018 , as part of its investigation .

manalo reportedly stated during the visit , "we are gathering the truth .

fake news should not be believed .

everything should be based on evidence. .

the icoe also set a deadline of january 31 , 2019 , for people to submit evidence of the commission of human rights abuses .

since burma's security forces began its "clearance operations" in august 2017 , commander - in - chief senior general min aung hlaing has repeatedly denied that his troops committed human rights abuses in rakhine state , or elsewhere in burma .

on february 15 , 2019 , min aung hlaing told asahi shimbun that "there is no certain proof that the national army was involved in the persecution" of rohingya. .

he also said that such accusations "hurts the nation's dignity. .

besides the united states , australia , canada , and the european union have imposed sanctions on burmese military or security officers responsible for human rights violations in burma ( see table 1 ) .

the european union placed sanctions on seven burmese security officers on june 25 , 2018 , and another seven officers on december 21 , 2018 .

on june 25 , 2018 , canada placed sanctions on the same seven officers as the eu .

on october 5 , 2018 , australia placed financial sanctions of five burmese security officers .

three people appear on all four lists — lt .

general aung kyaw zaw , major general khin maung soe , and major general maung maung soe .

two officers , brigadier general aung aung and brigadier general than oo , have been sanctioned by australia , canada , and the eu , but not the united states .

the following tables list the names of burmese security force officers ( table 2 ) and units ( table 3 ) that have been identified in one or more of the reports mentioned above as being responsible for human rights violations in burma since 2011 .

for purposes of this report , the "types of responsibility" include the following: authorization — authorized and / or ordered other security personnel to commit human rights abuses on burmese civilians ; commission — committed the human rights abuses and / or took no action to prevent the commission of human rights abuses ; and cover - up — became aware of credible allegations that security personnel under their command had committed or were committing human rights violations , but took no action to stop the further commission of human rights violations ; attempted to conceal alleged human rights violations by burmese security personnel ; and / or tried to prevent or undermine investigations or prosecutions of alleged human rights violations by burmese personnel .

with regard to the type of human rights violation committed , this report classifies them into six categories arbit rary arrest — includes the arrest and / or detention of civilians without discernible evidence that the civilians had committed some crime ; attacks on civilians — includes intentional assaults of civilians and attacks conducted with a disregard for the potential of causing harm to civilians ; extrajudicial killing — includes the intentional killing of civilians and the killing of civilians during military attacks conducted with a disregard for the potential of causing harm to civilians ; forced labor — includes forcing civilians to carry military equipment or supplies , to serve as "human shields" for military units , and / or to use civilians as human "landmine detectors" ; sexual violence — includes rape , attempted rape , and other forms of sexual assault ; and torture — includes torture and / or the physical abuse of civilians .

while the military personnel and units listed in the tables have not been proven to be responsible for human rights abuses , their identification in one or more of the reports listed above may indicate that there is reason for further investigation of the allegations .

information in the tables suggests certain patterns about the human rights abuse allegations , including the following: pervasive and systemi c abuse by tatmadaw — table 3 includes more than 100 military units , including 3 regional operations commands , 6 infantry divisions , and more than 90 infantry battalions , indicating that alleged human rights abuse is not limited to a few "troubled" units ; geographically pervasive — the reports link certain military units with similar human rights abuses in all of burma's ethnic minority states — chin , kachin , karen ( kayin ) , karenni ( kayah ) , mon , rakhine , and shan ; "trouble d " units — the reports repeatedly implicate certain units in abuses , including the following: infantry division 33 — this unit is identified in six reports , involving a variety of alleged abuses in the states of kachin , rakhine and shan ; infantry division 99 — this unit is also identified in six reports , involving a variety of alleged abuses in the states of kachin , rakhine , and shan ; and infantry battalions 324 , 502 , 503 and 567 — these units were identified in three different reports as committing a variety of human rights abuses .

the extensive list of reports alleging that burma's security forces have committed genocide , crimes against humanity , and / or war crimes has reinforced calls for some form of accountability mechanism to investigate and possibly prosecute the perpetrators of the alleged abuses .

many of the reports and various human rights organizations have proposed various accountability mechanisms , including referral to the international criminal court ( icc ) , the creation of an ad hoc international criminal tribunal , the imposition of u.n. sanctions , and the enactment of bilateral restrictions on relations with the burmese government and / or the burmese military .

congress has various options on how it may respond to the alleged human rights violations in burma .

legislation has been introduced to modify u.s. policy in burma , in part to address the alleged human rights abuses .

resolutions have also been introduced expressing congressional views on events in burma , and calling for changes in u.s. policy .

over the last few years , congress has also included burma - related provisions in pending appropriation legislation to shape u.s. policy in burma .

congress has also demonstrated its ongoing interest in burma , and the importance of u.s. policy in burma , by holding several hearings to learn more about developments in burma and discuss policy options .

several congressional delegations have traveled to bangladesh and burma to directly investigate the situation and express to burma's leaders the importance of the human rights violations allegations to congress .

whatever additional actions or measures , if any , congress takes to address the alleged human rights violations in burma will likely be influenced by other elements of bilateral relations , as well as regional concerns such as china's growing influence in southeast asia .

some members of congress and the trump administration view burma as undergoing a fragile and difficult transition from an oppressive military dictatorship to a potentially democratic , civilian - run federated state , and are concerned that imposing additional restrictions on relations with burma could undermine that transition .

other members of congress and administration officials see the human rights abuses in kachin , karen , rakhine , and shan states as proof that the tatmadaw's leaders have no intention of permitting such a transition to occur .

in the 115 th congress , two bills were introduced pertaining to u.s. policy in burma with provisions related to the alleged human rights violations — the burma unified through rigorous military accountability ( burma ) act of 2018 ( h.r .

5819 ) and the burma human rights and freedom act of 2018 ( s. 2060 ) .

both bills would have imposed a visa ban on senior military officers involved in human rights abuses in burma , placed new restrictions on security assistance and military cooperation , and required u.s. opposition to international financial institution ( ifi ) loans to burma if the project involves an enterprise owned or directly or indirectly controlled by the military of burma .

s. 2060 also would have required the president to review burma's eligibility for the generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) program .

the house committee on foreign affairs , on may 17 , 2018 , ordered h.r .

5819 to be reported favorably out of committee , with an amendment in the nature of a substitute , and agreed to seek consideration under suspension of the rules .

the senate committee on foreign relations reported s. 2060 favorably out of committee on february 12 , 2018 , with an amendment in the nature of a substitute , but the bill never received floor action by the senate .

ten separate resolutions in the house or senate pertaining to burma were introduced during the 115 th congress ; one passed .

in the 116 th congress , one burma - related resolution has been introduced , s.res .

34 , that resolves that the senate ( among other things ) : condemns the violence and displacement inflicted on burma's rohingya and other ethnic minorities ; and urges the secretary of state to make a determination whether the actions by the myanmar military constitute crimes against humanity or genocide and to work with interagency partners to impose targeted sanctions on myanmar military officials , to include senior general min aung hlaing , responsible for these heinous acts through existing authorities .

as previously described , the 116 th congress included provisions in the consolidated appropriations act , 2019 ( p.l .

116-6 ) placing restrictions on the provision of bilateral economic assistance , international security assistance , and multilateral assistance to burma .

similar provisions could be included in the appropriations legislation for the department of defense and the department of state for fy2020 .

since september 2017 , congress has held several hearings on burma , including the following: a house committee on foreign affairs hearing on september 26 , 2018 , entitled , "genocide against the burmese rohingya. .

a house committee on foreign affairs hearing on october 4 , 2017 , entitled , "the rohingya crisis: u.s .

response to the tragedy in burma. .

a house committee on foreign affairs subcommittee on asia and the pacific hearing on september 27 , 2017 , entitled , "burma's brutal campaign against the rohingya. .

a senate committee on foreign relations hearing on october 24 , 2017 , entitled , "assessing u.s. policy towards burma: geopolitical , economic , and humanitarian considerations. .

a tom lantos human rights commission hearing on july 25 , 2018 , entitled , "victims' rights in burma. .

at all of these hearings , most of the members of congress present indicated that they view the acts of burma's security forces in rakhine state and elsewhere in burma as either genocide or crimes against humanity .

many also stated that the trump administration's response to date has been inadequate given the severity of the human rights abuses .

congress may also consider sending congressional delegations and staff delegations to bangladesh and burma to investigate the alleged human rights violations and ascertain the views of the alleged victims on what forms of accountability should be pursued .

these delegations could also meet with burmese government officials and burmese military leaders to hear their perspectives of the human rights allegations , and to express the delegation's opinion on what measures the burmese government and military should make to investigate and possibly prosecute those individuals , military units , and organizations that have been accused of committing genocide , crimes against humanity , and war crimes in burma .

