labor markets are highly responsive to short - and long - term economic influences .

for example , total employment , the types of jobs available , their locations , and the skills sought by employers respond in various degrees to changing cyclical and structural forces .

recessions , for example , bring about increased joblessness with stronger impacts for certain worker groups , and changes in production patterns and consumers' preferences for goods and services — examples of structural forces — further influence the size and composition of employment .

using data from the bureau of labor statistics , this report considers how such changes have affected the u.s. labor market since 2007 , examining the performance of labor market indicators like employment , unemployment , and labor force participation ; changes in the types of jobs available by industry and occupation ; and employment outcomes for different demographic groups .

since 2007 , the labor market has been affected by factors such as the great recession of 2007-2009 , technological innovation , and an aging labor force that have altered the mix of jobs available to u.s. workers .

such trends have been of interest to congress because they provide information about how the labor force is evolving , the resilience or sensitivity of some jobs to recession , and the changing needs of employers , and thereby inform workforce planning , income support programs , and other potential policy responses .

this section discusses the contribution of business cycles ( notably the great recession ) and ongoing structural change to recent labor market developments .

throughout the report , recent patterns are examined in the context of these changes .

the timing and intensity of labor market changes can in some cases point to the effects of a particular force , but it is beyond the scope of this report to identify specific , discrete contributions of each .

this is because forces ( eg , recession , technological change ) act concurrently , and sometimes they can have interactive effects .

while several forces shaped labor market outcomes over the last decade , the impact of the great recession was the most visible .

more than 7.5 million private sector jobs were lost between december 2007 and june 2009 , and an additional 1.2 million were lost between the official end of the recession and february 2010 ; for the entire period , private employment declined by 6.6% .

some of these losses included long - tenured workers ( 6.9 million from 2007 to 2009 ) , who were displaced from their jobs when companies closed , moved , or downsized .

the economy did not consistently add jobs ( on net ) until march 2010 , and did not return to december 2007 levels until march 2014 .

employment has continued to grow since then , but as a share of the population it remains below its precrisis level , largely because of declining labor force participation .

that is , despite greater success among job seekers in securing employment ( as seen in recently low unemployment rates , figure 1 ) , fewer potential workers are participating in the labor market ( see declining labor force participation rates in figure 2 ) and this has driven down employment as a share of the population .

subdued employment - population ratios among prime - age workers ( 25-54 years of age ) are explored in greater detail in the " worker characteristics " section of this report .

following the great recession , the unemployment rate peaked at 10% — the second time it reached double digits since the great depression .

it has steadily fallen since 2011 , reaching a low of 3.8% in may 2018 — the lowest level it has been in any of the seven economic expansions since 1970 ( figure 1 ) .

in the 2001-2007 expansion , the lowest unemployment rate attained was 4.4% .

unemployment is below the congressional budget office's ( cbo's ) natural rate estimate of 4.7% ( i.e. , the lowest sustainable unemployment rate that the economy can currently achieve ) , a benchmark level accepted by many economists .

most other labor market utilization indicators are also consistent with full employment .

thus , the united states may have reached full employment despite higher unemployment for minorities , less - educated americans , and certain geographic regions .

for more information , see crs insight in10860 , has the economy reached full employment ? .

if so , will it stay there ? .

 , by marc labonte .

one measure that has shown less improvement recently is the labor force participation rate ( lfpr ) , which experienced an unprecedented drop in the 2000s and only a relatively small recovery in the current expansion ( figure 2 ) .

it fell from about 67% in the 1990s expansion to 66% in the 2001-2007 expansion , and then dropped to 63% from 2008 to 2014 , its lowest level since the 1970s .

it has remained around 63% since .

historically , the lfpr was not a highly cyclical measurement , but in this case some have wondered if its low level is indicating latent slack in labor markets ; that is , there could be a source of more available workers than the unemployment rate would currently suggest .

that possibility depends on the likelihood that workers who have left the labor force will reenter .

one study found that from 1980 to 2011 , almost 80% of workers aged 25-44 who exit the labor force reenter it within four years , but only 40% of workers aged 45-54 and 20% of workers aged 55-59 reenter .

this section discusses how industry and occupational employment has changed since 2007 .

the great recession led to greater employment loss in certain industries and occupations than others , but those effects have receded as the economy returns to full employment .

in the meantime , structural changes have also had disparate impacts on various industries and occupations .

as a result , even as the unemployment rate returns to prerecession levels , the mix of jobs available today is not the same as it was in 2007 .

looking forward , the labor market will continue to evolve in response to cyclical and structural developments , creating future opportunities and challenges for u.s. workers .

some of the key trends highlighted in this report could potentially continue to play out in future years , and new , unexpected developments will emerge .

cyclical factors are rarely static — for example , the unemployment rate is usually trending upward or downward , and is rarely steady .

the unemployment rate briefly hit its lowest level since 1969 in may 2018 .

with a historically low unemployment rate , the economy can only continue adding jobs at the recent pace if proportionately more new or former workers can be brought into the labor force .

the fact that the lfpr is still low suggests that this is possible , but conceivably challenging .

there are few examples of the u.s. economy sustaining a very low unemployment rate for a significant period of time without a return to recession .

the current economic expansion is already the second longest on record , and at some point a new recession will begin .

when it does , the ensuing rise in unemployment will likely disproportionately affect certain industries , occupations , and demographic groups .

in the past , construction and manufacturing employment has been more sensitive to the business cycle , and labor market recovery has been slower for certain minorities .

for some , the effects of the next recession could be long lasting , in terms of future earnings and employment .

cultural and demographic changes coupled with the great recession led to changes in the labor market that are difficult , but not necessarily impossible , to reverse .

the aging of the labor force has shifted a larger share of it into age groups that have traditionally had participation rates that were less than half the participation rate of prime - age workers .

the participation rate of young workers ( aged 16 to 24 ) has fallen by over 10 percentage points since 1990 .

the rising participation rate of women — a major source of labor force growth in the post - world war ii period — has reversed since 2001 .

if these trends continue — and there is not an offsetting increase from a source such as immigration — the labor supply will grow far more slowly than it has in the post - world war ii period , dampening economic growth and income growth .

according to the social security trustees report , annual labor force growth fell from 2.1% between 1960 and 1980 to 1.4% between 1980 and 2000 to 0.6% between 2000 and 2015 .

after a cyclical uptick through 2021 , the social security trustees project it will grow at a similar rate from 2022 to 2095 .

without the assumption that the lfpr of older workers will rise , the social security trustees' projected growth rate would be lower .

in the long run , structural changes continue to alter the labor market in profound ways .

for example , as farming became less labor intensive , the share of rural farm households fell from an estimated 35% of total households in 1900 to 1.7% in 2010 .

it remains to be seen whether current innovations , such as artificial intelligence ( ai ) and automation , will have an equally profound impact on labor markets .

as was the case with changes in farming , ai could potentially lead to the eventual shift of large numbers of workers to different occupations .

skill - biased technological change and globalization have not prevented a return to full employment , but have sparked concerns about a "hollowing out" of middle - wage jobs , especially for less - educated workers .

these processes may not yet have run their courses , and — as the example of farming illustrates — the types of jobs that will replace the displaced jobs are not always obvious beforehand .

technology and globalization are not the only developments influencing future employment .

policy changes , such as immigration changes or a potential "trade war," can also lead to structural shifts in employment composition .

educational attainment also will partly determine the types of jobs in which the united states has a comparative advantage in the future .

the u.s. labor force is dynamic , but has been less dynamic in this expansion compared to earlier ones by several measures .

fewer workers are changing jobs , individual firms are adding and subtracting fewer gross jobs , and fewer workers are moving to new areas in order to take advantage of the fact that jobs are more plentiful in some parts of the country .

this reduced dynamism can make it harder for workers to adapt to the changes discussed above , increasing the potential for displacement to result in negative outcomes for workers .

