from the ear liest days of commercial radio , the federal communications commission ( fcc ) and its predecessor , the federal radio commission , have encouraged diversity in broadcasting .

the fcc's policies seek to encourage four distinct types of diversity in local broadcast media: diversity of viewpoints , as reflected in the availability of media content reflecting a variety of perspectives ; diversity of programming , as indicated by a variety of formats and content , including programming aimed at various minority and ethnic groups ; outlet diversity , to ensure the presence of multiple independently owned media outlets within a geographic market ; and minority and female ownership of broadcast media outlets .

in addition to promoting diversity , the fcc aims , with its broadcast media ownership rules , to promote localism and competition by restricting the number of media outlets that a single entity may own or control within a geographic market and , in the case of broadcast television stations , nationwide .

localism addresses whether broadcast stations are responsive to the needs and interests of their communities .

in evaluating the extent of competition , the fcc considers whether stations have adequate commercial incentives to invest in diverse news and public affairs programming tailored to serve viewers within their communities .

the debate over media ownership rules is occurring against the background of sweeping changes in news consumption patterns .

figure 1 illustrates these general trends .

based on surveys conducted by pew research center , the percentage of adults citing local broadcast television as a news source declined from 65% in 1996 to 37% in 2017 .

the percentage of respondents who stated that they "got news yesterday" from online sources grew from 2% in 1996 to 43% in 2017 , marking the first time that online sources outranked local broadcast television .

in contrast , those citing printed newspapers as a source they "read yesterday" or use regularly declined from 50% in 1996 to 18% in 2016 .

broadcast radio also has declined in importance as a source of news .

these trends raise questions as to whether common ownership of multiple media outlets in the same market might limit diversity of viewpoints as much today as two decades ago .

as broadcast stations face competition for viewers' attention from other media outlets , and thereby financial pressures , some have sought to strengthen their bargaining relative to program suppliers ( i.e. , broadcast networks ) , advertisers , and / or programming distributors ( i.e. , cable and satellite operators ) by consolidating .

for example , in an agreement that was subsequently rescinded , sinclair broadcast group proposed to acquire tribune media company , thereby making it the largest owner of broadcast television stations in the united states .

in november 2017 , entercom communications completed its merger with cbs radio inc. , making it the largest radio operator in the united states in terms of revenue .

in june 2018 , gray television announced that it would purchase raycom media inc. in a $3.65 billion transaction that would enable gray to reach one - fourth of u.s. households .

the extent to which such media consolidation can occur is directly related to the fcc media ownership and attribution rules in place at the time .

the fcc has five distinct sets of rules governing ownership of multiple media outlets in a single market: ( 1 ) local television ownership rules ( known as the television duopoly rules ) ; ( 2 ) local radio ownership rules ; ( 3 ) radio / television cross - ownership rules ; ( 4 ) newspaper / broadcast cross - ownership rules ; and ( 5 ) the dual network rule .

the fcc has a long history of attempts to adopt rules to encourage diverse broadcast station ownership , including ownership by women and members of minority groups .

examples of the fcc's attempts are described within several of its past media ownership reviews , including the adoption of the failed station solicitation rule and the establishment of a class of "eligible entities" that could qualify for relaxed ownership rules , attribution rules , and more flexible licensing policies than their counterparts .

as a result of this history , and appeals of previous fcc actions imposing rules to foster diversity of broadcast ownership , the third circuit court of appeals is overseeing the fcc's efforts to foster diversity of broadcast station ownership .

in 2016 , the fcc adopted a new order ( 2016 diversity order ) containing rules designed to increase broadcast ownership diversity .

in accordance with a third circuit directive , the agency submitted the rules to the court .

in its 2016 diversity order , the fcc reinstated the revenue - based eligible entity standard , using the small business administration's definition of a "small business. .

the fcc had also used this revenue - based eligible entity standard in its previous 2008 ownership diversity rulemaking ( 2008 diversity order ) .

under this definition , entities that own broadcast stations and have total annual revenue of $38.5 million or less qualify for certain construction , licensing , transaction , and auction measures , described below .

the fcc adopted six measures in the 2016 diversity order that are designed to enable eligible entities to abide by less restrictive media ownership and attribution rules , and more flexible licensing policies , than their counterparts .

table 4 describes the six measures .

similar to the reinstated definition of eligible entities , these measures are the same as those previously adopted in the fcc's 2008 diversity order .

to justify this decision , the fcc reasoned that "we continue to believe that enabling more small businesses to participate in the broadcast industry will encourage innovation and promote competition and viewpoint diversity. .

it added that whether or not such measures would specifically lead to increased broadcast ownership by women and minorities has no bearing on whether the measures will promote small business participation in the broadcast industry .

interested parties have appealed the 2016 diversity order to the third circuit .

as part of its reconsideration of the quadrennial media ownership order in 2017 , the fcc established a new incubator that provides a broadcast radio ownership rule waiver to a broadcaster that establishes a program to help facilitate station ownership for a certain class of owners .

in addition , the fcc launched a new rulemaking proceeding seeking comment on how to implement the program .

the fcc issued rules governing the incubator program in august 2018 .

most of the rules became effective on september 27 , 2018 .

information collection requirements are subject to review by the omb , pursuant to section 3507 ( d ) of the paperwork reduction act of 1995 ( p.l .

104-13 ) .

under the incubator program , an established radio broadcaster will provide financial and operational support , including training and mentoring , to a new or small radio broadcaster .

at the end of a successful incubation relationship , the new or small broadcaster will either own and operate a new station independently , or be on a firmer financial footing .

once an incubation relationship is completed successfully , the established broadcaster will be eligible to receive a waiver of the fcc's local radio ownership rule , subject to certain requirements .

in the order , the fcc did not foreclose the possibility of eliminating or further relaxing its local radio ownership rule in the 2018 quadrennial review .

the fcc noted that congress would be able to adopt legislation either authorizing or mandating tax certificates and tax credits in the agency's incubator program , either in addition to or in lieu of the fcc local radio ownership rule waiver .

furthermore , the fcc stated that following the completion of the 2018 quadrennial review , it might consider expanding the incubator program to apply to television stations .

in addition , it stated that "were congress to provide an alternative benefit for incubating broadcasters , we would be strongly inclined to expand the program to include television stations. .

national ownership rule histor .

