congress is again debating work requirements for programs providing need - tested assistance to low - income families and individuals .

need - tested programs provide benefits and services to individuals and families based on financial need ( usually low income ) .

this is in contrast to social insurance programs such as social security and unemployment insurance , which base their benefits on past work .

work requirements for cash assistance for parents in needy families with children receiving public benefits have been part of policy debates since the 1960s .

those debates culminated in the 1996 welfare reform law ( p.l .

104-193 ) , which created the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant to replace the pre - 1996 cash assistance program of aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) .

since the enactment of the 1996 law , extending work requirements to other need - tested programs has sometimes been raised in policy debates about need - tested programs .

legislation before the 115 th congress — the house - passed version of h.r .

2 — would expand work requirements in the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) .

h.r .

5861 , reported to the house from the ways and means committee , would alter some of tanf's rules regarding work .

in addition , the trump administration is currently granting demonstration waivers for states to implement work requirements for certain recipients of medicaid , and has proposed expanded work requirements for housing assistance programs .

work requirements for recipients of government assistance seek to achieve a variety of policy goals .

they can attempt to offset work disincentives in government assistance programs and promote a culture of work over dependency on government benefits .

work requirements can also reduce the assistance caseloads , leading to government savings .

they can screen out those who decide that the benefit of receiving assistance is not worth the cost of complying with a work requirement .

they can also be used to remove from the assistance programs those who do not comply with the societal norm of work .

in general , the economic status of most individuals is tied to work — either current work , past work , or the work of another family member .

thus , requiring work can be seen as a means of improving the economic status of individuals and families , as it is the primary means of lifting them out of poverty .

what does the research evidence indicate about the impact of work requirements in meeting these policy goals ? .

most of the research that addresses this issue comes from a set of experiments , conducted prior to the 1996 welfare reform , on alternative approaches to the work and education provisions in tanf's predecessor program , afdc .

this report summarizes the findings from the pre - 1996 welfare - to - work experiments as well as the limits of applying those findings to the current policy debate around work requirements .

before the enactment of the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( prwora , p.l .

104-193 ) , a large number of experiments were fielded to inform the welfare reform debates that spanned four decades , from the 1960s to the mid - 1990s .

the experiments were demonstrations of alternative policies and were evaluated using the randomized controlled trial ( rct ) method , which is used to isolate the effect of differing policies from other factors that can influence outcomes .

the era of experimentation on alternative welfare policies began with the negative income tax ( nit ) experiments initiated in the 1960s and 1970s .

they were conducted because the welfare reforms offered ( but never enacted ) by presidents nixon and carter were based on the nit model , which was an income guarantee and a gradual "taxing back" of benefits as incomes increased .

in the 1980s , the focus of the experimental research shifted to examining programs that required work and / or provided employment services with the goal of moving recipients from nonwork on the afdc assistance rolls to work and being off the rolls .

this research culminated in evaluations fielded in the early 1990s in the federally sponsored national evaluation of welfare to work strategies ( newws ) study ; evaluations required of states that obtained "waivers" of afdc requirements related to work ; and the minnesota family investment program ( mfip ) , which required special legislative authorization .

after the 1996 welfare reform law , mandatory welfare - to - work programs were no longer considered experiments , they were considered to be the policy .

thus , tanf was never evaluated .

much of the current focus of the discussions on work requirements is on the snap , medicaid , and housing assistance programs .

existing snap law has participation requirements and includes an employment and training ( e&t ) program .

it also time limits nondisabled adult recipients without children who are aged 18 to 49 and not working or participating in training to 3 months in a 36-month period .

h.r .

2 , as it passed the house , would alter those rules , establishing mandatory participation requirements for both those subject to the current time limit as well as other nondisabled adults under the age of 60 .

medicaid has no statutory work requirements .

however , the trump administration is currently granting research and demonstration waivers to states to permit them to require work and "community engagement" for medicaid recipients .

under statute , these waivers must promote the objective of medicaid , and thus must have a goal of improving health outcomes .

as waivers , rather than program rules , they may differ in the population covered , the work requirements tested , and other provisions ( eg , coverage of health - related services such as enhanced dental and vision benefits , cost sharing ) .

generally , waivers may be granted to require engagement of nonelderly , nonpregnant individuals who are not disabled .

in the housing assistance programs , a community service or self - sufficiency activity requirement applies to recipients in public housing .

nonexempt public housing residents must participate at least eight hours per month in community service or another activity .

for section 8 housing voucher recipients , public housing authorities participating in the moving to work ( mtw ) demonstration project are permitted to impose work requirements .

though mtw is called a demonstration , it was not designed to be evaluated .

there are numerous differences between the evaluated pre - 1996 experiments and snap , medicaid , and housing assistance that affect the applicability of the experiments' findings to these latter programs: broader populations .

snap , medicaid , and housing assistance programs aid a broader population than did afdc , as most recipients of afdc were single mothers .

in addition to general disadvantages such as low levels of education and work experience , single mothers faced a specific barrier of needing to find care for their young children .

snap , medicaid , and housing assistance serve a broader population of low - income individuals , such as married couples with and without children , noncustodial parents , and single men and women who are not parents .

some in these groups might also have specific barriers ( eg , the formerly incarcerated [who are often men] might have difficulty being hired because of their criminal record ) .

working low - income people .

afdc rules required the earnings of those who had them to be very low in order to come onto the rolls , and they limited the time that recipients with substantial earnings could remain on assistance .

thus , afdc generally served nonworking single parents .

snap , medicaid , and housing assistance serve lower - income individuals and families , but their income eligibility thresholds are higher than those for cash assistance .

thus , many of these programs serve individuals who are working , albeit at relatively low wages and sometimes with irregular and less than full - time work schedules .

different goals .

the goals of the evaluated pre - 1996 experiments involved moving nonworking afdc recipients into work .

programs such as snap , housing assistance , and medicaid have some recipients who do not work and are disconnected from the labor force , similar to afdc recipients .

however , as noted above , these programs also have recipients who are already working .

thus , the goals of work requirements and work programs for working recipients would differ from those of the evaluated programs that focused on nonworking recipients .

for example , a goal might be to increase wage rates or number of hours worked , in order to reduce assistance payments or raise incomes so the participant no longer qualifies for benefits .

additionally , the medicaid waivers are being granted with the goal of improving the health of the population covered by them , a different goal than connecting recipients to work .

different approaches to employment and education services .

among the snap , housing assistance , and medicaid programs , only snap has a funding mechanism for providing employment and educational services to its recipients .

housing and medicaid lack funding for such services .

under the trump administration's "community engagement" waiver initiative , medicaid funds can be used by states to enforce compliance with the work and community engagement requirement , but not for employment and training services themselves .

the welfare reform debates that culminated in the 1996 welfare reform law occurred simultaneously with a large number of studies fielded in the 1980s and early 1990s testing work requirements and employment and education services for adult recipients of cash assistance for needy families ( mostly single mothers ) .

the accumulated evidence showed that mandatory welfare - to - work programs — the combination of funded employment and education services with mandatory participation requirements — could achieve some limited policy goals , increase employment , and reduce welfare receipt .

it also showed a policy trade - off .

mandatory welfare - to - work programs alone did not increase incomes and reduce poverty .

however , programs that supplemented mandatory participation in a welfare - to - work program with continued aid for working parents sometimes increased incomes , though at a cost to the government .

as congress debates work requirements in snap , medicaid , and housing assistance , there is no large accumulated research base to draw from .

given the differences in populations , presence of those in the programs who are already working , goals , and funding structures for employment and education services , the findings of the pre - 1996 welfare - to - work experiments cannot be directly applied to the current debate .

the lack of a research base on the effectiveness of work requirements for snap recipients led to congress requiring pilot work programs in the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) .

that law authorized pilots in 10 states .

in march 2015 , the u.s. department of agriculture awarded grants to california , delaware , georgia , illinois , kansas , kentucky , mississippi , vermont , virginia , and washington .

these pilots were fully operational beginning in fy2017 .

the pilots will be evaluated using the rct method , but research findings are not yet available .

congress has proceeded with a 2018 farm bill ( h.r .

2 ) without these results .

in tying work requirements to benefit programs , congress might consider what goals can be achieved by such requirements , welfare - to - work programs , and / or broader labor market policies .

a key finding of the pre - 1996 welfare - to - work experiments was that it was work requirements and employment and education services combined with earnings supplements that both raised rates of employment and improved the economic outcomes of single mothers with children .

today , most earnings supplements are provided through the federal income tax code — the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) and the partially refundable child tax credit .

most of the benefits of the eitc and all of the benefits of the child tax credit go to families with children .

individuals and families without children , populations that are part of the focus of work requirements for snap , medicaid , and housing assistance recipients , qualify for only a small eitc .

other labor market policies could also be considered .

over time , wages have increased at the top of the income distribution but have stagnated for those at the bottom , and they have fallen for those with less educational attainment .

absent earnings supplements or other labor market policies , the stagnant or declining fortunes for a large share of the workforce will likely constrain the effectiveness of welfare - to - work initiatives in producing long - term impacts to improve employment and economic well - being of program participants .

