the federal government obligates hundreds of billions of dollars each year to procure goods and services .

federal procurement statutes and regulations establish largely uniform policies and procedures applicable to government contracts "to deliver on a timely basis the best value product or service to the [government] , while maintaining the public's trust and fulfilling public policy objectives. .

to meet these ends , federal agencies have a number of legal tools at their disposal to help ensure a contractor adequately performs a contract or , if warranted , to hold a contractor accountable for performance failures or misconduct .

these legal tools are intended to advance the transparency , fairness , and integrity of the procurement system and limit waste , fraud , and abuse .

as described in detail below , these tools include contractual remedies , contract bid and source selection criteria , as well as various noncontract - based legal powers , such as civil fraud enforcement and the authority to exclude contractors for a period of time from being eligible for future contracts through suspension or debarment proceedings .

this report analyzes a selection of the legal tools a procuring agency may use to hold contractors accountable .

the report first assesses contractual remedies that procuring agencies could utilize to ensure full and satisfactory performance of existing contracts .

next , the report discusses performance - related contract source selection criteria that agencies may , and often must , utilize when evaluating new contract bid proposals .

the report ends with a discussion of other legal tools — outside of contract law and the contract selection processes — that the government may employ to hold a contractor accountable .

contracting officers generally have wide discretion to draft contracts to protect the government's interest .

however , contracting officers are bound by governing procurement statutes , regulations , and executive orders regulating government contracts .

in many instances , the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) — the government - wide regulation that generally applies to acquisitions by federal executive branch agencies — requires that particular contracts incorporate specific standard contractual terms ( or slightly modified versions thereof , as applicable ) .

part 52 of the far , and in some cases individual agencies' supplements to the far , provide for dozens of standard terms agencies must include in their contracts .

many of these standard contract clauses are designed to protect the government's interests , such as by ensuring that goods and services are provided in the time , manner , and quality contemplated and in accordance with the procuring agency's programmatic objectives .

certain "mandatory contract clauses that express a significant or deeply ingrained strand of public procurement policy" — such as the right to terminate contracts for the government's convenience , discussed further below — are available to the federal government "by operation of law" even in the absence of express authorization .

other rights and remedies may be available to the government only if the relevant procurement contract expressly provides or incorporates such terms by reference .

when problems arise in the performance of a contract , the parties can address them through their contract rights .

contract disputes potentially can be reviewed and resolved by a federal court ( typically , the u.s. court of federal claims ) or a board of contract appeals in accordance with the contract disputes act .

the contract dispute process is outside the scope of this report .

the terms that a procuring agency incorporates into a particular contract — and , by extension , the rights and remedies at the agency's disposal — can vary considerably according to the type of contract the agency solicits .

the type of contract an agency chooses may depend on , among other factors , the types of goods or services sought ; the timeline by which the agency needs delivery or performance ; the objective and complexity of the acquisition ; the depth and breadth of the qualified contractor pool ; and the certainty with which costs can be predicted .

this report focuses on the two most common categories of government contracts: fixed - price and cost - reimbursement .

fixed - price contrac t. through a fixed - price contract , a procuring agency acquires a good or service for a specified price that is either firm , or , under certain circumstances , adjustable in accordance with conditions spelled out in the contract .

the contractor under a fixed - price contract generally assumes the risk of cost overruns .

as a result , the government typically prefers using fixed - price contracts to the extent that they are appropriate for the given circumstances .

when administering a fixed - price contract , the government's focus is generally on whether the acquired good or service comports with the contract's specifications and meets the agency's needs .

cost - reimbursement contract .

in contrast , through a cost - reimbursement contract , a procuring agency agrees to reimburse a contractor for specified allowed costs the contractor incurs , subject to a cap .

the payment structure of cost - reimbursement contracts subjects the government to a greater risk of wasteful spending than in fixed - price contracts .

an agency will typically use a cost - reimbursement contract when there are too many uncertainties regarding the cost , performance , or specifications for the procuring agency to utilize a fixed - price contract .

when overseeing the administration of a cost - reimbursement contract , the government generally focuses on "ensuring that the contractor expends funds to most effectively accomplish the government's objectives. .

table 1 details selected common contract types for each category ; the situations in which they are typically utilized ; and a selection of regulatory conditions imposed on their use .

what follows is an analysis of selected contractual rights and remedies that federal agencies may employ to obtain products and services that meet the quality , cost , and other specifications for which they contracted .

when selecting contractors , procuring agencies often must consider various contractor accountability issues , notably including the contractor's performance under other contracts , through ( 1 ) "responsibility determinations" to assess whether the contractor is capable of performing on the contract ; and ( 2 ) source selections under negotiated contracting .

 ( similarly , as is discussed in the next section of this report , procuring agencies also must ensure that a contractor is legally eligible to be awarded a federal contract. ) .

procuring agencies generally have considerable discretion in how they evaluate prospective contractors when conducting a selection process , as long as selection decisions are rationally based and comply with the law .

the far generally requires procuring agencies to compile and review information about potential contractors in the federal government's contractor performance assessment reporting system ( cpars ) .

these databases include the past performance information retrieval system ( ppirs ) , which is available only to authorized government personnel and the contractor in question , and the publicly available federal awardee performance and integrity information system ( fapiis ) .

in addition , agencies are required to compile and review information in a separate but linked government - run database called the system for award management ( sam ) exclusions .

this section of the report first analyzes far provisions requiring procuring agencies to evaluate prospective contractors in connection with ( 1 ) responsibility determinations and ( 2 ) the source selection process .

it then analyzes far provisions requiring agencies to document contractor performance - related matters in ppirs , fapiis , and sam exclusion while administering existing contracts .

the far also requires agencies to have policies and procedures in place to "suspend" and "debar" contractors — i.e. , to exclude , except under limited circumstances — from being eligible to receive new federal contracts for some length of time because of various criminal convictions , civil judgments , serious contract performance failures , or specified grounds .

these policies and procedures are designed to ensure that agencies award contracts to responsible contractors that are capable of successful performance .

procuring agencies may utilize suspension proceedings to exclude contractors temporarily during the course of investigations of , or legal proceedings associated with , contractor wrongdoing .

a suspension generally must end within 18 months , unless the government initiates civil or criminal proceedings against the contractor .

a debarment , in contrast , lasts for a specified period of time "commensurate with the seriousness of the cause ( s ) ," but generally no more than three years .

the government can suspend and / or debar a contractor based on , among other grounds , the contractor's: "commission of fraud or a criminal offense in connection with ( i ) obtaining , ( ii ) attempting to obtain , or ( iii ) performing a public contract or subcontract ; " "commission of embezzlement , theft , forgery , bribery , falsification or destruction of records , making false statements , tax evasion , violating federal criminal tax laws , or receiving stolen property ; " "commission of any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty that seriously and directly affects the present responsibility of a government contractor or subcontractor[] ; " or "[a]ny other cause of so serious or compelling a nature that it affects the present responsibility of [a government] contractor or subcontractor. .

while outside the scope of this report , the government can also exclude contractors from being eligible to receive government contracts pursuant to legal authorities other than the far .

for example , federal law generally prohibits federal agencies from entering into contracts with entities that have been convicted of certain violations of the clean water act and clean air act .

in addition to generally being excluded from acquiring new contracts , contractors that are suspended or debarred also are generally prohibited from being hired as subcontractors under government contracts .

the suspension or debarment of a contractor does not immediately result in the termination of existing contracts , however .

instead , a procuring agency may allow the performance of those contracts to continue unless and until it decides terminating the contract for default or convenience is warranted .

procuring agencies generally must provide contractors with notice of a suspension or proposed debarment and the opportunity for a hearing before a suspending or debarring official within the agency .

these procedural requirements are designed to satisfy the constitutional due process rights of contractors .

the notice must explain the grounds for the suspension and proposed debarment , the contractor's rights to dispute the suspension or proposed debarment , the process by which the agency will make a final decision , and the legal impact of the suspension or debarment .

if the contractor requests a hearing , the affected contractor may submit evidence , present witnesses , and examine the agency's witnesses .

after reviewing the administrative record , the suspending official must notify the contractor of her decision to amend , terminate , or keep in place the suspension or debarment .

alternatively , the contractor and procuring agency can negotiate an "administrative agreement" that resolves the issues that prompted the initiation of the suspension or debarment proceedings .

as previously mentioned , procuring agencies are required to file information about contractors that they suspend , debar , or otherwise determine to be ineligible to be awarded government contracts in sam exclusions .

the information must include: the contractor's name and address ; the agency that initiated the relevant action ; and the grounds for ineligibility .

to help ensure that excluded contractors are not awarded contracts , a procuring agency must check sam exclusions both when it receives proposals or opens bids , as well as just before awarding a contract .

another mechanism by which the federal government can hold contractors accountable is to enforce civil laws that make it unlawful to defraud the government .

three such laws frequently enforced against government contractors are the false claims act ; the anti - fraud provision of the contract dispute act ; and the program fraud civil remedies act .

while not exclusively applicable to contracting issues , the government can use these laws to hold government contractors accountable for acquiring , or attempting to acquire , government contracts through fraudulent means or submitting a false claim for payment to the government .

the remedies available to the government under each statute are not necessarily exclusive ; rather , under certain circumstances , contractors can be held liable under multiple laws .

these laws are discussed briefly below .

the false claims act ( fca ) prohibits seven types of acts .

of these seven , the violations that are of particular relevance to federal contractors are: " ( a ) knowingly present[ing] , or caus[ing] to be presented , a false or fraudulent claim for payment or approval ; [or] ( b ) knowingly mak[ing] , use[ing] or caus[ing] to be made or used , a false record or statement material to a false or fraudulent claim. .

these fraud provisions govern a wide variety of potential government contractor misconduct , such as submitting a claim for payment while falsely claiming to meet ( or failing to disclose a lack of compliance with ) a material contract or legal requirement in the submission of a claim for payment ; and inducing the government to enter into a contract based on "false statements or fraudulent conduct. .

liability under the fca is limited to " knowing " acts , which is defined to mean having "actual knowledge," being "deliberate[ly] ignorant of the truth" or "act[ing] in reckless disregard for the truth" ; however , liability does not require proving actual "intent to defraud. .

the fca broadly defines the term ' claim ' "to include 'any request or demand , whether under a contract or otherwise , for money or property which is made to a contractor , grantee , or other recipient if the united states government provides any portion of the money or property which is requested or demanded.' .

additionally , the false or fraudulent claims generally must be " material ," which the act defines as "having a natural tendency to influence , or be capable of influencing , the payment or receipt of money or property. .

violators of the fca can be subject to civil penalties of up to $10,000 ( adjusted for inflation ) , treble damages , and reasonable attorney's fees and other legal costs .

the attorney general can bring claims under the fca .

in addition , "relators" — private individuals acting in the government's name and on the government's behalf — can bring claims under the act through so - called qui tam claims .

the fca does not provide for an administrative process ; violations of section 3729 of the fca are enforced exclusively through the courts .

the contracts disputes act ( cda ) establishes judicial and administrative processes for the resolution of certain disputes that arise in the course of awarding and administering applicable government contracts .

the cda includes an anti - fraud provision intended to prevent contractors from "submi[tting] baseless claims [that] contribute [] to the so - called horsetrading theory where an amount beyond that which can be legitimately claimed is submitted merely as a negotiating tactic" in the course of attempting to resolve a contract dispute .

the cda provision bars contractors from submitting claims that are unsupportable or that are "attributable to a misrepresentation of fact or fraud" in an attempt to acquire a settlement with the government .

a "claim" under the cda is " ( 1 ) a written demand , ( 2 ) seeking , as a matter of right , ( 3 ) the payment of money in a sum certain. .

the cda defines "misrepresentation of fact" as "a false statement of substantive fact , or conduct that leads to a belief of a substantive fact material to proper understanding of the matter in hand , made with intent to deceive or mislead. .

in order to bring a successful claim under the cda's anti - fraud provision , the government must show that the contractor's claim was fraudulent and made with "an intent to deceive or mislead the government" based on the "preponderance of the evidence. .

contractors that are held liable under the cda's anti - fraud provision are liable for "an amount equal to the unsupported part of the claim plus all of the federal government's costs attributable to reviewing the unsupported part of the claim. .

the program fraud civil remedies act ( pfcra ) is another mechanism by which procuring agencies may hold contractors accountable for knowingly submitting "false , fictitious , or fraudulent" contract claims .

the fraudulent activities that pfcra bars are very similar to those barred by the fca .

the pfcra does not create any new civil fraud violations beyond those established by the fca except that contractors can be held liable under the pfcra for making false statements that are not tied to a claim .

instead , the pfcra provides an additional avenue to hold contractors accountable for fraud .

unlike the fca , which is exclusively judicially enforced , the pfcra provides an administrative process for enforcing fraudulent claims in addition to a judicial process .

also in contrast to the fca , the pfcra is limited to small claims of not more than $150,000 .

contractors that violate the pfcra can be subject to a civil penalty up to $5,000 ( adjusted for inflation ) , as well as an assessment equal to twice the amount of any fraudulent claim that was paid by the government .

procuring agency personnel may report suspected potential violations of the pfcra to the relevant agency's inspector general or other "investigating official. .

the investigating official may investigate allegations and , if warranted , issue a report with conclusions about violations to a separate and independent "reviewing official. .

the reviewing official , upon reviewing the report , may notify the attorney general of a potential referral of the matter along with an explanation of , among other things , evidence supporting the allegations and the estimated value of the alleged fraud .

upon the attorney general's approval , the reviewing official may then file a complaint with the contractor or seek to settle the issue with the procuring agency .

the contractor may request an administrative hearing , generally conducted in accordance with the administrative procedure act , before an administrative law judge or other "presiding officer. .

if , upon finding that the government met its burden of proof that the contractor , based on a preponderance of the evidence , violated the pfcra , then the presiding officer may issue an initial decision recommending the issuance of civil penalties and assessments against the contractor .

the contractor may appeal the presiding officer's initial decision to the head of the procuring agency .

if the contractor does not appeal the presiding officer's initial decision , that decision becomes final .

if the initial decision is appealed , the agency head may "affirm , reduce , reverse , compromise , remand , or settle any penalty or assessment. .

if the agency head determines that the contractor is liable , then the contractor may appeal her decision to a federal district court , which shall set aside the agency head's decision only if it is "unsupported by substantial evidence. .

