the jobs and investor confidence act ( s. 488 ) is a capital markets package consisting of 32 titles that have mostly already passed the house with bipartisan support as standalone bills .

originally a relatively narrow bill , the earlier version of s. 488 was referred to as the encouraging employee ownership act and was passed by the senate on september 11 , 2017 .

the original bill's content was incorporated into section 507 of s. 2155 , which was signed into law on may 24 , 2018 ( p.l .

115-174 ) .

a substitute amendment to s. 488 was passed by the house on july 17 , 2018 , in a 406-4 vote ( hereinafter , all discussion of s. 488 refers to the house - amended version of the bill ) .

the package has been referred to as jobs act 3.0 , following after the initial jumpstart our business startups act ( jobs act ; p.l .

112-106 ) in 2012 and the financial services provisions signed into law as part of the fixing america's surface transportation act ( p.l .

114-94 ) , which are referred to as jobs act 2.0 .

some of the provisions in s. 488 are part of a long - running debate about financial market regulation .

in response to the 2007-2008 financial crisis , congress passed the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ; p.l .

111-203 ) on july 21 , 2010 .

the dodd - frank act is generally regarded as a regulatory overhaul that broadly tightened the u.s. financial regulatory landscape .

since the dodd - frank act , there have been multiple attempts to provide regulatory relief through either repeals to sections of the dodd - frank act or new proposals .

two of these legislative attempts to provide regulatory relief are the financial choice act ( fca ; h.r .

10 ) and the economic growth , regulatory relief , and consumer protection act ( s. 2155 , p.l .

115-174 ) .

h.r .

10 is a wide - ranging financial reform bill that was passed by the house on june 8 , 2017 .

p.l .

115-174 is a narrower proposal that was passed by the senate on march 14 , 2018 , and then passed by the house and signed into law in may 2018 .

several of the provisions in h.r .

10 that were not included in p.l .

115-174 , many of which are related to capital markets , are included in s. 488 .

s. 488 passed the house with close to unanimous support .

in addition , many s. 488 provisions were included in a house - passed appropriations bill ( h.r .

6147 ) .

table a - 1 highlights these provisions .

although s. 488 is generally referred to as a capital markets package , it addresses various other topics ; for example , insurance and human trafficking financing ( see table a - 1 for a full list of the 32 titles ) .

s. 488 's capital markets provisions are largely focused on smaller companies' access to capital .

in addition , several of the titles are oriented toward studies , some of which include recommendations for regulatory action .

this report summarizes the 18 capital markets provisions in s. 488 , as amended and passed by the house .

capital markets , for purposes of this report , refer to the segments of the financial system under securities and exchange commission ( sec ) oversight and in which funding is raised through equity or debt securities .

the report divides the 18 provisions into four general categories: ( 1 ) expand investor access , ( 2 ) reduce compliance costs , ( 3 ) promote financial intermediation , and ( 4 ) increase investor protection .

these categories may not be mutually exclusive .

for example , the proposed changes to regulation crowdfunding ( see " title xxxii – crowdfunding amendments " section below ) could be interpreted as expanding investor access through the amendments to the sec registration threshold ; promoting financial intermediation through the use of pooled investment vehicles ; and increasing investor protection through the investment adviser registration requirements .

in such case , one primary category is chosen according to the provision's principal functions .

the expansion of investor access is one method to increase funding for issuers ( companies looking to raise money ) and generate additional investment opportunities for investors .

there are two types of securities offerings .

one type is called public offerings , which are available to all types of investors and have more rigorous disclosure requirements .

by contrast , securities offerings that are exempt from sec registration are referred to as private offerings and are mainly available to more sophisticated investors .

because public offerings are already accessible by all investors , the discussions of expanding investor access often revolve around private offerings .

for purposes of investor protection , private offerings are often limited in the kinds of investors to which they can be offered .

two common approaches to expanding capital access are to expand the investor pool or enhance investor communication for private offerings .

some of the s. 488 provisions propose to expand ( 1 ) the type of eligible investors by widening the accredited investor definition , as seen in titles iv and x ; and ( 2 ) the communication to eligible investors by allowing broader outreach , as seen in title i .

the number of publicly listed u.s. companies has declined by half over the past two decades , and small - to medium - sized companies are said to have more difficulty accessing capital relative to larger companies .

numerous factors contributed to this trend , but one of the most debated factors is the compliance costs for companies to go and stay public .

some believe the compliance costs associated with capital markets regulation could potentially outweigh the benefits of being a public company and are disproportionately burdensome for small and medium - sized businesses .

the compliance costs include external auditing , legal fees , and financial reporting fees .

according to the ipo task force , public companies in 2011 faced a onetime initial regulatory compliance cost of around $2.5 million and annual ongoing compliance costs of $1.5 million .

the key benefits of compliance often include investor protection and risk mitigation .

in response to these concerns , certain s. 488 provisions aim to reduce ( titles v and ix ) or better understand ( titles xxii and xxxi ) compliance costs for publicly listed companies .

capital markets consist of numerous players .

between investors and company issuers , who are the end contributors and recipients of funding , there are financial intermediaries that serve to channel funding or execute trades .

financial intermediaries generally include brokers , dealers , exchanges , investment companies , investment advisors , research firms , and rating agencies , to name a few .

the most notable financial intermediation trend during the past 70 years has been the shifting of investment activities from individuals to delegated fund management firms .

whereas investors used to buy and sell stocks and bonds directly , they now predominately invest through pooled investment vehicles like mutual funds , exchange - traded funds , and private equity funds .

some provisions in s. 488 , for example , titles xxvi and xxxii , promote the use of pooled investment vehicles to channel funding from investors to issuers .

in addition , the trading of small company stocks is widely regarded as less efficient than the trading of larger companies' stocks .

sec research shows that smaller company stocks have less research coverage , less market quality , and lower liquidity , which adversely affect the stock performance and pricing .

some s. 488 provisions specifically address these challenges .

for example , title xxiv would promote investment research of small issuers , and title xx would create a designated new marketplace , called venture exchange , for smaller issuer stock trading .

the policy debate about capital markets often revolves around the perceived tradeoffs between expanding capital formation and protecting investors , two of the sec's core missions .

expanding capital formation allows for greater access of investment opportunities for more investors and increased funding for businesses .

but expanded capital formation also involves investor protection challenges , including the challenge to ensure that investors , such as less sophisticated retail investors , comprehend the risks they are bearing .

for example , proposals that reduce the regulatory compliance that a securities issuer or a market intermediary must comply with can decrease these market participants' compliance costs and increase the speed and efficiency of capital formation .

however , this reduced regulation may also expose investors to additional risks .

in addition , investor protection can help contribute to healthy and efficient capital markets because investors may be more willing to provide capital , and even at a lower cost , if they have faith in the integrity and transparency of the underlying markets .

there are multiple titles in s. 488 that would create investor protection safeguards as part of a capital formation oriented provision .

for example , title xx aims to facilitate trading activities , but it would also direct the sec to issue disclosure requirements .

these requirements could help investors understand the distinct features and risks of certain investment products and activities .

there are also s. 488 provisions that center on investor protection .

for example , titles xxvii and xxix would provide protection to general investors against corporate insiders and title xxx would provide targeted protection to senior investors who are victims of financial exploitation .

title xxvii would direct the sec to study whether rule 10b5-1 , a rule that allows corporate insiders to trade for legitimate reasons without running afoul of insider trading inquiries , should be amended .

the sec would issue the report no later than a year following the enactment of the act .

it would also carry out related rulemaking consistent with the study results .

federal law bans insider trading , which is the buying or selling of a security on the basis of material nonpublic information that provides unfair advantages to corporate insiders over other investors .

but public company executives often receive compensation in the form of company stock or stock options .

insider trading restrictions could pose challenges for them to legitimately liquidate stocks .

the sec enacted rule 10b5-1 in 2000 to allow executives to make prearranged trades at a time when they are not in possession of insider information to avoid insider trading inquiries .

yet studies repeatedly show that the rule may have been abused , evidenced by corporate insider trades within 10b5-1 plans that earned abnormal returns .

for example , a wall street journal investigation found 1,418 executives , including some with 10b5-1 plans , had made beneﬁcial trades .

cbo estimates that implementing a similar bill ( h.r .

6320 ) would cost the sec around $1 million .

title xxix would amend the federal securities law so public companies who have issued multi - class shares of stock would be required to provide more comprehensive disclosure on the stock holdings of corporate officials and other individuals with significant holdings of company stock .

common equity shares of publicly traded companies are typically composed of one share class wherein anyone who holds a share has voting rights equal to that of other shareholders .

voting rights typically give shareholders the right to vote on certain matters of corporate policy , including the right to vote in elections for a company's board of directors and on proposals that would significantly alter corporate goals , or that would result in major structural changes .

by contrast , the issuance of multi - class common equity shares typically involves ( 1 ) one share class with limited voting power being offered to the public at large , and ( 2 ) another share class with relatively more voting power that is often held by the company's founders or current executives .

having superior voting shares may give their holders majority control of a firm .

the 1980s saw a proliferation in the adaption of multi - class share structures as increasingly competitive major stock exchanges relaxed previous listing restrictions on multi - class stock .

the last decade or so has seen renewed interest in the issuance of multi - class shares with the number of such companies , including google and facebook , reportedly significantly expanding .

in march 2017 , the sec investor advisory committee , a sec - based committee of investor - related stakeholders , which makes policy recommendations to the agency , criticized multi - class share structures for resulting in corporate insiders' voting power outstripping their actual ownership interest .

among other things , it recommended that companies with multi - class shares clearly disclose the numerical relationship that exists between stock ownership and the attendant voting rights .

similar concerns over multi - class shares undermining corporate governance have been raised by others , including the council of investors , an institutional investor trade group .

although criticized from a corporate governance standpoint , multi - class shares may have a number of potential benefits for some , including preventing investors from coercing management into decisions that might enhance short - term stock performance at the expense of longer - term growth .

title xxix would require the sec to issue rules amending the securities exchange act of 1934 that would require issuers with multi - class share structures to report the following data regarding their corporate executives and the holders of more than 5% of the company's voting power: ( 1 ) their percentage of the total number of outstanding securities entitled to vote ; and ( 2 ) their percentage of the aggregate voting power of all classes of securities entitled to vote .

cbo estimates that the gross cost of sec implementation of a similar bill ( h.r .

6322 ) would be about $1 million .

title xxx would direct the sec to establish a senior investor taskforce to identify challenges and potential regulatory solutions for senior investors over the age of 65 .

the provision directs the taskforce to coordinate and consult with other internal and external authorities and report every two years on senior investor - related trends , issues , and best practices , among other topics .

the taskforce would terminate at the end of the 10-year period starting from the enactment of the act , with the option of reestablishment by the sec chairman .

the provision also would direct the government accountability office ( gao ) to study the financial exploitation of senior citizens and issue a report within one year of enactment of the act .

senior citizens aged 65 and over are projected to reach 18% of the u.s. population by 2030 .

this population holds significant amounts of investable assets and is increasingly subject to financial scams and abuses .

more than 6.8 million senior citizens , or 17% of americans aged 65 or older , have reportedly fallen victims of financial exploitation .

in addition , the senior financial exploitation cases are vastly under reported ; for example , only one in 44 cases were said to ever have been reported .

cbo estimates that implementing a similar bill ( h.r .

6323 ) would cost the sec $7 million over the 2019-2023 period and less than $500,000 for gao .

as discussed in the introduction , several provisions in s. 488 were included in h.r .

10 , the financial services and general government appropriations bill ( h.r .

6147 ) , and stand - alone legislation , as shown in table a - 1 .

