i n order to safeguard "the complete independence of the courts of justice," article iii of the u.s. constitution provides that "the judges , both of the supreme and inferior courts" of the united states , "shall hold their offices during good behaviour" and receive a salary that "shall not be diminished during their continuance in office. .

by granting u.s. supreme court justices , judges of the u.s. courts of appeals and u.s. district courts , and other such "article iii" judges a guaranteed salary and "the practical equivalent of life tenure," the founders sought to insulate the federal courts from political pressures that might influence judges to favor or disfavor certain litigants instead of neutrally applying the law to the facts of a particular case .

because article iii judges ordinarily hold their positions for life , and because federal judges can decide issues of great legal and political significance , the decision whether or not to elevate any particular judicial candidate to the federal bench can be momentous .

the u.s. constitution empowers the president to nominate candidates for article iii judgeships , but also vests the senate with the role of providing "advice" and affording or withholding "consent" with respect to the president's nominees .

to carry out this "advice and consent" role , the senate typically holds a hearing at which members of the senate judiciary committee question the nominee .

after conducting this hearing , the senate generally either "consents" to the nomination by voting in favor of the nominee's confirmation or instead rejects the nominee .

ideally , "the questioning of nominees at confirmation hearings enables [s]enators to obtain useful and indeed necessary information about nominees. .

to that end , senators commonly ask questions that are intended to enable the senate "to evaluate not only the nominees' qualifications , but also their beliefs and probable voting patterns on the court. .

such questions frequently include inquiries "about specific cases , judicial philosophy , and attitudes on issues that are likely to come before the court. .

however , judicial nominees have often refused to answer certain questions at their confirmation hearings — or have volunteered only perfunctory responses — claiming that fully answering certain questions could violate various ethical norms governing judges and judicial candidates or impair the independence or fairness of the federal judiciary .

to name several notable examples , then - judge ruth bader ginsburg stated during her supreme court confirmation hearing she could offer "no hints , no forecasts , [and] no previews" of how she might rule on questions that might come before the court .

similarly , then - judge antonin scalia refused to state his opinion on any prior supreme court decisions , declining even to discuss marbury v. madison , the foundational case establishing the power of courts to review laws under the constitution .

some commentators and members alike have expressed frustration regarding nominees' reticence to reveal their jurisprudential views during their confirmation hearings .

while by no means the consensus view , some argue that if prospective judges refuse to divulge how they will rule on controversial legal issues once they reach the bench , then senators cannot cast a fully informed vote when deciding whether to confirm or reject the nominee .

at the same time , however , even though many wish that federal judicial nominees were more forthcoming during their confirmation hearings , there is nonetheless "relative agreement among nominees , senators , and commentators" alike that "there must be some limitations on a potential justice's answers" during the confirmation process .

for instance , most commentators agree that a nominee should not make "[e]xplicit or implicit promises" to rule in a certain way in future cases during his or her confirmation hearing , as "such promises if sought and given would .

 .

 .

compromise judicial independence and due process of law" by depriving litigants of their constitutional entitlement to a fair adjudicator .

these commentators further maintain that the integrity of the federal judiciary would suffer if a judge's responses to senators suggested that his "confirmation ha[d] been purchased through the pledge of future conduct in office. .

in response to concerns regarding the proper conduct of judges and judicial candidates , judges and bar associations have promulgated a variety of "canons" of judicial ethics — that is , self - enforcing , aspirational norms intended to promote the independence and integrity of the judiciary .

among other things , these canons provide nominees with general guidance regarding which sorts of statements by judges and judicial candidates are appropriate or inappropriate .

as discussed below , most commentators agree that the canons discourage federal judicial nominees from pledging to reach predetermined results in future cases .

however , scholars , nominees , and members of congress have not reached a consensus regarding the extent to which ethical canons otherwise constrain a nominee from answering other types of questions at his or her senate confirmation hearing .

beyond the canons of judicial ethics , historical practice reveals the constitutional norms that have influenced what questions a federal judicial nominee should or must refuse to answer .

here , too , however , different nominees have reached different conclusions regarding which types of responses are improper .

as a result , the boundaries between proper responses and improper responses remain unsettled .

this report examines the relevant considerations with respect to the questioning of judicial nominees .

the report begins by discussing applicable canons of judicial ethics that may discourage judicial nominees from answering certain questions posed by members of congress .

the report then proceeds to discuss which types of questions prior federal judicial nominees have answered or declined to answer , focusing on nominees for the u.s. supreme court .

the report concludes with some takeaways for members .

the federal judiciary , state courts , state legislatures , and various bar associations have all developed codes of ethical standards intended to guide the conduct of judges and judicial candidates .

as explained below , many of these codes contain provisions that could discourage nominees for federal judgeships from answering certain types of questions during their confirmation hearings .

each of the ethical rules discussed below purport to constrain what a federal judicial nominee may permissibly say during the confirmation process ; none of the ethical rules , however , affirmatively obligate nominees to respond to particular questions .

moreover , the applicable ethical rules purport only to prohibit the nominee from answering certain questions ; they do not explicitly purport to prohibit members from asking those questions .

as the following sections explain , however , canons of judicial ethics are generally self - enforcing , with the result that there is virtually no case law and only minimal commentary analyzing how these codes of judicial conduct apply in the specific context of confirmation hearings for appointed federal judges .

although it is possible to draw analogies from other contexts — especially statements and promises that candidates for elected judgeships at the state level make during their campaigns — neither the canons nor the advisory opinions interpreting them definitively address how the various ethical rules apply in the specific context of a confirmation hearing before the u.s. senate .

further complicating matters is the fact that not all of the canons discussed below apply equally to all nominees .

perhaps for these reasons , neither judicial nominees nor members of congress nor commentators have reached a consensus regarding the precise range of responses that are permissible under the relevant canons of judicial conduct .

some nominees have suggested that ethical considerations prohibit judicial candidates from making virtually any statement about any legal issue that could conceivably come before the federal judiciary .

some scholars , by contrast , take the opposite position — that the applicable canons "impose[] surprisingly few restraints on the scope of a nominee's responses. .

according to this view , "a nominee's answers before the senate judiciary committee[] will violate" the applicable codes of judicial conduct "only where they evince a settled intention to decide certain cases in a certain manner," such as "promising to reach a predetermined outcome" in a future case "irrespective of the arguments of the parties or the discrete facts of the presented case. .

still other commentators take the intermediate position that the applicable ethical rules grant judicial nominees the flexibility to "make a personal judgment about how to fulfill the ethical requirements of the role of a judge in responding to questions posed by senators during the confirmation process" — and , thus , a personal judgment about which types of responses would or would not run afoul of ethical norms .

beyond the need to comply with specific ethical norms , another reason that some nominees may avoid answering certain questions during their confirmation hearings is the need to refrain from making public statements that would mandate their disqualification from future cases .

several federal statutes , as well as several canons of judicial conduct , require federal judges to recuse themselves from adjudicating particular cases under specified circumstances .

of particular relevance here , 28 u.s.c .

§ 455 ( a ) — with limited exceptions — affirmatively requires "any justice , judge , or magistrate judge of the united states" to "disqualify himself in any proceeding in which his impartiality might reasonably be questioned. .

as explained below , courts have concluded that a judge's extrajudicial statements or comments can sometimes mandate that judge's disqualification from particular cases pursuant to section 455 ( a ) .

the "need to avoid frequent disqualification" — and , by extension , a judicial nominee's need to avoid making public statements that would warrant his or her recusal in future cases — is arguably particularly pressing "in the case of supreme court justices. .

because "the supreme court is the ultimate tribunal on matters that are frequently of urgent public importance," some have argued that "[t]he nation is entitled , where possible , to decisions that are made by a full court. .

unlike in the lower courts , where a district or circuit judge from the same court may step in to take the place of a disqualified judge , neither retired justices of the supreme court nor lower court judges may hear a case in a recused justice's stead .

thus , the disqualification of a supreme court justice from a particular case increases the likelihood that the court will be evenly divided and thereby unable to create binding precedent for future cases .

"the standard for disqualification under § 455 ( a ) is an objective one .

the question is whether a reasonable and informed observer would question the judge's impartiality" as a result of the judge's conduct .

thus , "[t]he judge does not have to be subjectively biased or prejudiced" to mandate disqualification under section 455 ( a ) , "so long as he appears to be so. .

"[d]isqualification from the judge's hearing any further proceedings in the case" is "mandatory for conduct that calls a judge's impartiality into question. .

significantly , section 455 ( a ) "is not intended to give litigants a veto power over sitting judges , or a vehicle for obtaining a judge of their choice. .

unjustified recusals "contravene public policy by unduly delaying proceedings , increasing the workload of other judges , and fostering impermissible judge - shopping. .

as a consequence , in order to avoid undesirable and unwarranted recusals , courts "assume the impartiality of a sitting judge and 'the party seeking disqualification bears the substantial burden of proving otherwise.' .

section 455 is generally "intended to be self - enforcing , meaning that the recusal issue is supposed to be raised first by the judge and not the parties. .

nevertheless , section 455's "standards are not completely self - policing," as "a party [to the litigation] certainly may file a motion" to disqualify a judge if appropriate , and "a federal trial judge's refusal to disqualify himself" is subject to appellate review .

however , a federal appellate court will generally overturn a district court judge's decision not to recuse himself only if that "decision was not reasonable and [wa]s unsupported by the record. .

section 455 ( a ) is similar to the code of conduct discussed above to the extent that both strive to promote impartiality in the federal judiciary .

nonetheless , courts have recognized "that the code of judicial conduct does not overlap perfectly with § 455 ( a ) : it is possible to violate the code without creating an appearance of partiality ; likewise , it is possible for a judge to comply with the code yet still be required to recuse herself. .

thus , when assessing whether a federal judge's public statement or comment mandates his or her recusal from a case , courts have considered — but have not treated as dispositive — whether the statement in question violates canon 3 ( a ) ( 6 ) of the code of conduct .

as some courts have observed , however , there is "little guidance on when public comments" made outside the context of a hearing or bench ruling "create an appearance of partiality for which § 455 ( a ) recusal is the appropriate remedy. .

in particular , there are very few cases analyzing whether a judge's statement in the confirmation context can mandate that judge's disqualification from particular cases once that judge reaches the bench .

instead , the most common scenario in which a judge's public comments disqualify that judge from adjudicating a case is when the judge makes statements to the media about a case over which he or she is presently presiding .

such situations are only minimally illuminating , however , as a judge who volunteers statements to the media about a case over which he is actively presiding would seem to pose a materially greater risk to judicial integrity than a nominee who simply answers questions in the abstract regarding his or her jurisprudential views during a senate confirmation hearing .

in re african - american slave descendants litigation is one of the few section 455 ( a ) cases that directly discuss when , if ever , a federal judge must disqualify himself or herself on the basis of statements he or she made during the judicial confirmation process .

the plaintiffs in african - american slave descendants moved to recuse the district judge assigned to the case , claiming that certain "statements [the judge] made to the united states senate judiciary committee during [his] judicial confirmation" reflected "bias against either the [p]laintiffs or their lawsuit. .

critically , however , the challenged statements "merely discussed [the nominee's] general legal views" on issues like "judicial restraint and the constitutional doctrine of separation of powers. .

the district judge therefore reasoned that his prior comments were "not so case - specific that a reasonable person would believe that they would predetermine his decision in [the plaintiffs' case] some two decades later. .

the court thus determined that the plaintiffs had failed to "proffer[] any valid reasons for recusal based on [the judge's] statements made in [a] questionnaire submitted to the united states senate during his judicial confirmation. .

under different circumstances , however , historical practice supports the notion that a judge's prior public comments about disputed and controversial legal issues may warrant that judge's recusal from a future case .

in 2003 , for instance , justice scalia "gave a public speech .

 .

 .

in which he spoke critically of an interpretation of the establishment clause that would disallow the 'under god' phrase to remain in the pledge of allegiance. .

when the supreme court later granted certiorari to decide a case presenting exactly that issue , justice scalia "announced that he would not sit on the case. .

although justice scalia "did not explain why he would not participate" in the case , commentators have almost uniformly surmised that justice scalia determined that his prior public comments mandated his recusal .

the "distinction between a federal judge's expression of personal philosophy .

 .

 .

and his expression of an opinion on some facet of a particular case which is before him" can potentially explain why recusal was warranted in the pledge of allegiance case but not in african - american slave descendants .

several judges have suggested that non - case - specific comments about jurisprudential philosophy are less likely to mandate recusal in future cases than questions about specific cases or issues that the judge may be called upon to adjudicate in the future .

as a result , federal judicial nominees may be more inclined to answer general questions about their legal views than case - specific questions they may need to adjudicate if the senate ultimately confirms them .

as explained above , not only are the rules governing judicial ethics largely self - enforcing , they do not always provide clear answers regarding which types of conduct are permissible or impermissible .

as a result , judges and judicial candidates often must decide for themselves whether various actions — including answering questions at a confirmation hearing — violate ethical standards .

judicial nominees developing their own standard for responding to senators' questions may look to historical practice for guidance , customs that are informed by both ethical and constitutional considerations .

more generally , historical practice can be an important resource for defining constitutional norms , particularly in interpreting the "scope and exercise" of the "respective powers" of the three branches of government .

for instance , during the hearing on whether to confirm then - associate justice william rehnquist to the position of chief justice , the nominee initially declined to respond to a question from senator arlen specter asking whether he thought that congress could strip the supreme court of the ability to hear constitutional challenges .

senator specter pressed the issue , stating that he believed this was an appropriate question on a fundamental issue .

justice rehnquist responded by saying that he thought that justice sandra day o'connor , in her own confirmation hearings , "was asked similar questions" and "took much the same position. .

the senator stated that he did not believe this was true .

the next day , justice rehnquist reversed course , stating that while he continued to "have considerable reservations about" answering the question , he would "try to give" an answer in light of the fact that "one of [his] colleagues," justice o'connor , "ha[d] felt that [it] was proper" to respond to such questions .

the general standard that many nominees invoke when responding to senate questioning has come to be known as the "ginsburg rule. .

during then - judge ruth bader ginsburg's confirmation hearing , she stated that she could offer "no hints , no forecasts , [and] no previews" of how she might rule on questions that would come before the supreme court .

in her opening statement , she warned senators that because i am and hope to continue to be a judge , it would be wrong for me to say or to preview in this legislative chamber how i would cast my vote on questions the supreme court may be called upon to decide .

were i to rehearse here what i would say and how i would reason on such questions , i would act injudiciously .

judges in our system are bound to decide concrete cases , not abstract issues .

each case comes to court based on particular facts and its decision should turn on those facts and the governing law , stated and explained in light of the particular arguments the parties or their representatives present .

a judge sworn to decide impartially can offer no forecasts , no hints , for that would show not only disregard for the specifics of the particular case , it would display disdain for the entire judicial process .

although the refusal to stake out a position on matters that are likely to come before the court has become known as the ginsburg rule , the principle precedes justice ginsburg's hearing .

indeed , according to one recent study , the three supreme court nominees who most frequently "refuse[d] to answer a question on the ground that answering would create the reality or appear of bias , would interfere with judicial independence , or would be inappropriate for some other , similar reason," all predate justice ginsburg's hearing .

this section of the report examines nominations to the supreme court and describes the norms that have developed surrounding senatorial questioning and nominees' responses .

this review focuses on supreme court confirmation hearings rather than lower courts , because supreme court nominations have traditionally involved a more comprehensive examination of the nominee .

this section begins by briefly reviewing the development of the modern judicial confirmation hearing , and then discusses the general constitutional concerns underlying the exchanges between senators and judicial nominees .

finally , it explores trends in the types of questions that nominees are willing to answer .

in considering this final issue , however , it is important to keep in mind that due to the wide variety of senatorial questioning and the inherently personal nature of a candidate's decision to answer a particular question , there will almost always be exceptions to the general tendencies described below .

in sum , the applicable codes of judicial conduct and historical practice provide some guidance regarding what sorts of questions a nominee may permissibly answer during his confirmation hearing .

scholars , nominees , and even members of congress generally agree that under ethical rules as well as norms like the ginsburg rule a nominee should refrain from pledging to uphold or overturn particular precedents or to decide cases in certain ways .

nominees likely need to avoid making statements that could mandate their recusal from future cases under the federal judicial disqualification statute or under applicable canons of judicial ethics .

beyond that , however , the boundaries between permissible and impermissible responses are murky — and still contested during confirmation hearings .

historical practice suggests that nominees will not only avoid clear commitments to resolve future cases in certain ways , but in many circumstances , will avoid even giving "hints" about how they may view potential disputes .

general questions relating to the nominee's jurisprudential philosophy are more likely to elicit forthcoming responses than specific questions about how the nominee intends to rule in particular categories of cases .

however , nominees have been more likely to speak about particular legal issues if they have previously commented on that issue , such as in judicial opinions or extra - judicial statements .

ultimately , however , there are few available remedies when a nominee refuses to answer a particular question .

although a senator may vote against a nominee who is not sufficiently forthcoming , as a matter of historical practice the senate has rarely viewed lack of candor during confirmation hearings as disqualifying , and it does not appear that the senate has ever rejected a supreme court nominee solely on the basis of evasiveness .

