the nexus of robotics and autonomous systems ( ras ) and artificial intelligence ( ai ) has the potential to change the nature of warfare .

ras offers the possibility of a wide range of platforms — not just weapon systems — that can perform "dull , dangerous , and dirty" tasks — potentially reducing the risks to soldiers and marines .

regarding ai , one report suggests one of the promises of ai in the military that seems to guarantee its adoption is its broad applicability .

ai can be used to increase effectiveness and efficiency for more than just combat operations .

ai can improve supply lines , enhance the training of new soldiers , and increase the effectiveness and efficiency of intelligence gathering and processing .

but their effectiveness in combat operations seems especially promising .

ai is not a wholly revolutionary idea to be applied to the military domain , and it is merely the next logical step in the digitization and mechanization of the modern battlefield .

as a stated imperative in the national defense strategy , the department of defense ( dod ) and the services are pursuing ras and ai for a wide variety of applications .

aside from the programmatic and budgetary considerations for congress , another key aspect of these technologies that may merit consideration by congress is articulated in the following passage from a u.s. air force document: authorizing a machine to make lethal combat decisions is contingent on political and military leaders resolving legal and ethical questions .

these include the appropriateness of machines having this ability , under what circumstances should it be employed , where responsibility for mistakes lies , and what limitations should be placed on the autonomy of such systems... .

ethical discussions and policy decisions must take place in the near term in order to guide the development of future [unmanned aircraft systems] capabilities , rather than allowing the development to take its own path apart from this critical guidance .

apart from the u.s. military's pursuit of ras and ai , there has been a proliferation of ras and ai internationally , ranging from foreign militaries , to violent nonstate groups to criminal organizations .

these technologies have already been used to a limited degree against u.s. military forces .

how the united states will address further foreign advances in these realms may be of interest to congress .

much has been written about how ras and ai have affected society and , in particular , the workplace .

a comprehensive 2017 study by the international bar association's ( iba ) global employment institute offers some interesting insights on both society and the workplace: modern information technologies and the advent of machines powered by artificial intelligence ( ai ) have already strongly influenced the world of work in the 21 st century .

computers , algorithms and software simplify everyday tasks , and it is impossible to imagine how most of our life could be managed without them .

however , is it also impossible to imagine how most process steps could be managed without human force ? .

the information economy characterized by exponential growth replaces the mass production industry based on economy of scales .

when we transfer the experience of the past to the future , disturbing questions arise: what will the future world of work look like and how long will it take to get there ? .

will the future world of work be a world where humans spend less time earning their livelihood ? .

alternatively , are mass unemployment , mass poverty and social distortions also a possible scenario for the new world , a world where robots , intelligent systems and algorithms play an increasingly central role ? .

what is the future role of a legal framework that is mainly based on a 20 th century industry setting ? .

what is already clear and certain is that new technical developments will have a fundamental impact on the global labor market within the next few years , not just on industrial jobs but on the core of human tasks in the service sector that are considered 'untouchable. .

economic structures , working relationships , job profiles and well - established working time and remuneration models will undergo major changes .

in addition to companies , employees and societies , education systems and legislators are also facing the task of meeting the new challenges resulting from constantly advancing technology .

legislators are already lagging behind and the gap between reality and legal framework is growing .

the study further suggests that because of ras and ai , society has entered a "fourth industrial revolution," described as [t]he technical integration of cyber physical systems ( cps ) into production and logistics and the use of the 'internet of things' ( connection between everyday objects ) and services in ( industrial ) processes — including the consequences for a new creation of value , business models as well as downstream services and work organization .

cps refers to the network connections between humans , machines , products , objects and ict ( information and communication technology ) systems .

within the next five years , it is expected that over 50 billion connected machines will exist throughout the world .

the introduction of ai in the service sector distinguishes the fourth industrial revolution from the third .

the analysis also provides examples of fourth industrial revolution robotics and artificial intelligence: well - known examples from the field of robotics and ai are the so - called 'smart factories' , driverless cars , delivery drones or 3d printers , which , based on an individual template , can produce highly complex things without changes in the production process or human action in any form being necessary .

well - known service models are , for example , networking platforms like facebook or amazon mechanical turk , the economy - on - demand providers uber and airbnb , or sharing services , such as car sharing , spotify and netflix .

studies show that merely due to sharing services the turnover of the sector will grow twentyfold within the next ten years .

if , as some suggest , society is in a "fourth industrial revolution" what are the implications for the u.s. military as a whole and , in particular , u.s. ground forces , namely the army and marine corps ? .

the u.s. 2018 national defense strategy of the united states of america , in describing dod's strategic approach , states the department will invest broadly in military application of autonomy , artificial intelligence , and machine learning , including rapid application of commercial breakthroughs , to gain competitive military advantages .

in this regard , the army and marines are directed to pursue ras and ai in support of the national defense strategy , but there are also more practical reasons why the army and marines might emphasize the development of ras and ai .

some of these reasons include the following .

although the future is unpredictable , it is a reasonable assumption that selected ras and ai advances in the private sector such as logistics , data analysis , and education and training will be adopted by militaries to enhance their institutional and operational effectiveness .

some of the potential implications of ras and ai for u.s. ground forces include the following .

other nations have military ras and ai aspirations .

recognizing the importance of these technologies , in 2017 the chinese government reportedly stated its goal of being the world's premier artificial intelligence innovation center by 2030 , with russian president vladimir putin stating , "whoever becomes the leader in this sphere [ai] will become ruler of the world. .

one analyst notes armed robots are also proliferating on the ground and at sea .

south korea has deployed a robot sentry gun to its border with north korea .

israel has sent an armed robotic ground vehicle , the guardium , on patrol near the gaza border .

russia is building an array of ground combat robots and has plans for a robot tank .

even the shiite militias in iraq have gotten in on the game , fielding an armed ground robot in 2015 .

these technologies are not the exclusive purview of nations or paramilitary groups .

one report notes in 2017 a criminal group used a swarm of small unmanned aerial vehicles against a fbi hostage rescue team's observation post in an attempt to force them from their hidden position .

the following sections provide a brief illustrative description of selected non - u.s. ras and ai efforts .

for the selected countries , the efforts discussed are only examples and might not constitute that nation's entire military ras / ai program .

army and marine ras and ai efforts are governed by various policies and managed by a number of different organizations .

the following sections provide an overview of selected authorities and managing organizations .

a fully manned , capable and well - trained workforce is a key component of military readiness .

the integration of ras and ai into military units raises a number of personnel - related issues that may be of interest to congress .

the legal and ethical debate over the development and deployment of autonomous weapons systems largely concerns technology that does not currently exist — mobile robotic weapons systems capable of selecting and attacking targets without human intervention .

while some argue that such weapons can and should be developed and fielded if they meet the requirements of the international law of armed conflict ( loac , also known as international humanitarian law , or ihl ) for lawful weapons — described more fully below — others view the lack of human participation in the decision to take a human life to make such systems inherently unlawful or unethical .

opponents of fully autonomous weapons systems urge the adoption of an international treaty banning such weapons or at least providing a legal framework to ensure that such weapons are subject to meaningful human control .

others advocate a moratorium on developing such weapons until advances in technology enable the weapons to comply with loac .

proponents of autonomous weapons systems argue that the possibility that such systems may enhance compliance with loac could make their use more ethical than fighting wars without them .

they recommend rigorous testing and review of proposed weapons under the existing article 36 legal review process .

"article 36 review" refers to the obligation of states to evaluate new or modified weapons to ensure they do not violate loac .

the obligation stems from article 36 of additional protocol i ( api ) .

congress has an active and ongoing interest in ras and ai .

in its september 2018 report titled "rise of the machines: artificial intelligence and its growing impact on u.s. policy," the house subcommittee on information technology notes the loss of american leadership in ai could also pose a risk to ensuring any potential use of ai in weapons systems by nation - states comports with international humanitarian laws .

in general , authoritarian regimes like russia and china have not been focused on the ethical implications of ai in warfare , and will likely not have guidelines against more bellicose uses of ai , such as in autonomous weapons systems .

as congress continues policy debates on ras and ai , potential considerations could include , but are not limited to , the following .

as the united states pursues military ras and ai applications and systems , an examination of foreign military ras and ai efforts and their potential impact on u.s. ground forces could be of benefit to policymakers .

one report notes the emphasis on armed robots underscores the difference between u.s. concepts of operations , in which unmanned ground systems largely support intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( isr ) and augment warfighters' capabilities , while the russian military contemplates small to large unmanned ground vehicles ( ugvs ) doing the actual fighting in the near future alongside or ahead of the human fighting force .

it has been suggested that military ras and ai have the potential to change the very nature of war .

at the strategic level , this could affect how the u.s. organizes ground forces , how it fights , and what types of major weapon systems it will need .

at the operational and tactical levels , enemy ras and ai capabilities could dictate specific weapon systems design , the development of new types of units to address enemy ras and ai , and how brigade to squad level units conduct tactical operations .

while the dod and the services emphasizes the development of ras and ai for the u.s. military , it might be considered prudent to have a full understanding of foreign military ras and ai efforts to help guide u.s. efforts and possibly preclude strategic or tactical ras and ai "surprises" posed by foreign militaries or nonstate groups .

regarding fully autonomous weapon systems , one report notes some of the most prominent leaders in these fields are publicly warning about the dangers in an unconstrained environment .

military operations enabled by these technologies , and especially by artificial intelligence , may unfold so quickly that effective responses require taking humans out of the decision cycle .

letting intelligent machines make traditionally human decisions about killing other humans is fraught with moral peril , but may become necessary to survive on the future battlefield , let alone to win .

adversaries will race to employ these capabilities and the powerful operational advantages they may confer .

while dod continues to eschew fully automated ground combat systems , there is a possibility that other nations could aggressively pursue fully autonomous weapons systems to achieve a battlefield advantage .

this raises a question: are other nation's efforts to develop laws sufficient justification for the united states to do the same ? .

the evolution of other weapons , such as hypersonic weapons , could also result in u.s. development of fully autonomous weapon systems from a purely defensive perspective .

despite dod's insistence that a "man in the loop" capability will always be part of ras systems , it is possible if not likely , that the u.s. military could feel compelled to develop ground fully autonomous weapon systems in response to comparable enemy ground systems or other advanced threat systems that make any sort of "man in the loop" role impractical .

while u.s. development of ras and ai for use by ground forces is articulated in a variety of strategies and directives , it can be argued that equally and , possibly , more important is the development of technologies , systems , formations , and tactics , techniques , and procedures designed to counter foreign use of ras and ai against u.s. ground forces .

such a "defensive" approach to ras and ai could prove to be particularly prudent , as it is possible other nations may introduce ras and ai systems into ground combat before the united states , thereby necessitating an effective means of countering their use .

furthermore , foreign ras and ai advances not directly related to weapons such as ai - enhanced military decisionmaking and intelligence or ras - enabled logistics could have an indirect impact on u.s. ground forces and may be taken into consideration when developing u.s. counter ras and ai capabilities .

many cutting - edge innovations in ai and ras are occurring in the private sector , and these innovations could be adapted for use by u.s. ground forces .

however , engaging with the private sector raises policy considerations for the army and marine corps , as well as dod more broadly .

for example , if policymakers seek to assist the military in making use of emerging technologies such as ai and ras , they might consider expanding support for entities such as the defense innovative unit .

if the administration or congress seeks to have more in - house expertise in ai and ras , they might also consider supporting the development of service incentives or recruitment models to attract additional experts , either on a permanent or temporary basis .

there are other potential considerations which might merit further examination .

as previously noted , there are a number of security challenges associated with dod and the services engaging with academic institutions and the private sector in regards to foreign national students and employees who might pose a security risk .

another consideration is how academia and private industry view the morality of military ras and ai use .

as technologies in these areas advance , some academic and private sector institutions might choose to "opt out" of working with dod on technologies which they might view as counter to their values — much as google reportedly is doing with dod's project maven .

if this becomes a pervasive practice , dod efforts to develop ras and ai technologies could be significantly hindered .

some experts have argued that a productive relationship could be encouraged by dod approaching ai development and use with a focus on ethics and safety .

the memorandum establishing the jaic includes these principles , which must be considered within the center's overarching goal of accelerating the delivery of ai - enabled capabilities .

aside from equipping the services , personnel - related issues may be a major congressional concern as the services incorporate various levels of ras and ai into the force both in the near and far term .

as such , congress might choose to examine a number of topics in the following areas .

questions congress may consider include the following: where will ras and ai be integrated into the military most rapidly ? .

which occupational specialties will be less needed due to replacement by ras and ai ? .

which occupational specialties will be in greater demand as ras and ai are integrated into the force ? .

what degree of "human backup" is desired in the event ras and ai systems do not perform as required ? .

questions congress may consider include the following: which particular skills do the military services require to support the integration of ras and ai systems ? .

what fields of academic study and work history are most essential to target for recruiting and retention ? .

the armed forces have any array of special and incentive pay authorities that allow them to increase compensation for targeted skill sets and assignments .

are these authorities sufficient ? .

are the services using them effectively ? .

what nonmonetary incentives are most attractive to individuals with those skills ? .

do the armed forces have the authority to offer those incentives ? .

how valuable are those skills to private - sector employers ? .

how competitive are the armed forces in competing for this type of labor ? .

should certain eligibility criteria for joining the armed forces be modified to make military service a more viable option for those with the necessary skills ? .

to what extent can other federal civilians and contractors with advanced technical skills be substituted for military personnel with those skills ? .

some considerations for training servicemembers on ras and ai include the following: how much training will the armed forces have to provide to their work force can effectively employ ras and ai systems ? .

when and where will this training occur , and at what cost ? .

how quickly will the armed forces be able to adapt their training programs to account for technical advances in ras and ai , and new concepts of operations ? .

what role might private - sector training or training with industry play , particularly for those whose work roles require the most sophisticated knowledge of ras and ai ? .

some considerations for developing a career path model for ras and ai experts include the following: what assignments will be most critical to the professional development of ras and ai experts and their ability to contribute to operational missions ? .

might private - sector or academic assignments be part of the career path ? .

will specialists in ras and ai be expected to lead units and , if so , of what size and complexity ? .

does a technical track make sense ? .

how much professional military knowledge will ras and ai specialists need to possess to effectively integrate into military organizations ? .

how much knowledge of warfighting functions will they need to advise commanders on how best to employ ras and ai and how to synchronize them with other systems for maximum effect ? .

legal and ethical considerations associated with the possible development and adoption of fully autonomous lethal weapon systems are both considerable and complicated .

as ras and ai technology development advances in both the commercial and military sectors , a point will likely be reached where u.s. policymakers will be faced with the decision — can the united states ( legally ) and should the united states ( ethically ) develop laws ? .

the administration will likely have its own views on the legality and morality of laws , as will congress .

as previously noted authorizing a machine to make lethal combat decisions is contingent on political and military leaders resolving legal and ethical questions .

these include the appropriateness of machines having this ability , under what circumstances should it be employed , where responsibility for mistakes lies , and what limitations should be placed on the autonomy of such systems... .

ethical discussions and policy decisions must take place in the near term in order to guide the development of future [unmanned aircraft systems] capabilities , rather than allowing the development to take its own path apart from this critical guidance .

in view of this , there appears to be an opportunity for congress to examine these issues and perhaps define its role in the overall u.s. governmental debate on laws .

these debates and resulting policy decisions and guidance could prove beneficial to dod as a whole — and the army and marines in particular — as they develop ras and ai systems and capabilities for use on the battlefield .

given current deliberations on laws and ongoing discussions in the u.n. , it is conceivable that at some point in the future , formal international efforts could be undertaken to regulate laws development and use .

as dod has previously noted if such restrictions on autonomous weapon systems were to come into existence , and if the u.s. were to follow it , the ban would severely limit the ability to develop and use lethal autonomous weapon systems .

such restrictions could limit other nations as well .

should deliberate formal efforts to regulate laws emerge in the coming years , the united states has the option of playing an active role , a passive role , or no formal role whatsoever .

because of the potential national security implications of a potential laws ban , as well as its impact on army and marine ras and ai developmental efforts , policymakers both in the administration and congress might examine and decide what the appropriate level of u.s. involvement should be in such an international regulatory process .

