the u.s. co nstitution originally provided for the question of presidential disability or inability in article ii , section 1 , clause 6: in case of the removal of the president from office , or of his death , resignation , or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office , the same shall devolve on the vice president , and the congress may by law provide for the case of removal , death , resignation or inability , both of the president and vice president , declaring what officer shall then act as president , and such officer shall act accordingly , until the disability be removed , or a president shall be elected [emphasis added] .

this language designated the vice president to exercise the powers and duties of the presidency if the president died , resigned , was removed from office , or was unable to discharge the position's powers and duties .

it did not , however , provide any mechanism or procedure for determining presidential inability .

the same clause authorized congress to provide by law for instances of removal , death , resignation , or inability of both the president and vice president , which it did with the succession act of 1792 and its subsequent revisions in 1886 and 1947 .

despite several instances of incapacitating presidential illness during the 19 th and 20 th centuries , however , it was not until ratification of the twenty - fifth amendment in 1967 that procedures governing inability or disability of the president were established in the constitution .

this report provides a description and analysis of sections 3 and 4 of the amendment , which deal with presidential disability or inability .

it also reviews the history of presidential disability and earlier proposals to provide for such contingencies , provides a legislative history of the twenty - fifth amendment and examines relevant legislative proposals pending in the 115 th congress .

the twenty - fifth amendment , proposed by congress in 1965 and ratified by the states in 1967 , provides for presidential succession , vice presidential vacancies , and presidential disability .

presidential inability or disability is specifically covered in section 3 , whereby the president may declare a disability , and section 4 , whereby a disability is declared by the vice president and a majority of the cabinet or such other body as may be established by law .

two bills that would establish the "other body" contemplated in section 4 of the twenty - fifth amendment have been introduced to date in the 115 th congress .

both would create a disability review panel as a potential partner with the vice president in the presidential disability process .

as noted earlier in this report , congressional authority to establish a body as an alternative to the cabinet in determinations of section 4 presidential disability is balanced both by the internal procedural requirements any bill would face in the legislative process , and the fact that it is subject to the president's approval , unless congress were able to override a presidential veto .

the provisions of article ii , section 1 , clause 6 of the constitution created uncertainties concerning aspects of ( 1 ) presidential succession , ( 2 ) vacancies in the vice presidency , and ( 3 ) presidential disability that remained unresolved from the time government under the constitution was established in 1789 until ratification of the twenty - fifth amendment in 1967 .

the twenty - fifth amendment benefited from the alignment of factors that are shared by amendments that have met the stringent requirements imposed by article v of the constitution .

most successful constitutional amendments have emerged as responses to the stimulus of sudden transformative events , or have benefited from the "ripeness" of an idea that has been before the public for many years .

both factors contributed to the successful proposal and ratification of the twenty - fifth amendment .

a decade of congressional investigation of the issue of presidential disability , combined with the shock president kennedy's assassination , provided a galvanizing impetus to congressional action on issues — presidential succession and disability — that had been discussed and debated for decades .

a final element was the committed approval and active leadership support from senior members of both chambers , including house judiciary committee chairman emanuel celler and senator birch bayh , chairman of the senate judiciary committee's subcommittee on constitutional amendments .

of the amendment's two sections concerned with presidential disability , section 3 has been explicitly implemented twice since ratification , during the george w. bush presidency , and implicitly once , during the ronald reagan presidency .

on all three occasions , the president implemented and rescinded declarations of disability in connection with routine medical procedures that presented no complications and generated little comment .

to date , it has arguably met its framers' expectations with little controversy or criticism .

section 4's comparative complexity , particularly its potential for declaring a president to be disabled without his or her concurrence , has troubled some observers .

the section , they have argued , provides opportunities for political mischief and the potential usurpation of the president's authority .

it might be further suggested that section 4 , like the impeachment process , is a procedure so powerful and fraught with constitutional and political implications that it would likely be used only in the most compelling circumstances , since its invocation might arguably precipitate a constitutional crisis .

in response to these concerns , however , it may be noted from the record that senator bayh and the framers of the twenty - fifth amendment gave these issues serious consideration and included powerful checks to deter abuse .

these include the president's ability to challenge a section 4 declaration of disability ; the requirement of a timely decision by congress ; and , ultimately , the need for a two - thirds vote in both houses to sustain a contested section 4 finding of disability by the vice president and the cabinet or disability review body .

as one commentator quoted earlier in this report concluded , "[b]ecause the amendment deals with unpredictable human frailties , it is not a perfect solution , but few exist in constitutional history .

the task is to make the most of what the amendment encompasses .

success depends on the good judgment and good sense of our leaders and the citizenry. .

