congressional communications continues to evolve .

as members of congress adopt new online social networking services , more information is potentially available faster than ever before .

many members now use email , official websites , youtube channels , twitter , facebook , instagram , flickr , google+ , medium , and other networking platforms to share information with and collect information from their followers .

many of these technologies were either nonexistent or not widely available several years ago .

around 2009 , members of congress began adopting social media as an additional way to share information .

at that time , members who had adopted twitter — the first platform widely adopted by representatives and senators — most often used it as a tool to send out information .

since that time , members of congress have primarily adopted three social media platforms — twitter , facebook , and youtube — to share information and potentially to collect opinions on a range of policy issues .

in addition to twitter , facebook , and youtube , members of congress have adopted various other social media services .

some platforms appear to be gaining in popularity among members of congress ( eg , instagram , which has grown from approximately 25% of members with accounts in 2015 to more than 50% in 2017 ) , whereas others were briefly popular but have now faded from public relevance ( eg , in june 2014 , 26% of members had a vine account ; today the service has been shut down and no members of congress have accounts ) .

as various social media platforms expand and diminish in popularity , members of congress continue to explore new platforms to enhance their communications strategies .

social media have arguably enhanced the ability of members of congress to fulfill their representational duties by providing greater opportunities for communications between members and constituents , supporting the fundamental democratic role of sharing information about public policy and government operations .

despite this , some have raised concerns about electronic communications .

these include managing social media content and interactions , allocating office resources , and archiving communications .

this report examines member adoption of social media broadly .

today , the adoption of facebook , twitter , and youtube by members of congress is nearly ubiquitous .

therefore , this report focuses not only on adoption of these platforms , but also on the adoption of other social media platforms — instagram , flickr , google+ , snapchat , medium , linkedin , pinterest , periscope , and tumblr — to evaluate which platforms are being adopted , how adoption has changed over time , and what the use of multiple social media platforms might mean for member communication ( see appendix for a brief description of the most popular social media platforms adopted by members of congress ) .

members of congress have been using social media since at least 2009 , when the first representatives and senators adopted facebook , twitter , and youtube .

today , nearly all members of congress have twitter , facebook , and youtube accounts , and many have also registered official accounts with other social media services .

the following examination of social media adoption by members of congress is divided into two parts: 1. the adoption of established platforms — facebook , twitter , and youtube — over time ; and 2. the adoption of newer platforms in the 114 th and 115 th congresses .

following the analysis of social media adoption , the report focuses on potential consequences of social media adoption , and the adoption of multiple platforms , on member communications practices and office operations .

these considerations include managing multiple platforms , the type of content and posting location , the allocation of office resources to social media communications , and archiving social media content .

during the 2016-2017 academic year ( september 2016 to may 2017 ) , crs partnered with graduate students at the lyndon b. johnson ( lbj ) school of public affairs at the university of texas to collect and analyze the adoption of social media by members of congress .

data on social media platform adoption were collected by visiting the official webpages of individual representatives and senators to determine which social media platforms were linked to each member's webpage and by searching each platform and the internet for official accounts that were not linked to each member's webpage .

additionally , using the same methodology — visiting representatives' and senators' webpages — data were collected by crs for the first session of the 114 th congress ( 2015 ) and the 115 th congress ( 2017-2018 ) .

these data were used to analyze member adoption of social media over a four - year period .

several caveats accompany the results presented .

first , the analysis treats all member social media posts as structurally identical , because an individual tweet , snap , or post rarely reveals information about who physically typed the message .

in some cases , members might personally tweet , snap , or post , whereas other members may delegate these responsibilities to staff .

this analysis draws no distinctions between the two .

second , the analysis covers only a relatively short period of the congressional calendar .

therefore , it is inherently a snapshot in time of a dynamic process .

as with any new technology , the number of members signed up for any particular social media platform and the patterns of adoption may change in short periods of time .

thus , the conclusions drawn from these data cannot necessarily be generalized .

finally , these results cannot be used to predict future behavior .

members of congress have many choices when deciding which social media platforms to adopt .

social media can be roughly divided into two categories: established platforms and newer platforms .

this section discusses member adoption of both types of social media and the number of platforms that representatives and senators have adopted in the 114 th congress and the 115 th congress .

the decision to adopt and use social media is not without potential costs , as members likely have to devote some finite resources to managing their social media presence .

those decisions might include managing multiple platforms , creating policies on the type of content shared and where it is posted , allocating resources , and archiving communications .

the nature of the communication between members of congress and constituents continues to evolve .

in light of the adoption of multiple social media platforms , several potential implications exist for the continued use of social media as a communications tool .

these include the potential value of archiving for understanding congressional history , and future studies on member use of social media .

traditionally , official house or senate records have been used to study policy development , understand past congressional action , and provide the courts with congressional intent .

in some cases , the personal papers of members of congress might be used to understand how a particular public policy issue developed .

accessing these papers , however , is often difficult because they are scattered around the country , with some in public or university libraries and others located out of public view in attics , basements , or other family collections .

the advent of social media provides a new opportunity to potentially include the online correspondence of individual members as part of the public policy record .

since member tweets , facebook posts , and other social media items are in the public domain on the social media services' platforms , interested parties might be able to use those to help understand public policy development .

this report focused on social media adoption by members of congress .

although the adoption of new technology provides an important insight into the communication and potential interaction with constituents , it does not provide insight into how members of congress use social media to communicate their message and potentially receive feedback from their state or district .

future studies of social media might utilize machine learning or other similar technology to reveal patterns of social media use across congress .

such a study could provide better insight into how members share information , the type of information they post on various platforms , and whether or not they are using social media to solicit constituent opinions to help them formulate positions on policy issues .

members of congress have more choices and options available to communicate with constituents than ever before .

these include legacy platforms ( twitter , facebook , and youtube ) and new platforms ( instagram , flickr , google+ , snapchat , medium , linkedin , pinterest , periscope , and tumblr ) .

a description of legacy platforms and new platforms is provided below .

established platforms members of congress have been widely using three social media platforms since at least 2009: twitter , facebook , and youtube .

analysis of adoption and use of these platforms by members of congress has found that nearly all members have signed up and use these platforms to share text , video , and pictures with constituents .

twitter founded in 2006 , twitter is a social networking service that allows users to send and read short messages .

also considered a microblogging site , twitter users send "tweets" of up to 280 characters .

these tweets often contain short videos , photos , and other visual media and give the user the ability to direct a message to another user , resend another user's message ( i.e. , retweet ) , or provide labels ( i.e. , hashtags ) to make searching for a particular topic easier .

recently , twitter also incorporated a live - video function , in cooperation with its subsidiary periscope , to allow users to broadcast events .

facebook launched in february 2004 , facebook is the world's largest social networking service and website .

facebook users create "profiles" and "pages" to share pictures , videos , and messages , upon which other users ( "followers" ) may post comments .

users can limit the visibility of their profile posts to other users whom they have personally approved ( "friends" ) .

a facebook user can become a fan of a page , however , simply by clicking "like" on the facebook page of interest ; owner approval is often not required .

youtube youtube was founded in 2005 and has become one of the most popular video platforms on the internet .

currently , youtube is owned by google .

youtube describes its mission as an opportunity to "give everyone a voice and show them the world," based on four essential freedoms: freedom of expression , freedom of information , freedom of opportunity , and freedom to belong .

youtube allows users to both watch and upload videos .

a youtube account is not required to watch videos , but a user must sign up to post video content .

newer platforms social media are constantly evolving .

consequently , the number and types of platforms that members of congress adopt and use is varied .

following a survey of representative and senator webpages ( see " research overview and methodology" above for a description of that search ) , nine platforms in addition to facebook , twitter , and youtube had at least 1% of members signed up for their services in an official ( noncampaign ) capacity .

these are instagram , flickr , google+ , snapchat , medium , linkedin , pinterest , periscope , and tumblr .

instagram launched in 2010 , and acquired by facebook in 2012 , instagram is a photo - based social media service that allows users to post pictures along with text captions .

instagram also allows photographs to be edited with various tools to enhance images and create stories .

more than 800 million registered users post more than 250 million daily stories .

flickr founded in 2004 , flickr is a photo library owned by yahoo ! .

one of the original photo curation websites , flickr's stated goal is to "help people make their photos available to people who matter to them," and to "enable new ways of organizing photos and video. .

flickr provides users with 1,000 gb of free storage .

google+ founded in 2011 , google+ is google's social network .

originally perceived by the media to be a competitor to facebook , google+ accounts are given to anyone who has a regular google account .

google+ allows users to post photos and status updates to their personal stream or to interest - based communities .

snapchat founded in 2011 , snapchat is a social media service available only through a smart device ( i.e. , smart phone or tablet ) application .

snapchat's premise is to allow users to send and receive pictures and messages that are short - lived .

snapchat's emphasis is on allowing users to share their point of view , and the application features a camera when it is opened to encourage the user to share what he or she is seeing at that moment .

medium launched in 2012 by twitter cofounder evan williams as a supplement to twitter's then - 140-character limit , medium combines an open publishing blogging platform with social media features to create a product that has led to what has been referred to as social journalism .

medium bills itself as a platform that allows users to interact with other users' articles and to create their own content .

linkedin founded in 2003 , linkedin is a professional networking platform that allows users to connect with other individuals and potential employers .

linkedin users can create a professional network , exchange ideas , and potentially find new employment opportunities that match their interests and network connections .

pinterest started in 2010 , pinterest states that it "began as a tool to help people collect things they were passionate about online. .

currently , more than 200 million people use pinterest every month .

each user can share visual information by posting "pins" on "boards" that are used as filters for the user .

other users can then browse the boards to find others who share similar interests and inspirations .

periscope founded in 2014 , periscope is a live video streaming platform used on mobile devices that enables users to broadcast their activities as a live video .

currently owned by twitter , periscope's live video features have largely been incorporated into twitter's platform .

tumblr founded in 2007 , tumblr is a blogging platform specializing in social network microblogging .

users can create their own blogs , post their own material , and reshare content written by other tumblr users .

in addition to providing a microblogging platform , tumblr also has a feature that allows users to ask posters anonymous questions about the written subject material .

