the financial services and general government ( fsgg ) appropriations bill includes funding for more than two dozen independent agencies .

these agencies perform a wide range of functions , including the management of federal real property , the regulation of financial institutions and markets , and mail delivery .

this report focuses on funding for those independent agencies in title v of the fsgg appropriations bill .

it also addresses general provisions that apply government - wide , which appear in title vii , and provisions on cuba sanctions , which would typically appear in title i .

in addition , the fsgg bill funds agencies not covered in this report — the department of the treasury ( title i ) , the executive office of the president ( eop ; title ii ) , the judiciary ( title iii ) , and the district of columbia ( title iv ) .

the bill typically funds mandatory retirement accounts in title vi , which also contains general provisions applying to the fsgg agencies .

the fsgg bill occasionally addresses other issues , particularly those involving financial regulation , in additional titles .

although financial services are a major focus of the bill , the fsgg appropriations bill does not fund many financial regulatory agencies , which are instead funded outside of the appropriations process .

the fsgg bill has existed in its current form since the 2007 reorganization of the house and senate committees on appropriations .

the house and senate fsgg bills fund the same agencies , with one exception .

funding for the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) is considered through the agriculture appropriations bill in the house and the fsgg bill in the senate .

in this report , the cftc funding is generally included in the combined funding totals for fsgg independent agencies .

the fsgg appropriations act includes general provisions applying government - wide .

most of the provisions include language that has appeared under the general provisions title for several years because congress has decided to reiterate the language rather than make the provisions permanent .

an administration's proposed government - wide general provisions for a fiscal year are generally included in the budget appendix .

among the new provisions proposed for fy2019 were the following: if new budget authority provided in fy2019 appropriations acts exceeds the discretionary spending limit for any category set forth in section 251 ( c ) of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 because of estimating differences with cbo , the omb director will make an adjustment to the fy2019 discretionary spending limit in such category in the amount of the excess .

the total of all such adjustments would not exceed 0.2% of the sum of the adjusted fy2019 discretionary spending limits for all categories .

 ( section 736 , fy2019 budget proposal , section 745 of h.r .

6147 as passed by the house , section 748 of h.r .

6147 as passed by the senate , section 748 of h.r .

21 as passed by the house , section 747 of h.r .

648 as passed by the house , and section 747 of p.l .

116-6 . ) .

the head of a covered agency that has established an information technology system modernization and working capital fund ( it fund ) may transfer funds appropriated in this or any other act that become available upon or after this act's enactment date to such agency's it fund for the purposes specified in section 1077 of p.l .

115-91 .

requirements for notification about the transfer apply .

amounts transferred to an agency's it fund would remain available for three fiscal years .

 ( section 737 of the fy2019 budget proposal .

not included in h.r .

21 as passed by the house , h.r .

648 as passed by the house , and p.l .

116-6 . ) .

none of the funds made available by this act could be used to implement , administer , or enforce a rule issued pursuant to section 13 ( p ) of the securities exchange act of 1934 , which requires the sec to promulgate rules requiring issuers with conflict minerals that are necessary to the functionality or production of a product manufactured by such person to disclose annually whether any of those minerals originated in the democratic republic of the congo or an adjoining country .

 ( section 747 of h.r .

6147 as passed by the house .

not included in h.r .

21 as passed by the house , h.r .

648 as passed by the house , and p.l .

116-6 . ) .

a pay adjustment of 1.9% for 2019 was authorized for federal civilian employees paid under the general schedule , allocated as 1.4% base pay adjustment and 0.5% locality pay adjustment .

 ( section 749 of h.r .

6147 as passed by the senate , section 749 of h.r .

21 as passed by the house , section 748 of h.r .

648 as passed by the house , section748 of p.l .

116-6 . ) .

the treasury department's office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) administers the main body of cuba embargo regulations , the cuban assets control regulations , which were first issued in 1963 , and have been amended many times over the years to reflect changes in u.s. policy toward cuba .

in the 115 th congress , h.r .

6147 as passed by the house included two fsgg provisions in division b that would have tightened u.s. economic sanctions on cuba .

section 128 provided that no funds made available by the act could have been used to approve , license , facilitate , authorize , or otherwise allow the use , purchase , trafficking , or import of property confiscated by the cuban government .

the provision appears to have been aimed at prohibiting the importation of rum and tobacco products by authorized u.s. travelers as accompanied baggage .

section 129 , which relates to trade sanctions on cuba , provided that no funds made available by the act could have been used to authorize a general license or approve a specific license with respect to a mark , trade name , or commercial name that is substantially similar to one that was used in connection with a business or assets that were confiscated by the cuban government unless the original owner expressly consented .

the provision , which would have prohibited ofac from licensing the payment of trademark registration fees , relates to a long - standing dispute between a cuban company and the bermuda - based bacardi limited over the havana club trademark .

in january 2016 , ofac issued a specific license for the cuban company to make payments related to the renewal of the havana club trademark , and the u.s. patent and trademark office subsequently renewed the havana club trademark until 2026 .

both cuba provisions had been included in house appropriations committee version of the fy2018 fsgg appropriations bill , h.r .

3280 , but were not included in the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) .

h.r .

6147 as passed by the senate did not include either section 128 or section 129 .

in the 116 th congress , neither h.r .

21 nor h.r .

648 included either section and nor did the enacted p.l .

116-6 .

