c ongress regularly considers legislative proposals to designate lands using a variety of titles , such as national park , national wildlife refuge , national monument , national conservation area , national recreation area , and many others .

additionally , congress provides oversight of land designations made by executive branch entities .

these congressional and executive land designations may bring few management changes to a site or may involve significant management changes , based on individual designating laws and / or general authorities governing a land system .

often , the designations are applied to federally owned lands ( including lands already under federal administration and those that the designating law may authorize for federal acquisition ) , but some federal designations are conferred on lands that remain nonfederally owned and managed .

the designations may authorize federal funding for an area , but they do not always do so .

this report addresses questions about which federal title or designation might be appropriate for particular areas .

what do the different land titles signify , and how does each type of unit differ ? .

who has authority to confer each designation ? .

which agency or nonfederal entity is responsible for managing the land under each designation , and which statutes would govern management decisions ? .

what types of uses would be allowed on the land under each designation , and what uses would be prohibited ? .

the report compares a variety of federal land designations with respect to these factors .

it is beyond the scope of this report to assess the benefits or drawbacks of conferring federal designations on lands , although such questions often arise when federal designations are contemplated .

for any given area , some stakeholders might favor a federal designation ( for example , to bring federal funding to an area , to promote visitation , or to bring new resource protections ) and others might oppose one ( for example , to forestall the federal government's becoming a stakeholder in regional land use decisions or to preserve federal funds that might be spent on area management for allocation to other priorities ) .

additional crs products , cited at the end of this report , explore such questions in greater detail for specific land designations .

this report begins by briefly discussing some general factors that congress may consider when determining which , if any , federal land designations might be suitable for a given area .

it then compares selected designations across multiple attributes ( table 1 ) .

 table 1 , below , compares selected designations used by congress and the executive branch for federal lands and other areas .

the table begins with designations that are common to multiple agencies and then lists designations exclusively or primarily related to an individual agency .

the four agencies appear in order of the overall amount of land each agency manages ( blm , then fs , fws , and nps ) .

the table provides information on the entity that confers each designation ( eg , congress , the president , the interior or agriculture secretary ) ; statutory authorities for the designation ; the agency or agencies that administer each type of area ( also noting designations for which the area typically remains in nonfederal management ) ; selected characteristics of the areas ; and examples of each type of area .

designations for nonfederally owned and managed sites are listed according to the agency with administrative responsibility for the designation ( eg , responsibility for evaluating site qualifications and providing technical and / or financial assistance to designated sites ) .

the table reflects a selection of titles that have been used repeatedly for multiple areas .

it is not comprehensive .

for example , congress has designated many sites with unique titles ( such as "national park for the performing arts" or "national tallgrass prairie" ) that are not reflected in the table .

crs report r41658 , commemorative works in the district of columbia: background and practice , by jacob r. straus .

crs report r41285 , congressionally designated special management areas in the national forest system , by katie hoover .

crs in focus if10585 , the federal land management agencies , by katie hoover .

crs report r43429 , federal lands and related resources: overview and selected issues for the 115th congress , coordinated by katie hoover .

crs report rl33462 , heritage areas: background , proposals , and current issues , by laura b. comay and carol hardy vincent .

crs report r41330 , national monuments and the antiquities act , by carol hardy vincent .

crs report r41816 , national park system: what do the different park titles signify ? .

 , by laura b. comay .

crs report r43868 , the national trails system: a brief overview , by sandra l. johnson and laura b. comay .

crs report r42614 , the national wild and scenic rivers system: a brief overview , by sandra l. johnson and laura b. comay .

crs report rl31447 , wilderness: overview , management , and statistics , by katie hoover .

