in 2017 , approximately 39.7 million people , or 12.3% of the population , had incomes below the official definition of poverty in the united states .

the poverty rate ( the percentage that were in poverty ) , fell from 12.7% in 2016 , while the number of persons in poverty showed no discernible change .

in this report , the numbers and percentages of those in poverty are based on the census bureau's estimates .

while this official measure is often regarded as a statistical yardstick rather than a complete description of what people and families need to live , it does offer a measure of economic hardship faced by the low - income population: the poverty measure compares family income against a dollar amount called a poverty threshold , a level below which the family is considered to be poor .

the census bureau releases these poverty estimates every september for the prior calendar year .

most of the comparisons discussed in this report are year - to - year comparisons .

this report only considers a number or percentage to have changed from the previous year , or to be different from another number or percentage , if the difference has been tested to be statistically significant at the 90-percent confidence level .

however , in addition to the most recent year's data , this report presents a historical perspective as well as information on poverty for demographic groups ( by family structure , age , race and hispanic origin , and work status ) and by state .

over the past several decades , criticisms of the official poverty measure have led to the development of an alternative research measure called the supplemental poverty measure ( spm ) , which the census bureau also computes and releases .

statistics comparing the official measure with the spm are provided at the conclusion of this brief .

the spm includes the effects of taxes and in - kind benefits ( such as housing , energy , and food assistance ) on poverty , while the official measure does not .

because some types of tax credits are used to assist the poor , as are other forms of assistance , the spm may be of interest to policymakers .

however , the official measure provides a comparison of the poor population over a longer time period , including some years before many current anti - poverty assistance programs had been developed .

in developing poverty - related legislation and conducting oversight on programs that aid the low - income population , policymakers may be interested in these historical trends .

 figure 1 shows a historical perspective of the number and percent of the population below the poverty line .

the number in poverty and the poverty rates are shown from the earliest year available ( 1959 ) through the most recent year available ( 2017 ) .

because the total u.s. population has grown over time , poverty rates are useful for historical comparisons because they control for population growth .

poverty rates fell through the 1960s .

since then , they have generally risen and fallen according to the economic cycle , though during the most recent two expansions poverty rates did not fall measurably until four to six years into the expansion .

historically notable lows occurred in 1973 ( 11.1% ) and 2000 ( 11.3% ) .

poverty rate peaks occurred in 1983 ( 15.2% ) , 1993 ( 15.1% ) , and 2010 ( 15.1% ) .

poverty rates tend to rise during and after recessions , as opposed to leading economic indicators such as new housing construction , whose changes often precede changes in the performance of the overall economy .

the poverty rate's lag is explainable in part by the way it is measured: it uses income from the entire calendar year .

notably , the poverty rate in 2017 registered a third consecutive annual decrease since the most recent recession , though it remained higher than the rate in 2000 , the most recent low point .

the drop in the u.s. poverty rate ( from 12.7% in 2016 to 12.3% in 2017 ) affected some demographic groups more than others , notably the population ages 18 to 64 , people of hispanic origin , and part - time workers ; it was not a broad - based decline .

details for selected demographic groups are described below .

poverty is not equally prevalent in all parts of the country .

the map in figure 5 shows states with relatively high poverty rates across parts of the appalachians , the deep south , and the southwest , with the poverty rate in mississippi ( 19.8% ) among the highest in the nation , and not statistically different from the rates in new mexico ( 19.7% ) , louisiana ( 19.7% ) , and west virginia ( 19.1% ) .

the poverty rate in new hampshire ( 7.7% ) was lowest .

when comparing poverty rates geographically , it is important to remember that the official poverty thresholds are not adjusted for geographic variations in the cost of living — the same thresholds are used nationwide .

as such , an area with a lower cost of living accompanied by lower wages will appear to have a higher poverty rate than an area with a higher cost of living and higher wages , even if individuals' purchasing power were exactly the same in both areas .

the district of columbia and 20 states experienced poverty rate declines from 2016 to 2017: six in the midwest ( illinois , indiana , iowa , michigan , missouri , and ohio ) , three in the northeast ( maine , new york , and pennsylvania ) ; eight in the south ( district of columbia , florida , georgia , kentucky , mississippi , north carolina , tennessee , and texas ) ; and four in the west ( arizona , california , colorado , and idaho ) .

delaware and west virginia were the only states to experience increases , and 28 states , as well as puerto rico , experienced no significant change .

criticisms of the official measure have led to the development of the supplemental poverty measure ( spm ) .

described below are the development of the official measure , its limitations , attempts to remedy those limitations , the research efforts that led to the spm , and a comparison of poverty rates based on the spm and the official measure .

the poverty thresholds were originally developed in the early 1960s by mollie orshansky of the social security administration .

rather than attempt to compute a family budget by using prices for all essential items that low - income families need to live , orshansky focused on food costs .

unlike other goods and services such as housing or transportation , which did not have a generally agreed - upon level of adequacy , minimum standards for nutrition were known and widely accepted .

according to a 1955 u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) food consumption survey , the average amount of their income that families spent on food was roughly one - third .

therefore , using the cost of a minimum food budget and multiplying that figure by three yielded a figure for total family income .

that computation was possible because usda had already published recommended food budgets as a way to address the nutritional needs of families experiencing economic stress .

some additional adjustments were made to derive poverty thresholds for two - person families and individuals not living in families to reflect the relatively higher fixed costs of smaller households .

while the official poverty measure has been used for over 50 years as the source of official statistics on poverty in the united states , it has received criticism over the years for several reasons .

first , it does not take into account benefits from most of the largest programs that aid the low - income population .

for instance , it uses money income before taxes – meaning that it does not necessarily measure the income available for individuals to spend , which for most people is after - tax income .

therefore , any effects of tax credits designed to assist persons with low income are not captured by the official measure .

the focus on money income also does not account for in - kind benefit programs designed to help the poor , such as snap or housing assistance .

the official measure has also been criticized for the way it characterizes families' and individuals' needs in the poverty thresholds .

that is , the method used to compute the dollar amounts used in the thresholds , which were originally based on food expenditures in the 1950s and food costs in the 1960s , do not accurately reflect current needs and available goods and services .

moreover , the official measure does not take account of the sharing of expenses and income among household members not related by birth , marriage , or adoption .

and , as mentioned earlier , the official thresholds do not take account of geographic variations in the cost of living .

in 1995 , a panel from the national academy of sciences issued a report , measuring poverty: a new approach , which recommended improvements to the poverty measure .

among the suggested improvements were to have the poverty thresholds reflect the costs of food , clothing , shelter , utilities , and a little bit extra to allow for miscellaneous needs ; to broaden the definition of "family ; " to include geographic adjustments as part of the measure's computation ; to include the out - of - pocket costs of medical expenses in the measure's computation ; and to subtract work - related expenses from income .

an overarching goal of the recommendations was to make the poverty measure more closely aligned with the real - life needs and available resources of the low - income population , as well as the changes that have taken place over time in their circumstances , owing to changes in the nation's economy , society , and public policies ( see table 1 ) .

after over a decade and a half of research to implement and refine the methodology suggested by the panel , conducted both from within the census bureau as well as from other federal agencies and the academic community , the census bureau issued the first report using the supplemental poverty measure ( spm ) in november 2011 .

compared with the official measure , the spm takes into account greater detail of individuals' and families' living arrangements and provides a more up - to - date accounting of the costs and resources available to them .

because the spm recognizes greater detail in relationships among household members and geographically adjusts housing costs , it provides an updated rendering , compared with the official measure , of the circumstances in which the poor live .

in that context , some point out that the spm's measurement of taxes , transfers , and expenses may offer policymakers a clearer view of how government policies affect the poor population today .

however , the spm was developed as a research measure , and the office of management and budget set the expectation that it would be revised periodically to incorporate improved measurement methods and newer sources of data as they became available ; it was not developed for administrative purposes .

conversely , the official measure's consistency over a longer time span makes it easier for policymakers and researchers to make historical comparisons .

under the spm , the profile of the poverty population is slightly different than under the official measure .

after rounding , the spm was about 1.6 percentage points higher in 2017 than the official poverty rate ( 13.9% compared with 12.3% , a figure that includes foster children under age 15 , who are not normally included in the official measure .

see figure 6 ) .

more people ages 18 to 64 are in poverty under the spm ( 13.2% compared with 11.2% under the 2017 official measure ) , as are people ages 65 and over ( 14.1% , compared with 9.2% under the official measure ) .

the poverty rate for people under age 18 was lower under the spm ( 15.6% in 2017 ) than under the official measure ( 17.5% , with foster children included ) .

again , the spm uses a different definition of resources than the official measure: the spm includes in - kind benefits which generally help families with children ; subtracts out work - related expenses , which are often incurred by the working - age population ; and subtracts medical out - of - pocket expenses , which are incurred frequently by people age 65 and older .

with the geographically - adjusted thresholds , the poverty rate in 2017 was lower under the spm than under the official measure for the midwest ( 10.7% compared with 11.4% ) , while it was higher than the official measure for the northeast ( 14.2% compared with 11.4% ) , the west ( 15.1% compared with 11.8% ) , and the south ( 14.8% compared with 13.6% ) .

