one defendant robbed local drug dealers .

a second , a police officer , directed the victims of traffic accidents to a particular body shop for a kickback .

a third , a state governor , accepted lavish gifts from a businessman who hoped to benefit from his largesse .

all three were prosecuted under the hobbs act , the federal criminal statute that outlaws obstructing interstate commerce by robbery or extortion .

the hobbs act , 18 u.s.c .

§ 1951 , began as the anti - racketeering act in 1934 , which punished obstructions of commerce "by extortion , violence , coercion , or intimidation. .

congress recast the statute in the hobbs act in 1946 and polished it in 1948 in the revision of federal criminal law .

except for an adjustment in the fine schedule , the statute has remained unchanged ever since .

the supreme court has visited the hobbs act on several occasions to review the statute's related , but very distinct , crimes .

one proscribes robbery and is sometimes used to prosecute street crimes .

the other proscribes extortion and is often used to prosecute federal , state , and local public corruption .

this is a brief overview of the act and relevant court interpretations of its provisions .

the hobbs act robbery proscription , described in outline form , condemns the following: ( 1 ) whoever ( 2 ) in any way or degree ( 3 ) ( a ) obstructs , ( b ) delays , or ( c ) affects ( 4 ) ( a ) [interstate or foreign] commerce or ( b ) the movement of any article or commodity in commerce , ( 5 ) ( a ) by robbery , i.e . , ( i ) [knowing and willful] ( ii ) unlawful taking or obtaining of personal property ( iii ) ( a ) from the person or ( b ) in the presence of another , ( iv ) against his will , ( v ) by means of actual or threatened ( a ) force , ( b ) or violence , or ( c ) fear of injury , immediate or future , ( vi ) ( a ) to his person or property , ( b ) or property in his custody or possession , ( c ) or the person or property of a relative or member of his family or of anyone in his company at the time of the taking or obtaining or ( b ) attempts or ( c ) conspires so to do , or ( d ) commits or threatens physical violence to any person or property in furtherance of a plan or purpose to do anything in violation of this section shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than twenty years , or both .

hobbs act extortion comes in two forms .

one , like hobbs act robbery , may involve violence .

the other is committed "under color of official right. .

the two constitute the alternative means by which hobbs act extortion is accomplished .

regardless of form , hobbs act extortion and hobbs act robbery share many of the same elements as is obvious from a display of its components: ( 1 ) whoever ( 2 ) in any way or degree ( 3 ) ( a ) obstructs , ( b ) delays , or ( c ) affects ( 4 ) ( a ) commerce or ( b ) the movement of any article or commodity in commerce , ( 5 ) ( a ) by extortion , i.e . , ( i ) [knowing and willful] ( ii ) obtaining the property of another ( iii ) with his consent ( iv ) ( a ) induced by wrongful use of actual or threatened ( i ) force , or ( ii ) violence , or ( iii ) fear of injury , or ( b ) under color of official right ( b ) attempts or ( c ) conspires so to do , or ( d ) commits or threatens physical violence to any person or property in furtherance of a plan or purpose to do anything in violation of this section shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than twenty years , or bot .

again , the term "whoever" in federal law refers to an individual as well as to legal entities such as corporations , labor organizations , and unincorporated associations .

a legal entity may incur criminal liability for the conduct of its officers , employees , members , or agents , committed within the scope of their authority , for the benefit , at least in part , of the legal entity .

hobbs act extortion does not encompass conduct committed entirely for the benefit of a governmental entity .

as noted earlier , the supreme court recognizes that , in the hobbs act , congress "speaks in broad language , manifesting a purpose to use all the constitutional power congress has to punish interference with interstate commerce by extortion , robbery , or physical violence. .

thus , hobbs act extortion convictions , like hobbs act robbery convictions , demand no more than that the government prove some slight , minimal , or de minimis impact on interstate or foreign commerce .

it is enough that in any individual case the defendant's conduct has a potential impact on commerce .

for example , the government has met its burden when it shows that "an enterprise , which either is actively engaged in interstate commerce or customarily purchases items in interstate commerce , has its assets depleted through extortion , thereby curtailing the victim's potential as a purchaser of such goods. .

the obtaining - property element of hobbs act extortion consists of "'not only the deprivation but also the acquisition of property. .

...that is , it requires that the victim part with his property and that the extortionist gain possession of it. .

moreover , "the property must therefore be transferrable" ; it must be something of value that can be exercised , transferred , or sold .

otherwise , the property may be tangible or intangible , lawful or contraband .

the hobbs act has no express state - of - mind element .

the defendant need not know or intend that his conduct delays or obstructs interstate or foreign commerce .

otherwise , the cases suggest that the intent required for hobbs act extortion depends on which of the two forms of extortion is at issue .

robbery - like extortion , extortion by means of force or fear , involves the wrongful use of force , violence , or fear to induce the victim to surrender his property .

bribery - like extortion , extortion under color of official right , involves the misconduct of public officials .

bribery - like extortion demands proof that a corrupt official received something to which he was not entitled , knowing that it was the quid pro quo for his performance of an official act .

extortion by means of wrongful force , violence , or fear , on the other hand , requires evidence that the defendant acted knowingly and willfully , and is marked by the prerequisite that the force , violence , or fear be wrongful .

the supreme court's 1973 labor violence case , united states v. enmons , complicates the description of hobbs act robbery - like extortion .

in enmons , the supreme court explained that the word "wrongful" as used in the hobbs act extortion provision refers to the use of force , violence , or fear to obtain property to which the extortionist has no lawful claim .

thus , the hobbs act applies to personal payoffs or feather - bedding extorted by union officials , but it does not reach "the use of violence to achieve legitimate union objectives , such as higher wages in return for genuine services which the employer seeks. .

the court concluded that the use of force , violence , or fear in enmons was not "wrongful" because the purpose for which violence was employed , legitimate labor objectives , was not wrongful .

outside of the labor context , however , the lower federal courts have held that the question of hobbs act coverage turns on whether the use or threatened use of force , violence , or fear , as a means of squeezing property from another , is "wrongful. .

legitimate labor objectives aside , the u.s. courts of appeals for the first , seventh , and ninth circuits have decided that in the case of hobbs act extortion the use or threatened use of force or violence is "inherently wrongful. .

as for the fear of economic harm , these courts have said that "the use of legitimate economic threats to procure property is 'wrongful' under the hobbs act , only if the defendant has no claim of right to that property. .

hobbs act extortion under color of official right occurs when a "public official has obtained a payment to which he is not entitled , knowing that the payment was made in return for official acts. .

it is the "rough equivalent" of bribery .

it envisions a corrupt this - for - that ( quid pro quo ) .

nevertheless , "[t]he offense is completed at the time when the public official receives a payment in return for his agreement to perform specific official acts ; fulfillment of the quid pro quo is not an element of the offense. .

although the offense implies a coercive relationship , duress is not an element of the offense ; and there is no requirement that a public official request or invite a corrupt payment .

the hobbs act does not define the term "official act," but the bribery statute does .

in mcdonnell v. united states , the supreme court turned to the bribery statute's definition of "official act" in its summary of what constitutes an official act for purposes of hobbs act extortion: in sum , an "official act" is a decision or action on a "question , matter , cause , suit , proceeding or controversy. .

the "question , matter , cause , suit , proceeding or controversy" must involve a formal exercise of governmental power that is similar in nature to a lawsuit before a court , a determination before an agency , or a hearing before a committee .

it must also be something specific and focused that is "pending" or "may by law be brought" before the public official .

to qualify as an 'official act,' the public official must make a decision or take an action on that "question , matter , cause , suit , proceeding or controversy. .

or agree to do so .

that decision or action may include using his official position to exert pressure on another official to perform an "official act," or to advise another official , knowing or intending that such advice will form the basis for an "official act" by another official .

setting up a meeting , talking to another official , or organizing an event ( or agreeing to do so ) — without more — does not fit the definition of "official act. .

as is true of hobbs act robbery , section 1951 proscribes obstructing commerce by means of extortion , and attempting or conspiring to do so .

section 2 of the federal criminal code treats those who aid or abet the commission of a felony by another as if they had committed the underlying crime themselves .

here as elsewhere , "[t]he crime of attempt consists of two elements .

first , the government must prove culpable intent .

in other words , the defendant must have been acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for the commission of the crime that he is charged with attempting .

the second element is conduct constituting a substantial step toward commission of the crime that strongly corroborates that intent. .

factual impossibility is not a defense .

nor is abandonment after a substantial step has been taken .

the crime of conspiring to commit hobbs act extortion is a bit of an enigma .

the word "extortion" connotes a predator and a victim .

yet , a predator and a "victim" may be guilty of conspiracy to commit hobbs act extortion under color of official right without the participation of anyone else .

conspiracy requires that all conspirators embrace a common purpose , the commission of the underlying offense .

hobbs act extortion requires the victim's "consent" to the surrender of his property to the extortionist , but "the minimal 'consent' required to trigger § 1951 is insufficient to form a conspiratorial agreement. .

it helps to think of hobbs act extortion as akin to bribery .

as the supreme court explained in united states v. o casio , ["t]he 'consent' required to pay a bribe does not necessarily create a conspiratorial agreement .

in cases where the bribe payor is merely complying with an official demand , the payor lacks the mens rea necessary for a conspiracy. .

imagine , for example , "that a health inspector demands a bribe from a restaurant owner , threatening to close down the restaurant if the owner does not pay .

if the owner reluctantly pays the bribe in order to keep the business open , the owner has 'consented' to the inspector's demand , but this mere acquiescence in the demand does not form a conspiracy. .

a unity of intent is also a component of aiding or abetting another to commit hobbs act extortion , which is complete when someone else commits the underlying offense .

hobbs act extortion , attempts , and conspiracies are all punishable by imprisonment for not more than 20 years .

unlike hobbs act robbery , the government appears to have rarely prosecuted hobbs act extortion as a crime of violence under 18 u.s.c .

§ 924 ( c ) ( carrying or using a firearm in furtherance of crime of violence ) .

hobbs act extortion , however , qualifies as a predicate offense under rico , the money laundering statutes , and the travel act .

a rico violation , for example , occurs whenever an individual conducts the affairs of a commercial enterprise through the patterned commission of a series of predicate offenses such as hobbs act extortion .

the proceeds from hobbs act extortion may constitute an element of promotional money laundering .

proceeds of more than $10,000 generated by hobbs act extortion may supply an element in the offense of monetary transaction money laundering .

the travel act , among other things , makes it a federal crime to travel interstate , use the mail , or use any facility in interstate commerce to promote or distribute the proceeds of a bribery or extortion offense .

