president donald trump called for a "free and open indo - pacific" ( foip ) in his remarks to the asia pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) ceo summit in da nang , vietnam , in november 2017 .

congress has a substantial role in overseeing the foip initiative and setting resource levels for its policies .

as it considers this role , congress may consider broad u.s. strategy — including the level of priority placed on the indo - pacific region within the overall u.s. strategy ; the proper strategy for managing china's rise as a global power ; and the long - term role the united states seeks to play in the indo - pacific region .

 ( see map below. ) .

it has the opportunity to consider questions about resources and policies , and whether existing levels of appropriation for u.s. military activities , state department operations , foreign assistance , public diplomacy , and other policy tools are proper for pursuing a foip strategy .

it may also consider whether the initiative is properly balanced among security , economic , and diplomatic initiatives , and whether regional allies and partners are sufficiently incentivized to play a role in supporting u.s. goals and interests .

the report outlines the development of the foip initiative through policy statements and speeches before discussing some of the critique of the initiative .

the report also considers the response of key regional states — including india , japan , australia , and china — before identifying issues for congress , relevant policy documents , and legislation related to the strategy .

other crs reports provide additional discussion of specific issues mentioned in this report .

through a series of statements and reports , the trump administration has outlined a goal to promote a "free and open indo - pacific" region ( foip ) which also seeks to integrate u.s. strategy toward east asia and south asia , two regions that have often been addressed in relative isolation .

the 2017 national security strategy ( nss ) defines the indo - pacific as stretching from "the west coast of india to the western shores of the united states. .

others have defined the indo - pacific region more broadly to include the western reaches of the indian ocean littoral as well .

the administration's foip concept remains relatively amorphous , but in recent months administration officials have begun to make policy announcements that further develop the strategic concept .

the free and open indo - pacific concept adopts many elements of previous administrations' policies .

it also responds to a number of challenges deriving from china's continuing economic growth and military modernization , and from its increasingly assertive and outward - reaching economic and security policies .

the administration's nss , argues that , "a geopolitical competition between free and repressive visions of world order is taking place in the indo - pacific region. .

it further states , although the united states seeks to continue to cooperate with china , china is using economic inducements and penalties , influence operations , and implied military threats to persuade other states to heed its political and security agenda… .

china presents its ambitions as mutually beneficial , but chinese dominance risks diminishing the sovereignty of many states in the indo - pacific .

for some analysts , the trump administration's foip initiative echoes the obama administration's policy of "strategic rebalancing" to the asia - pacific .

that initiative sought to promote rules - based political , economic and security regimes for asia , and under which the united states joined the regional east asia summit ( eas ) grouping , concluded agreements with australia and the philippines to allow u.s. troop rotations , pledged to shift u.s. naval posture to give greater weight to the asia - pacific , and concluded the 12-nation tpp ( though it did not ratify the pact ) .

the trump administration has continued many of these initiatives , with the notable exception of its decision to withdraw the united states from the tpp .

the trump administration has pursued other initiatives in the indo - pacific region , including diplomacy with north korea over pyongyang's nuclear weapons program and the imposition of broad - based tariffs against chinese goods and on steel , aluminum , and autos , which affect others in the region , particularly japan and south korea .

it has negotiated an agreement in principle to modify the korea - united states free trade agreement ( korus ) and called on allies , including japan and south korea , to bear more of the costs of stationing u.s. troops in asia .

it is unclear how the foip concept relates to these initiatives .

apparent contradictions between various initiatives may have increased skepticism in the region about the administration's goals , and in particular , in light of the tpp decision , its commitment to having a significant economic component to the foip .

inherent in the strategic rationale for the foip concept is the emergence of india and south asia as an important strategic region , which generates the argument that u.s. strategy needs to have a more integrated approach to the indian ocean region ( ior ) and the pacific .

the administration has pursued efforts to bring india more directly into regional initiatives , including through reviving a concept first raised in the george w. bush administration to form closer cooperation with japan , australia , and india as a four - member group called the "quad. .

in an april 2018 briefing on the foip , a state department official described the rationale: number one , it acknowledges the historical reality and the current - day reality that south asia , and in particular india , plays a key role in the pacific and in east asia and in southeast asia .

that's been true for thousands of years and it's true today .

secondly , it is in our interest , the u.s. interest , as well as the interests of the region , that india play an increasingly weighty role in the region .

india is a nation that is invested in a free and open order .

it is a democracy .

it is a nation that can bookend and anchor the free and open order in the indo - pacific region , and it's our policy to ensure that india does play that role , does become over time a more influential player in the region .

strategic dynamics in the indo - pacific region are undergoing significant change .

relatively new or renewed security challenges in the east china sea , the south china sea , and along the china - india border are being added to older challenges including potential conflict on the korean peninsula ; tensions between india and pakistan ; and taiwan .

many regional analysts also view the united states' post - world war ii hub and spoke system of alliances as no longer sufficient to underwrite regional security and are seeking to augment this system with new security partnerships and networks .

the nss places a clear focus on the challenges inherent in china's growing influence and marks , in the view of many , a fundamental shift in the u.s. approach to china's rise .

it makes the observation that: for decades , u.s. policy was rooted in the belief that support for china's rise and for its integration into the post - war international order would liberalize china .

contrary to our hopes , china expanded its power at the expense of the sovereignty of others .

the nss describes china as seeking "to displace the united states in the indo - pacific region , expand the reaches of its state - driven economic model , and reorder the region in its favor. .

to counter such perceived chinese aims , the nss states that the united states will , among other things: "compete with all tools of national power to ensure that regions of the world are not dominated by one power" ; "work with our partners to contest china's unfair trade and economic practices and restrict its acquisition of sensitive technologies" ; and "help south asian nations maintain their sovereignty as china increases its influence in the region" and offer african countries u.s. goods and services "as an alternative to china's often extractive economic footprint on the continent. .

insight into the administration's views on china in the context of the indo - pacific strategy were provided by former secretary of state tillerson , who described china's rise in october 2017 as: at times undermining the international , rules - based order even as countries like india operate within a framework that protects other nations' sovereignty .

china's provocative actions in the south china sea directly challenge the international law and norms that the united states and india both stand for .

the united states seeks constructive relations with china , but we will not shrink from china's challenges to the rules - based order and where china subverts the sovereignty of neighboring countries and disadvantages the u.s. and our friends .

in this period of uncertainty and somewhat angst , india needs a reliable partner on the world stage .

i want to make clear: with our shared values and vision for global stability , peace , and prosperity , the united states is that partner .

the administration appears to be acting in accordance with a central long - term tenet of u.s. strategic thinking , which is that the united states cannot allow any one power , or coalition of powers , to dominate the eurasian landmass , as such a power or coalition would have the ability to significantly threaten the united states and its interests .

among the challenges the administration may be responding to in developing the foip are: the growth of china's belt and road initiative ( bri ) , under which beijing pledges to finance infrastructure development across the region , and which many analysts argue would strengthen china both geopolitically and economically , at the expense of the united states , and give china leverage with investment recipients ; china's continued military modernization , and its militarization of the artificial islands it has built in the south china sea , which many analysts argue has altered the strategic landscape of east asia ; the expansion of china's naval activities in the indian ocean region ( ior ) and strategic mistrust between china and india ; china's continued growth as a trade , lending , and investment partner for many in the region , which some analysts fear will give beijing greater leverage over neighbors in both east asia and south asia ; concerns across the indo - pacific about the sustainability of u.s. commitment to the region , given u.s. strategic commitments in other regions and budgetary constraints facing both military spending and overall foreign assistance ; the trump administration's decision to withdraw the united states from the proposed 12-nation trans - pacific partnership trade agreement ( tpp ) in january 2017 , which has contributed to regional perceptions that the united states may lack an overall economic strategy toward the region ; and the prospect that china is challenging western liberal democratic values and the united states' network of alliances and strategic relationships in the indo - pacific .

the nss also describes russia as seeking to undermine the international , rules - based order , and some analysts have raised concerns about signs of increasing cooperation between china and russia .

chinese military forces participated in the russian military exercise vostok in september 2018 in the trans - baikal region of russia , and russian and chinese businesses are reportedly considering joint investment projects worth an estimated $100 billion .

vostok - 2018 was held in russia's far east and the pacific ocean and is thought to be the largest russian war game in three decades .

china's ministry of national defense has stated that the drills are: aimed at consolidating and developing the china - russia comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination , deepening pragmatic and friendly cooperation between the two armies , and further strengthening their ability to jointly deal with varied security threats , which are conducive to safeguarding regional peace and security .

according to one source , vostok - 2018 "highlights the growing closeness between beijing and moscow as the two great powers make common cause to challenge washington's dominance of the liberal international world order. .

one study attributes the deepening and broadening of the china - russia relationship to common objectives and values , perceived russian and chinese vulnerabilities in the face of u.s. and western pressure , and perceived opportunities for the two powers to expand their influence at the expense of u.s. , and allied countries that are seen in decline .

another source states , "chinese participation in russia's major annual military exercise is a signal that beijing is ready to develop a closer partnership with moscow if relations with the united states continue to deteriorate. .

yet further analysis describes the relationship as an entente .

the moscow - beijing relationship , while not an alliance , is also more than the strategic partnership it still calls itself .

it is best described as an entente — a basic agreement about the fundamentals of world order supported by a strong body of common interest .

while projecting a "strong and unified image" suits the interests of both beijing and moscow relative to the united states and the west , mutual suspicions between the two nations continue .

the indo - pacific region's economy is significant and important to the u.s. economy , and the trump administration has made adjusting perceived trade and other imbalances a high priority .

in 2017 , the region accounted for 57.6% of global population and 42.1% of global gross domestic product ( gdp ) on a purchasing power parity basis .

the united states millennium challenge corporation has granted $2.1 billion since 2004 to indo - pacific nations and the overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) "has a portfolio of $3.9 billion invested in the indo - pacific alongside american firms … for every dollar that opic has invested , the private sector has invested $2.76. .

according to the u.s. chamber of commerce , the region will need to attract nearly $26 trillion in capital to fund its energy and infrastructure needs .

the organization for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) expected that the number of middle - class people in asia would rise from 525 million in 2009 to an estimated 3.2 billion in 2013 .

china's belt and road initiative ( bri ) , which seeks to provide financing and investment for building infrastructure across the eurasian landmass , in many ways presents a new geo - economic challenge and adds to regional perceptions of china's rise and america's relative decline .

president trump's foip responds to china's initiative by offering a "renewed partnership with america to work together to strengthen the bonds of friendship and commerce between all of the nations of the indo - pacific , and together , to promote our prosperity and security. .

the president has also described the basis in which future trade relations would be built in the region: [w]e seek robust trade relationships rooted in the principles of fairness and reciprocity .

when the united states enters into a trading relationship with other countries or other peoples , we will , from now on , expect that our partners will faithfully follow the rules just like we do .

we expect that markets will be open to an equal degree on both sides , and that private industry , not government planners , will direct investment... .

i will make bilateral trade agreements with any indo - pacific nation that wants to be our partner and that will abide by the principles of fair and reciprocal trade .

what we will no longer do is enter into large agreements that tie our hands , surrender our sovereignty , and make meaningful enforcement practically impossible .

the administration's trade strategy was further discussed in its december 2017 national security strategy: the united states will encourage regional cooperation to maintain free and open seaways , transparent infrastructure financing practices , unimpeded commerce , and the peaceful resolution of disputes .

we will pursue bilateral trade agreements on a fair and reciprocal basis .

we will seek equal and reliable access for american exports .

we will work with partners to build a network of states dedicated to free markets and protected from forces that would subvert their sovereignty .

we will strengthen cooperation with allies on high - quality infrastructure .

working with australia and new zealand , we will shore up fragile partner states in the pacific islands region to reduce their vulnerability to economic fluctuations and natural disasters .

the deterioration of trade relations between the united states and china may affect other aspects of the bilateral relationship , and has raised concerns among regional states whose economies are closely tied to trade with both countries .

some have viewed the evolving trade war with china as marking "the opening stages of a new economic cold war," leading some to consider the possibility that "the united states may be in a protracted and economically damaging trade fight for years to come. .

president trump outlined his "vision for a free and open indo - pacific" while speaking to the asia pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) ceo summit in vietnam in november 2017 .

beyond the national security strategy ( nss ) and the national defense strategy ( nds ) , trump administration officials have sought to articulate the indo - pacific strategy in numerous statements including secretary of state pompeo's economic and security cooperation initiatives announced in july and august 2018 .

in a july 2018 speech , secretary of state mike pompeo described the foip initiatives goals: when we say "free" indo - pacific , it means we all want all nations , every nation , to be able to protect their sovereignty from coercion by other countries .

at the national level , "free" means good governance and the assurance that citizens can enjoy their fundamental rights and liberties .

when we say "open" in the indo - pacific , it means we want all nations to enjoy open access to seas and airways .

we want the peaceful resolution of territorial and maritime disputes .

this is key for international peace and for each country's attainment of its own national aims .

economically , "open" means fair and reciprocal trade , open investment environments , transparent agreements between nations , and improved connectivity to drive regional ties — because these are the paths for sustainable growth in the region .

while the trump administration's free and open indo - pacific initiative has been viewed by some observers as seeking to reshape america's strategic approach to the region and manage china's rise , one source takes the view that "allies and adversaries alike are left wondering if the united states really has the will and resources to make it happen" adding that: while the region welcomes the aspirations of the indo - pacific strategy as a sign of broader strategy and regional engagement , the challenge right now is that it's just aspirational — a set of goals with no real strategy , policy enumeration or implantation plan , let alone resourcing and budget .

others argue that the initial set of foip related initiatives are relatively small in scope .

one south asia expert has written that "the $113 million in assistance will clearly not scratch the surface of the financing needs in the indo - pacific region. .

some observers point out that the trump administration withdrew the united states from the proposed trans pacific partnership ( tpp ) and have criticized the foip's economic initiatives as well short of china's commitments to the region which , while generally believed to be overstated in the media , are also thought to be in the billions .

another key concern some have with the strategy is that it lacks a comprehensive economic component sufficient to accomplish its goals .

others point to problems in messaging related to the foip concept .

some analysts argue that regional states tend to underestimate the value and importance of u.s. economic engagement with the region when it is compared with belt and road initiatives by china because u.s. foreign direct investment ( fdi ) is largely not state - led .

the foip concept's emphasis on india , japan , and australia has led some to question where this leaves the concept of asean centrality in america's strategy towards the region .

similarly , some ask whether u.s. treaty ally south korea should have greater prominence in the initiative .

the trump administration has emphasized that its foip concept is about an open system , one open to others beyond the quad countries .

some have observed a reticence on the part of india to engage more fully with the quad .

some view this as being driven by a reluctance to antagonize china .

if this is the case , then there are significant limits on how far such a strategy can go .

while the administration has expressed a desire to work with all like - minded partners in the indo - pacific region that "share its vision of a stable and prosperous indo - pacific where sovereignty is upheld and a rules based system is respected," the administration's free and open indo - pacific strategy has placed relatively more emphasis on relations with india , japan , and australia .

while generally supportive of the trump administration's approach , these potential partners have sometimes divergent views and goals .

china's government played down the significance of the trump administration's free and open indo - pacific strategy .

at his annual press conference in march 2018 , china's foreign minister , wang yi , described the strategy as just another "headline - grabbing idea. .

all such ideas , he said , "are like the sea foam in the pacific or indian ocean: they may get some attention , but soon will dissipate. .

wang noted that the official position of the united states , australia , india , and japan is that the strategy "targets no one … i hope they mean what they say and their action will match their rhetoric. .

he warned , "nowadays , stoking a new cold war is out of sync with the times and inciting bloc confrontation will find no market. .

in early september 2018 , a spokesperson for china's foreign ministry said china welcomed the development of u.s. - india relations , adding that china hoped both "could contribute more to regional peace and stability. .

in july 2018 , another foreign ministry spokesperson said china welcomed pledges of infrastructure investment in the region from the united states , japan , and australia .

the spokesperson questioned , however , whether the three countries would make good on those pledges .

"if my memory serves me correctly , this is not the first time for them to make this statement," the spokesman noted .

"as a chinese saying goes , 'talking the talk is not as good as walking the walk.' .

in june 2018 , a ministry of defense spokesperson acknowledged "concern" about a joint u.s. - japan - india naval exercise , held off the coast of guam that month .

"china believes that the military cooperation of relevant countries should be conducive to regional peace and stability and not target any third country," the spokesman said .

prc scholars and commentators have been less restrained .

a senior scholar with china's foreign ministry think tank , the china institute of international studies , concludes: as foip has adopted such a blunt , cutthroat zero - sum , ideological , antagonistic and containment - oriented posture toward china , it's safe to say that the us strategy , up to now , is inherently anti - china , no matter what shining notions it has used or euphemisms it might apply .

it is the first time in the four - decade china - us diplomatic relations that a us administration has used such categorical , antagonistic language in its official documents and statements to portray china's behavior and intentions .

in august 2018 , a research fellow with the chongyang institute for financial studies at renmin university of china proposed a series of counter - measures china might take to blunt the impact of the u.s. indo - pacific strategy .

they include: help construct "an indo - pacific discourse system" and "deconstruct some concepts put forward by the u.s. and other countries that are not in china's interests , and replace them with new concepts that are beneficial to china by means of discourse substitution strategies. .

avoid high - cost direct military confrontation with the united states and instead pursue "'military operations other than war' ( such as the construction work on [china's] own islands and reefs , construction of roads , upgrading of border facilities , etc. ) . .

on trade , in the short - to medium - term , "force the u.s. side to negotiate with china through targeted counterattacks," and "by making limited concessions and reaching new agreements that do not harm china's fundamental interests. .

in the long - term , china must "carry out internal reforms. .

"[d]emonstrate [china's] goodwill and provide reassurance to the international community by using concepts such as 'community of shared future for mankind' as well as the 'belt and road initiative,' and those of the asian infrastructure investment bank ( aiib ) , and the brics new development bank. .

work with major asian nations such as japan , india , and australia "to safeguard common interests ( globalization , multilateralism , fair trade , etc. ) .

and , by so doing , weaken their motivation and determination to join indo - pacific countries to contain china. .

take advantage of what the author sees as the lack of "vital attention" to asean in the foip by first improving relations with vietnam and the philippines , then strengthening economic and trade cooperation with asean , then moving on to security cooperation .

"[p ]rudently strengthen strategic cooperation with russia , iran and other countries , and take advantage of the increasing challenges to the u.s. in eastern europe and the middle east" to reduce pressure on china .

also , stay alert to the potential for any development "that makes the u.s. feel the compelling urge to seek strategic support from china. .

counter the "negative impact" of u.s. policies on the world order and globalization through "pragmatic cooperation with mutual benefit and win - win results. .

use the belt and road initiative , the shanghai cooperation organization , the brics , and the aiib , "to galvanize the support of third parties and jointly build a community of shared future for mankind. .

the trump administration's foip initiative poses a number of potential policy and oversight issues for congress , including the following: administration strategy .

where does the indo - pacific lie in the administration's list of priorities ? .

does the trump administration have a fully developed , whole - of - government strategy for achieving a free and open indo - pacific ? .

does it have such a strategy for implementing the quad concept ? .

if so , what are the elements of that strategy , and what programs and funding in the administration's proposed fy2019 budget are intended to begin implementing that strategy ? .

if not , when does the trump administration anticipate completing its development of such a strategy ? .

to what extent does the foip initiative subsume other administration initiatives ? .

for example does the administration consider potential effects of trade policies on attitudes of friends and allies towards the foip initiative or are administration policies towards iran viewed independently , in tandem with or subordinate to indo - pacific objectives ? .

what is the process for determining the administration's priorities toward the region ? .

time and attention devoted to issue .

given the need for the united states to monitor and respond to events in other regions , is the trump administration devoting adequate time and resources to tracking and responding to developments in the indo - pacific ? .

how are new initiatives to be funded ? .

geographic scope .

have the strategic implications of defining the western edge of the indo - pacific region as the west coast of india — rather than farther west — been fully considered ? .

what effect does this have on india's involvement in the strategy ? .

does this delineation ignore trade , energy , and strategic linkages between the persian gulf and the western indian ocean and east asia and the broader indo - pacific region ? .

state department staffing .

what impact , if any , does the current staffing situation at the state department — where many positions are unfilled — have on the u.s. ability to develop and implement a whole - of - government strategy for the indo - pacific ? .

economic elements of the initiative .

following the u.s. withdrawal from the tpp , and given the administration's more recent trade actions , what are the economic elements of the foip strategy ? .

do potential indo - pacific partners view the foip as an overly militarized policy approach ? .

what actions could the united states consider to convince regional partners that the foip has tangible economic benefits for them ? .

u.s. r elations with o ther countries .

what implications does the indo - pacific strategy have for u.s. relations with china and other countries in the region ? .

does it change administration conceptions of "asean centrality" in asian regional diplomacy ? .

are initiatives such as the quad , which have emerged from particular leaders in countries like japan and india , sustainable beyond the tenure of those leaders ? .

u.s. defense programs and spending levels .

what implications does the indo - pacific strategy have for u.s. defense programs and spending levels ? .

how might it affect requirements for maintaining forward - deployed u.s. military forces in the region , or for modernizing u.s. military forces , particularly naval and air forces ? .

to what degree can or should the united states rely on u.s. allies or partner countries to counter china's military presence in the region ? .

u.s. arms sales .

what implications does the indo - pacific strategy have for u.s. arms sales in the region ? .

in light of new and existing strategic challenges in the region , what kinds of arms should the united states sell to regional friends and allies ? .

u.s. foreign assistance .

what implications does the indo - pacific strategy have for the scale or allocation of u.s. foreign assistance funding to the region ? .

is the indo - pacific receiving too large a share , too little a share , or about the right share of total u.s. foreign assistance funding ? .

is the allocation of u.s. foreign assistance funding to individual countries in the region appropriate , or should it be changed in some way ? .

economic architec ture .

is the evolving strategy towards the indo - pacific overly reliant on military tools following the united states' withdrawal from the tpp ? .

should the trump administration seek to further develop or engage with an economic architecture for the indo - pacific that could promote peace and stability and enhance u.s. interests through enhanced economic interdependencies between regional states including china ? .

what role should u.s. allies and partners play in providing and coordinating infrastructure financing in the region ? .

under what conditions would president trump support u.s. reentry into the tpp ? .

what is the administration's position on the chinese - led asian infrastructure investment bank ( aiib ) ? .

trade and investment .

what specific policies should the united states take regarding economic and trade ties with the indo - pacific region ? .

how important are the export import bank of the united states and the u.s. overseas private investment corporation in helping to finance u.s. exports to the region ? .

the challenges confronting the trump administration and its efforts to establish a free and open indo - pacific will likely remain part of the regional strategic landscape for many years to come .

china's strategic position in the indo - pacific , which is to a large extent defined by its belt and road initiative and its increasing military power , is changing the balance of power in the region .

regional states such as india , japan , and australia , while looking to the united states to play a stabilizing role in the region , are also looking to develop their own security relationships to hedge against geopolitical uncertainty .

existing flashpoints also have the potential to threaten u.s. interests .

congress can aid this administration's and future administration's efforts to shape the strategic dynamics of the indo - pacific in a way that protects and promotes american interests and values .

appendix a .

executive branch foip - related documents listed chronologically .

the white house , "remarks by president trump at apec ceo summit / da nang , vietnam," november 10 , 2017 , https: / / www.whitehouse.gov / briefings - statements / remarks - president - trump - apec - ceo - summit - da - nang - vietnam / .

the white house , "national security strategy of the united states of america," december , 2017 , https: / / www.whitehouse.gov / wp - content / uploads / 2017 / 12 / nss - final - 12-18-2017-0905-2.pdf .

u.s. department of defense , summary of the 2018 national defense strategy of the united states of america: sharpening the american military's competitive edge , january 2018 , https: / / dod.defense.gov / portals / 1 / documents / pubs / 2018-national - defense - strategy - summary.pdf .

u.s. department of state , deputy assistant secretary for south and central asian affairs daniel rosenblum , "the united states and the indo - pacific region," january 30 , 2018 , https: / / www.state.gov / p / sca / rls / rmks / 2018 / 277742.htm .

u.s. department of state , deputy assistant secretary for east asian and pacific affairs walter douglas , "new zealand , the united states , and the indo - pacific," march 26 , 2018 , https: / / www.state.gov / p / eap / rls / rm / 2018 / 03 / 279557.htm .

u.s. department of state , deputy assistant secretary for east asian and pacific affairs alex wong , "briefing on the indo - pacific strategy," april 2 , 2018 , https: / / www.state.gov / r / pa / prs / ps / 2018 / 04 / 280134.htm .

u.s. department of defense , "remarks by secretary mattis at plenary session of the 2018 shangri - la dialogue," june 2 , 2018 , https: / / dod.defense.gov / news / transcripts / transcript - view / article / 1538599 / remarks - by - secretary - mattis - at - plenary - session - of - the - 2018-shangri - la - dialogue / .

u.s. department of state , "joint statement australia - u.s .

ministerial consultations 2018," july 24 , 2018 , https: / / www.state.gov / r / pa / prs / ps / 2018 / 07 / 284460.htm .

u.s. department of state , secretary of state michael pompeo , "remarks on 'america's indo - pacific economic vision,'" july 30 , 2018 , https: / / www.state.gov / secretary / remarks / 2018 / 07 / 284722.htm .

u.s. agency for international development , "u.s. agency for international development administrator mark green's remarks at the indo - pacific business forum," july 30 , 2018 , https: / / www.usaid.gov / news - information / press - releases / jul - 30-2018-administrator - mark - green - remarks - indo - pacific - business - forum .

export - import bank of the united states , "remarks by acting president and chairman of export import bank of the united states jeffrey d. gerrish at the indo - pacific business forum," july 30 , 2018 , https: / / www.exim.gov / news / archives / speeches / remarks - acting - president - and - chairman - export - import - bank - united - states - bank .

u.s. department of commerce , "u.s. secretary of commerce wilbur ross announces programs to increase u.s. commercial engagement in the indo - pacific region," july 30 , 2018 , https: / / www.commerce.gov / news / press - releases / 2018 / 07 / us - secretary - commerce - wilbur - ross - announces - programs - increase - us .

overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) , "u.s. - japan - australia announce trilateral partnership for indo - pacific infrastructure investment," july 30 , 2018 , https: / / www.opic.gov / press - releases / 2018 / us - japan - australia - announce - trilateral - partnership - indo - pacific - infrastructure - investment .

u.s. department of state , secretary of state michael r. pompeo , "press availability at the 51 st asean foreign ministers' meeting and related meetings," august 4 , 2018 , https: / / www.state.gov / secretary / remarks / 2018 / 08 / 284924.htm .

office of the spokesperson , u.s. department of state , "u.s. security cooperation in the indo - pacific region," august 4 , 2018 , https: / / www.state.gov / r / pa / prs / ps / 2018 / 08 / 284927.htm .

keynote address by assistant secretary of defense for asian and pacific security affairs randall schriver at american enterprise institute event , "an american strategy for southeast asia," august 7 , 2018 , https: / / www.aei.org / wp - content / uploads / 2018 / 07 / 180807-aei - american - strategy.pdf .

u.s. department of state , principal deputy assistant secretary for south and central asian affairs alice g. wells , "u.s. policy in the indian ocean region," august 20 , 2018 , https: / / fpc.state.gov / 08 / 285237.htm .

u.s. department of state , principal deputy assistant secretary for south and central asian affairs alice g. wells , "building regional architectures," remarks at the third indian ocean conference , hanoi , august 28 , 2018 , https: / / www.state.gov / p / sca / rls / rmks / 2018 / 285557.htm .

appendix b .

selected indo - pacific related legislation in the 115 th congress the trump administration has supported several legislative initiatives that appear related to its foip strategy .

they include multiple provisions of the john s. mccain national defense authorization act for fy2019 ( h.r .

5515 / p.l .

115-232 ) , enacted on august 13 , 2018 .

subtitle e of the legislation is devoted to "matters relating to the indo - pacific region. .

section 1251 of the law changes the name of u.s. pacific command to "united states indo - pacific command. .

the sponsors of the asia reassurance initiative act of 2018 ( aria ) ( s. 2736 and h.r .

6888 ) seek to "enshrine[ ] a generational policy framework to demonstrate u.s. commitment to a free and open indo - pacific region and the rules - based international order. .

the senate version of the bill , which was reported by the senate foreign relations committee on september 26 , 2018 , would authorize $1.5 billion annually for five years to the department of state , the u.s. agency for international development and , as appropriate , the department of defense , to: enhance the u.s. presence in the indo - pacific , advance u.s. foreign policy interests and objectives in the indo - pacific , improve the defense capacity of partner nations , conduct engagements to meet strategic challenges , build new counter - terrorism partnership programs in southeast asia , increase maritime domain awareness programs in south and southeast asia , and counter the strategic influence of china .

the legislation would also authorize funding of $210 million annually for five years to promote democracy , civil society , human rights , rule of law , transparency , and accountability efforts .

other legislation related to the foip strategy includes the better utilization of investments leading to development ( build ) act of 2018 , which congress passed on october 3 , 2018 , as division f of the federal aviation administration ( faa ) reauthorization act of 2018 ( h.r .

302 ) .

the bill establishes the united states international development finance corporation to mobilize and facilitate the participation of private sector capital and skills in the economic development of less developed countries ... , and countries in transition from nonmarket to market economies , in order to complement the development assistance objectives , and advance the foreign policy interests , of the united states .

statements from the build act's sponsors and from the administration have presented it as a response to china's activities in the developing world .

after the build act passed the house in july 2018 , a press release from bill sponsor congressman ted s. yoho stated that the legislation , "meets the administration's request to reform foreign aid development finance to incentivize the private sector in emerging markets and provide countries with better alternatives to chinese investment. .

a co - sponsor of the senate's version of the build act , senator chris coons , stated after senate passage of h.r .

302 that the build act would allow the united states to achieve several goals , including "reduce poverty in areas that are critical to our national security [and] compete with chinese influence in the developing world. .

the white house press secretary issued a statement describing passage of the build act as an important step toward fulfilling the commitment president trump made to reform the united states' development finance institutions so that they better incentivize private sector investment in emerging economies and provide strong alternatives to state - directed initiatives that come with hidden strings attached. .

the "state - directed initiatives" language appeared to be a reference to china's belt and road initiative .

