federal immigration laws set forth procedures governing the exclusion and removal of non - u.s. nationals ( aliens ) who do not meet specified criteria regarding their entry or presence within the united states .

typically , aliens within the united states may not be removed without due process .

commensurate with these constitutional protections , the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) generally affords an alien whose removal is sought with certain procedural guarantees , including the right to written notice of the charge of removability , to seek counsel , to appear at a hearing before an immigration judge ( ij ) , to present evidence , to appeal an adverse decision to the board of immigration appeals ( bia ) , and to seek judicial review .

congress , however , has broad authority over the admission of aliens seeking to enter the united states .

the supreme court has repeatedly held that the government may exclude an alien seeking to enter this country without affording him the traditional due process protections that otherwise govern formal removal proceedings ; instead , an alien seeking initial entry is entitled only to those procedural protections that congress expressly authorized .

consistent with this broad authority , section 235 ( b ) ( 1 ) of the ina provides for the expedited removal of arriving aliens who do not have valid entry documents or have attempted to gain their admission by fraud or misrepresentation .

under this streamlined removal procedure , which congress established through the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act ( iirira ) of 1996 , such aliens may be summarily removed without a hearing or further review .

in limited circumstances , however , an alien subject to expedited removal may be entitled to certain procedural protections before he may be removed from the united states .

for example , an alien who expresses a fear of persecution may obtain administrative review of his claim and , if the review determines that his fear is credible , the alien will be placed in "formal" removal proceedings where he can pursue asylum and related protections .

additionally , an alien may seek administrative review of a claim that he is a u.s. citizen , lawful permanent resident ( lpr ) , admitted refugee , or asylee .

unaccompanied alien children also are not subject to expedited removal .

in addition to providing for expedited removal of certain arriving aliens , ina section 235 ( b ) ( 1 ) also confers the secretary of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) with the ability to expand the use of expedited removal to aliens present in the united states without being admitted or paroled if they have been in the country less than two years and do not have valid entry documents or have attempted to gain their admission by fraud or misrepresentation .

in practice , the government has employed expedited removal only to ( 1 ) arriving aliens ; ( 2 ) aliens who arrived in the united states by sea within the last two years , who have not been admitted or paroled by immigration authorities ; and ( 3 ) aliens found in the united states within 100 miles of the border within 14 days of entering the country , who have not been admitted or paroled by immigration authorities .

nevertheless , expedited removal is a major component of immigration enforcement , and in recent years , it has been one of the most regularly employed means by which immigration authorities remove persons from the united states .

furthermore , in january 2017 , president trump issued an executive order directing dhs to apply expedited removal within the broader limitations of the statute .

to date , however , dhs has not yet implemented this policy .

this report provides an overview of the statutory and regulatory framework that governs expedited removal under ina section 235 ( b ) ( 1 ) .

the report also highlights the exceptions to expedited removal , including provisions that permit an alien to seek review of an asylum claim before he may be removed .

finally , the report addresses the scope of judicial review of an expedited removal order , some of the legal challenges that have been raised to the expedited removal process , and briefly considers potential legal issues that may arise if expedited removal were expanded to cover additional categories of aliens present in the united states .

a glossary of some terms used frequently throughout this report can be found in appendix a .

as noted above , expedited removal authority currently is exercised with regard to the following three overarching categories of aliens: 1 .

arriving aliens seeking entry into the united states at a designated port of entry .

2 .

aliens who arrived in the united states by sea , who have not been admitted or paroled , and who have been in this country for less than two years .

3 .

aliens who are encountered within 100 miles of the border , who have not been admitted or paroled , and who have been in the united states for less than 14 days .

aliens in these categories are subject to expedited removal only if they fall under the grounds of inadmissibility found in ina section 212 ( a ) ( 6 ) ( c ) and ( a ) ( 7 ) .

these grounds of inadmissibility generally apply to aliens who lack valid entry documents or who attempt to procure admission through fraud or misrepresentation .

more specifically , the two inadmissibility grounds apply to the following: an alien who is not in possession of ( 1 ) a valid unexpired immigrant visa , reentry permit , border crossing identification card , or other valid entry document ; and ( 2 ) a valid unexpired passport , or other suitable travel document , or document of identity and nationality if required under applicable regulations .

this provision applies , for example , to aliens who arrive with proper documents for entry into the united states for certain purposes , but who intend to enter the united states for reasons that require different authorizing documents .

an alien whose immigrant visa has been issued in violation of the provisions regarding the numerical limitations on the distribution of immigrant visas .

an alien whose passport will expire within six months after his authorized period of stay in the united states .

an alien who is not in possession of a valid nonimmigrant visa or border crossing identification card at the time of his application for admission .

an alien who seeks to procure ( or has attempted to procure or has procured ) a visa , other documentation , or admission into the united states or other immigration benefit through fraud or willful misrepresentation ( eg , an alien presenting a photo - substituted passport , or providing false information on a visa application ) .

an alien who falsely represents ( or has falsely represented ) himself to be a u.s. citizen .

importantly , expedited removal is available in cases where the alien is charged only with being inadmissible under these grounds .

if an immigration officer determines that an alien is inadmissible on additional grounds ( eg , because he has engaged in specified criminal activity ) , then the alien will be placed in formal removal proceedings under ina section 240 .

ina section 235 ( b ) ( 1 ) instructs that an immigration officer must inspect an alien and determine whether he falls within the category of inadmissible aliens subject to expedited removal .

if the alien meets the criteria for expedited removal , the alien will be ordered removed without a hearing or further review , unless the alien indicates an intent to apply for asylum or a fear of persecution .

the alien will also be barred from reentering the united states for five years , with lengthier or even permanent bars to admission if special factors are present .

while expedited removal is a more streamlined process than formal removal proceedings , it nonetheless can involve a number of determinations by multiple agencies and agency subcomponents — particularly in cases where an alien intends to apply for asylum or expresses a more generalized fear of persecution that could potentially render the alien eligible for relief from removal .

u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , the dhs component with primary responsibility for immigration enforcement along the border and at designated ports of entry , typically takes the lead role in the expedited removal process , from the initial inspection or apprehension of the alien through the issuance of an order of expedited removal .

u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , the dhs component primarily responsible for interior enforcement and removal , also regularly plays a significant role , such as when the alien seeks asylum or expresses a fear of persecution , and ice takes responsibility for the alien's detention and removal .

another dhs component , u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) , is responsible for interviewing aliens who have claimed a fear of persecution and assesses whether such claims are credible .

if such claims are not deemed credible , the agency may issue an expedited removal order .

finally , ijs within the department of justice's executive office for immigration review may become involved in the expedited removal process when either ( 1 ) an ij is asked to review a uscis determination that an alien does not have a credible fear of persecution or ( 2 ) in the event that an alien is determined to have a credible fear , the alien is placed in formal removal proceedings before an ij where the alien's claim for relief can be adjudicated .

the following sections provide further explanation of the expedited removal process .

the ina generally authorizes ( but does not require ) immigration authorities to detain aliens pending their removal proceedings .

aliens placed in expedited removal , however , are generally subject to detention pending a determination as to whether they should be removed from the united states .

aliens in the expedited removal process who express a fear of persecution or an intent to apply for asylum are likewise generally subject to detention while the viability of those claims is considered .

but depending on a number of circumstances , including whether such aliens are apprehended at a designated port of entry or crossing the border surreptitiously , such aliens may potentially be released from detention on bond , on their own recognizance , under an order of supervision , or via the exercise of dhs's parole authority .

moreover , the extended detention of alien minors and their parents is limited by a binding settlement agreement from a case in the u.s. district court for the central district of california now called  flores v. sessions .

an alien who is in expedited removal proceedings generally has no right to a hearing or administrative appeal of an immigration officer's determination that he should be removed from the united states .

in addition to these restrictions , the alien has no statutory right to seek judicial review of the expedited order of removal except in limited circumstances .

given its summary nature and comparatively limited procedural protections , the expedited removal process has been subject to legal challenges since its implementation in 1997 .

however , in part because of the strict limitations to judicial review of an expedited order of removal , courts have largely dismissed such challenges for lack of jurisdiction , or , in the few occasions where courts have entertained such challenges , rejected them on substantive grounds .

nevertheless , these cases raise important issues concerning the breadth and scope of the expedited removal statute and the constitutionality of its provisions .

since the enactment of the expedited removal statute , immigration authorities have implemented expedited removal with respect to three overarching categories of aliens: ( 1 ) those who arrive in the united states at a designated port of entry ; ( 2 ) those who arrived in the united states by sea , and who have been in the country for less than two years ; and ( 3 ) those found within 100 miles of the u.s. border , within 14 days of entering the country .

the overwhelming majority of aliens subject to expedited removal , in other words , have been inspected or apprehended at a designated port of entry or near the international border when attempting to enter , or shortly after entering , the united states .

but as previously discussed , the expedited removal statute permits the secretary of dhs to apply expedited removal to any alien inadmissible due to a lack of entry documents or because he sought to obtain entry through fraud or misrepresentation , regardless of the alien's location , provided that the alien has not been admitted or paroled and has been in the country for less than two years .

thus , dhs has the statutory authority to expand expedited removal on a much larger geographic and temporal scale .

to that end , on january 25 , 2017 , president trump issued an executive order directing the dhs secretary to apply expedited removal within the broader framework of ina section 235 ( b ) ( 1 ) .

less than a month later , then - dhs secretary john kelly announced a series of border security and immigration enforcement initiatives .

among other measures , secretary kelly announced that "[t]o ensure the prompt removal of aliens apprehended soon after crossing the border illegally , the department will publish in the federal register a new notice designating aliens subject to expedited removal under [ina] section 235 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ( iii ) ," which may "depart from the limitations set forth in the designation currently in force. .

as reasons for this policy change , secretary kelly pointed to a "surge of illegal immigration at the southern border," a "historic backlog" of immigration court cases , and an increase in the number of apprehensions between ports of entry on the southern border .

in response , some immigrant rights advocates reportedly "denounced the proposed expansion ... warning that the policy would strip more immigrants of due process rights to seek asylum or other legal protections that would allow them to remain in the country. .

while federal statute clearly confers dhs with authority to employ expedited removal in a broader fashion , extending the process to aliens away from the border or its functional equivalent would likely prompt legal challenge .

as previously discussed , the supreme court has long recognized that , while aliens seeking entry into the united states have no constitutional rights regarding their applications for admission , aliens who have entered the united states , even unlawfully , are entitled to some due process protections before they can be removed .

such due process protections typically involve the right to a hearing and a meaningful opportunity to be heard .

as discussed in this report , an alien subject to expedited removal has no right to a hearing or further review of a determination that he should be removed from the united states .

thus , expanding expedited removal to cover aliens present in any part of the united states could come into conflict with these constitutional notions .

moreover , although some courts have , in light of the entry fiction doctrine , determined that aliens apprehended near the border may not avail themselves of these constitutional protections , the extent to which this principle may be applied to aliens in the interior , or who have developed ties to the united states , is far from certain .

however , the supreme court , at times , has appeared to view admission into the united states by immigration authorities as the key factor that determines whether an alien is entitled to constitutional protections .

for example , in landon v. plasencia , the supreme court stated that "once an alien gains admission to our country and begins to develop the ties that go with permanent residence his constitutional status changes accordingly. .

the court has also suggested that the length of time that an alien has spent in the united states may inform the scope and degree of constitutional protections .

these principles might support the argument that expedited removal can be applied on a wider basis to aliens within the interior of the united states who have been in the country for relatively short periods of time .

but notwithstanding the language in landon , the supreme court has continued to describe an alien's physical presence in the united states , whether lawful or unlawful , as the critical factor in assessing whether due process attaches .

therefore , if dhs undertakes a future expansion of expedited removal , the courts may be confronted with further challenges to the agency's implementation of that procedure down the road .

until now , courts have addressed such challenges only within the confines of enforcement actions at or near the border .

if dhs implements expedited removal on a broader scale throughout the united states , the courts may need to address critical questions concerning the scope of the federal government's plenary power over the admission of aliens , and the limits of that "sovereign prerogative" with respect to aliens already present in the united states .

appendix a. glossary appendix b .

implementation and expansion of expedited removal: 1997-2017 the following discussion is a more comprehensive overview of the executive's implementation and expansion of expedited removal following the passage of iirira in 1996 .

arriving aliens initially , the former ins limited the application of its expedited removal authority to aliens arriving in the united states .

in order to clarify the scope of the term "arriving alien," the ins issued regulations that defined the term to include aliens seeking admission into the united states at a port of entry , aliens seeking transit through the united states at a port of entry , and aliens who have been interdicted at sea and brought into the united states "by any means , whether or not to a designated port - of - entry , and regardless of the means of transport. .

in response to opposition to the inclusion of aliens interdicted at sea in the definition of "arriving alien," the ins pointed to bia precedent holding that "the mere crossing into the territorial waters of the united states has never satisfied the test of having entered the united states," and reasoned that "[a]liens who have not yet established physical presence on land in the united states cannot be considered as anything other than arriving aliens. .

furthermore , the ins declared , "[t]he inclusion of aliens interdicted at sea in the definition of arriving alien will support the department's mandate to protect the nation's borders against illegal immigration. .

the ins further determined that "[a]n arriving alien remains an arriving alien even if paroled pursuant to ina section 212 ( d ) ( 5 ) , and even after any such parole is terminated or revoked. .

the ins explained that the inclusion of paroled aliens was based on the language of ina section 212 ( d ) ( 5 ) , which indicated that the parole of an alien did not constitute an admission into the united states , and that the alien would be considered an applicant for admission once the purpose of the parole had been served .

looking ahead , the ins "reserve[d] the right to apply expedited removal procedures to additional classes of aliens within the limits set by the statute , if , in the commissioner's discretion , such action is operationally warranted. .

this expanded category of aliens , the ins explained , "may be localized , in response to specific needs within a particular region , or nationwide , as appropriate. .

the agency declared that "a proposed expansion of the expedited removal procedures may occur at any time and may be driven either by specific situations such as a sudden influx of illegal aliens motivated by political or economic unrest or other events or by a general need to increase the effectiveness of enforcement operations at one or more locations. .

the ins , however , recognized that expanding the reach of expedited removal would "involve more complex determinations of fact and will be more difficult to manage," and indicated that , for the time being , it would apply the new procedures "on a more limited and controlled basis. .

therefore , upon iirira's passage , the new expedited removal statute covered only arriving aliens in the united states , which , in turn , encompassed ( 1 ) aliens arriving at a port of entry , ( 2 ) aliens in transit at a port of entry , and ( 3 ) aliens interdicted at sea who have been brought into the united states .

nevertheless , at the outset , the ins's expedited removal authority "dramatically affect[ed] the pool of persons subject to expedited procedures. .

criminal aliens held in texas correctional facilities ( proposed but not implemented ) in 1999 , the ins considered , but ultimately did not implement , a "pilot program" that would have extended expedited removal to aliens who ( 1 ) had been convicted of unlawful entry ; ( 2 ) had not been admitted or paroled into the united states , and had been physically present in the united states for less than two years ; and ( 3 ) were serving criminal sentences in designated correctional facilities in texas .

to support its proposed expansion , the ins cited ina section 235 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ( iii ) and its implementing regulations , which gave it the authority to apply expedited removal to aliens who entered the united states without being admitted or paroled , and who have not been in the united states for at least two years .

citing a lack of detention space and an increase in the number of criminal alien apprehensions , the ins determined that a more effective procedure to remove aliens serving short criminal sentences was warranted .

despite this proposed expansion , neither the ins nor dhs implemented this policy .

aliens who arrived in the united states by sea in 2002 , the ins authorized expedited removal for a "newly designated class" of aliens: those who arrived in the united states by sea , "either by boat or other means," and who ( 1 ) have not been admitted or paroled , and ( 2 ) have not been physically present in the united states for a continuous period of at least two years at the time of their apprehension .

as it had done before , the ins cited ina section 235 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ( iii ) as the statutory authority for expanding expedited removal to aliens "who arrive illegally by sea. .

the ins noted that this expansion did not include aliens who arrived in the united states at a designated port of entry , or who were interdicted at sea and brought into the united states , because they were already subject to the expedited removal process for arriving aliens .

in addition , the ins did not apply its expansion to cuban nationals who arrived in the united states by sea because of the "longstanding u.s. policy to treat cubans differently from other aliens. .

therefore , apart from cuban nationals , all aliens who unlawfully arrived by sea in the united states , in a location other than a port of entry , would now be subject to expedited removal , and , with limited exceptions , detained pending any determination as to whether they had a credible fear of persecution .

the ins claimed that this expansion would "assist in deterring surges in illegal migration by sea , including potential mass migration , and preventing loss of life. .

the agency explained that "[a] surge in illegal migration by sea threatens national security by diverting valuable u.s. coast guard and other resources from counterterrorism and homeland security responsibilities. .

in addition , channeling the original legislative intent behind iirira's amendments , the agency determined that its decision was "necessary to remove quickly from the united states aliens who arrive illegally by sea and who do not establish a credible fear. .

the ins thus announced that it would implement expedited removal for aliens who arrived in this country by sea on or after november 13 , 2002 .

aliens unlawfully present in the united states within 100 miles of the border a few years later , in 2004 , dhs ( which had now replaced the ins ) authorized cbp to implement expedited removal for aliens who were unlawfully present in the united states without being admitted or paroled , if ( 1 ) they were apprehended within 100 miles of the border , and ( 2 ) they had not been physically present in the united states for a continuous period of at least 14 days .

as the statutory basis for this expansion , the agency again cited ina section 235 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ( iii ) , which gave it the discretion to apply expedited removal to aliens who were physically present in the united states without being admitted or paroled , and who could not establish their continuous physical presence in this country for up to two years .

in support of its decision to extend expedited removal to border areas , dhs pointed to "an urgent need to enhance [its] ability to improve the safety and security of the nation's land borders , as well as the need to deter foreign nationals from undertaking dangerous border crossings , and thereby prevent the needless deaths and crimes associated with human trafficking and alien smuggling operations. .

dhs thus determined that expanding the reach of expedited removal to aliens encountered shortly after they unlawfully entered the united states through the border would improve national security , "increase the deterrence of illegal entries by ensuring that apprehension quickly leads to removal," and "impair the ability of smuggling organizations to operate. .

ultimately , though , dhs limited its new designation of expedited removal to aliens who were neither nationals of mexico nor canada , and mexican and canadian nationals who had histories of criminal or immigration violations .

with regard to non - mexican and non - canadian nationals ( "third - country nationals" ) , dhs explained that there were logistical difficulties of initiating formal removal proceedings against nearly 1 million aliens apprehended each year , particularly along the southern border with mexico , and that , while the majority of those aliens were mexican nationals who could be "voluntarily returned" to mexico without any formal removal process , aliens from other countries could not simply be returned to mexico .

instead , they had to be detained pending arrangements for their return by aircraft , or pending formal removal proceedings .

given the agency's lack of resources to detain all third - country nationals , dhs explained , many of these aliens were released with instructions to appear for their removal proceedings , only to subsequently disappear in the united states .

for these reasons , dhs had a greater incentive to apply expedited removal to third - country nationals in border areas , than it did for mexican and canadian nationals .

on the other hand , given the agency's interest in improving national security and public safety , mexican and canadian nationals with prior criminal or immigration violations would be subject to expedited removal .

dhs also limited the scope of its new expedited removal designation to border areas .

the agency recognized that ina section 235 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ( iii ) did not geographically restrict expedited removal for aliens present in the united states without being admitted or paroled , and that the statute permitted expedited removal for aliens who could not establish their continuous physical presence in this country for up to two years .

nevertheless , the agency concentrated its enforcement resources "upon unlawful entries that have a close spatial and temporal nexus to the border. .

therefore , instead of implementing expedited removal nationwide , dhs limited it to "aliens who are apprehended immediately proximate to the land border and have negligible ties or equities in the u.s." the agency determined that an area within 100 miles of the border was "immediately proximate" to the border "because many aliens will arrive in vehicles that speedily depart the border area , and because other recent arrivals will find their way to near - border locales seeking transportation to other locations within the interior of the u.s." dhs also cited to agency regulations that had already established that the 100-mile range was a "reasonable distance" from the external boundary of the united states .

accordingly , dhs limited its new application of expedited removal to aliens apprehended within 14 days after they entered the united states , and within 100 miles of any international land border .

aliens falling into this category would be detained pending their removal and any determination as to whether they feared persecution .

consistent with other expedited removal designations , however , dhs excluded cuban nationals because their removal to cuba "[could not] presently be assured and for other u.s. policy reasons. .

dhs indicated that it would implement expedited removal for aliens apprehended in border areas beginning on august 11 , 2004 .

based on this latest expansion , dhs could now apply its expedited removal authority not only to aliens who arrived in the united states at ports of entry or by sea , but also to aliens who were encountered within this country's border regions between ports of entry .

expansion to entire southwest border initially , dhs limited the implementation of its new expedited removal authority to parts of the southwestern united states , specifically the border sectors of tucson , arizona ; yuma , arizona ; mcallen , texas ; laredo , texas ; san diego , california ; and el centro , california .

on september 14 , 2005 , dhs announced the expansion to three additional border sectors in del rio , tx ; marfa , tx ; and el paso , tx — thereby implementing the policy across the entire southwest border .

former secretary of homeland security michael chertoff , who headed the agency at the time , declared that the expansion "gives border patrol agents the ability to gain greater control of our borders and to protect our country against the terrorist threat. .

further , according to dhs , the expedited removal process "will disrupt the vicious human smuggling cycle that occurs along the southwest border. .

following the announcement , dhs implemented expedited removal along the entire land border with mexico .

expansion to entire u.s. border a few months later , on january 30 , 2006 , dhs announced the implementation of expedited removal along the entire u.s. - canadian border and all u.s. coastal areas .

noting decreased unlawful border crossings since expedited removal began in the southwestern united states , secretary chertoff asserted that expanding the process along all borders "will provide dhs agents and officers with an additional tool to protect our nation's boundaries and quickly remove those who entered our country illegally. .

according to the agency , expedited removal had proven to be "an effective border management process that swiftly returns illegal aliens to their countries of origin while maintaining protections for those who fear persecution. .

dhs also pointed to the disruption of "human smuggling cycles" as a factor warranting the expansion of expedited removal .

therefore , with this expansion in place , dhs could now implement expedited removal in the northern border sectors of blaine , wa ; spokane , wa ; havre , mt ; grand forks , nd ; detroit , mi ; buffalo , ny ; swanton , vt ; and houlton , me .

cuban nationals arriving in the united states on july 20 , 2015 , the united states formally restored diplomatic relations with cuba .

in addition , on january 12 , 2017 , former president barack obama announced an end to the long - standing "wet - foot , dry - foot" policy , which allowed cubans who arrived on american soil the right to remain in the united states and apply for lawful permanent resident status , while those who were detained at sea were returned to cuba .

in response to the restoration of diplomatic relations , dhs eliminated the exception to expedited removal for cuban nationals who arrive in the united states at a designated port of entry by aircraft .

the agency observed , moreover , that the policy justifications for exempting cuban nationals were no longer valid given cuba's agreement to facilitate the return of cuban nationals ordered removed from the united states .

in addition , dhs determined that "a significant increase in attempts by cuban nationals to illegally enter the united states" meant that an exception for cuban nationals would significantly undermine efforts to remove aliens who had no authorization to be in this country .

therefore , cuban nationals who arrived in the united states at a designated port of entry by aircraft were now subject to expedited removal .

dhs additionally eliminated the exception for cuban nationals who arrive in the united states by sea , who have not been admitted or paroled , and who have not been physically present in this country for less than two years .

dhs also removed the exception for cuban nationals who are encountered within 100 miles of the border , who have not been admitted or paroled , and who have not been in the united states for less than 14 days .

the agency again cited the restoration of diplomatic relations between the united states and cuba and other "significant changes" in the relationship between the two countries as factors that warranted a change in policy that "reflect[ed] these new realities. .

therefore , regardless of the manner in which they came to the united states , cuban nationals were now subject to expedited removal if they met the statutory criteria for that process .

