for decades u.s. policymakers have connected u.s. national security and other core interests with the spread of democracy around the world .

reflecting this , the promotion of democracy has been a longstanding and multifaceted element of u.s. foreign policy , and one often interrelated with u.s. efforts to promote human rights .

congress has often played an important role in supporting and institutionalizing u.s. democracy promotion by passing key legislation , appropriating funds for foreign assistance programs and other democracy promoting activities , and conducting oversight of aspects of u.s. foreign policy relevant to democracy promotion .

widespread concerns exist among analysts and policymakers over the current trajectory of democracy around the world and multiple hearings in the 115 th congress reflected bipartisan concern over this issue .

for the past decade , experts have debated whether , and to what extent , the heretofore global expansion of democracy has halted or even begun to reverse .

many argue that the world has been in the midst of what has been termed a global "democratic recession" that began around 2006 .

proponents of this view cite data from global measures of democracy as well as qualitative trends that have heightened concerns over the state of democracy , particularly in recent years .

frequently cited concerns include the rise of authoritarian populist and nationalist leaders , the potential negative influence on democracy from internationally assertive authoritarian states , questions over the enduring appeal of democracy as a political system , new tools nondemocratic governments are using to stifle potential democratizing forces , and others .

experts vary in their assessment of the impact of these and other perceived trends and in their appraisal of what current conditions may portend for the future trajectory of democracy around the world .

with regard to u.s. policy , there are disagreements over the extent to which the united states should respond to negative trends , as well as over the u.s. capacity to influence them meaningfully and effectively .

this report aims to provide congress information , analysis , and a variety of perspectives on these issues .

in particular , it provides brief conceptual background on democracy and on democracy promotion's historical role in u.s. policy , analyzes aggregate trends in the global level of democracy using data from two major democracy indexes , and discusses some of the key factors that may be broadly affecting democracy around the world .

finally , the report includes a synthesis of debates over democracy promotion in u.s. foreign policy and a selection of related policy issues and questions for congress in the current period and beyond .

rationales for u.s. democracy promotion are varied .

as noted , u.s. leaders have long drawn links between the state of global democracy and u.s. national security and economic interests .

in addition , members of congress and others have sometimes asserted that the united states has a moral obligation to promote democracy and human rights , and some scholars argue that an inclination within u.s. foreign policy for "values promotion" derives from fundamental aspects of american political culture .

nonetheless , analysts continue to debate the extent to which the united states should promote democracy and what the proper balance of emphasis is between this objective and other foreign policy priorities .

some have questioned the appropriateness of democracy promotion at a basic level , such as by asserting that it constitutes an imposition of american values on other societies .

there are also debates over whether these efforts constitute violations of sovereignty or improper interference in the politics of other countries .

supporters of democracy promotion have defended these activities as legitimate and generally argue that aspirations for , and values reflecting , democratic freedoms are universal .

more broadly , many disagreements over the proper placement of democracy promotion within u.s. foreign policy tend to relate to the extent to which democracy promotion is seen as supportive of u.s. national interests , the extent of its potential tension with the pursuit of other objectives , and whether the united states has the means and capacity over the long - term to effectively support the spread of democracy and prevent backsliding .

these thematic trends are summarized below .

congress plays a key role in influencing and shaping many aspects of u.s. policy and programs relating to democracy promotion .

as it carries out its legislative and oversight responsibilities , congress may consider a number of questions in the current period and beyond .

looking forward , the trends analyzed and described in this report likely portend continued near - term constraints on democratic expansion around the world , and in some cases have the potential to pose a range of persistent challenges for policymakers .

congress may continue to grapple with policy considerations within and in light of this difficult context in the near future .

as the above discussion illustrates , some of these considerations may relate to the overarching strategic orientation of u.s. foreign policy and democracy promotion's place within that , while others concern second order questions about particular means , resources , and resource allocation .

to the extent that there are differences in interest in democracy promotion between members of congress and the executive branch , these considerations may also entail questions about the institutional role of congress in democracy promotion and in u.s. foreign policy generally .

appendix a .

background information on democracy indexes background on freedom house's freedom in the world report freedom house's freedom in the world report has measured the level of civil liberties and political rights in each country annually since 1972 .

freedom house reporting has also rated a varying number of territories each year ; the ratings for these are not included in the data discussions in this report .

according to freedom house , its methodology is derived largely from the united nations ( u.n. ) universal declaration of human rights and "operates from the assumption that freedom for all people is best achieved in liberal democratic societies. .

freedom house uses both in - house and external analysts and advisers to determine country ratings .

scores in each category , which are tabulated to determine overall political rights and civil liberties ratings , are guided by a set of methodological questions .

for instance , under civil liberty's rule of law category , one of the questions is "is there an independent judiciary ? .

along with associated sub - questions , such as "do executive , legislative , and other governmental authorities comply with judicial decisions , and are these decisions effectively enforced ? .

analysts use a range of sources including news articles , scholarly analysis , ngo reports , and in - country research .

background on the economist intelligence unit's democracy index the economist intelligence unit's ( eiu's ) democracy index began coverage in 2006 ; new reports were issued biannually until the report covering 2010 , and have been issued on an annual basis since then .

eiu's index is based on an array of 60 indicators , some of which are may be at the outer bounds of democracy's core definition .

for instance , its political participation category includes indicators that measure rates of participation in political parties or political nongovernmental organizations , the rate at which adults follow politics in the news , and public confidence in the government and political parties , among other measures .

in addition to assessments by experts , many indicators are also determined by public opinion surveys , such as the world values survey and others .

for example , an indicator in the political participation category measuring citizens' political engagement uses a measure of the "percentage of people who are very or somewhat interested in politics" as measured by the world values survey , if available .

other democracy indexes numerous other democracy - related indexes and databases , some expansive in scope and others focused on particular regions or on particular components of democracy , are also used by policymakers and scholars .

a relatively new global democracy measure , the varieties of democracy project , or v - dem , consists of over 350 indicators covering five indexes associated with differing conceptions of democracy .

another measure , polity iv , is frequently cited in the academic literature and has been characterized as a relatively minimalist measure that focuses on procedural aspects of democracy .

despite this , it has been shown to be highly correlated with freedom house's measure ; this correlation is attenuated when countries at the democratic / authoritarian extreme are excluded , indicating ( sometimes wide ) disagreement over more middling countries .

other major indexes or aggregation of indexes include ( but are not limited to ) freedom house's nations in transit report , the bertelsmann transformation index , the electoral integrity project , the world bank's worldwide governance indicators ( particularly the voice and accountability indicators ) , and international idea's global state of democracy report .

critiques of global democracy indexes experts note that different indexes are organized around overlapping but different conceptions of democracy , and they sometime disagree widely on the state of democracy in a particular country , especially with regard to middling "hybrid regimes. .

differences between indexes may also be exacerbated by the use of differing sources and methods of evaluation , differing and contested aggregation methods , the selection of flawed or redundant indicators , flaws or inconsistencies related to the use of expert coding , and other factors .

some have also argued that popular indexes may suffer from ideological biases or may sometimes favor advocacy at the expense of scientific rigor .

organizations that produce the indexes have emphasized processes designed to reduce political bias and ensure methodological rigor .

crs does not endorse the value or accuracy of any particular index .

appendix b .

selected crs reports this appendix presents a list of selected crs reports that are referenced elsewhere in this report or that include significant discussions of democracy - related developments in a particular region or country context .

crs report r44858 , democracy promotion: an objective of u.s. foreign assistance , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report r44891 , u.s. role in the world: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report r44775 , russia: background and u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r41007 , understanding china's political system , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report r44897 , human rights in china and u.s. policy: issues for the 115th congress , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r45200 , internet freedom in china: u.s. government activity , private sector initiatives , and issues of congressional interest , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r44037 , cambodia: background and u.s. relations , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r43132 , human rights , civil unrest , and political reform in burma in 2013 , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r44017 , iran's foreign and defense policies , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r44793 , sub - saharan africa: key issues , challenges , and u.s .

responses , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

crs report r43166 , democratic republic of congo: background and u.s. relations , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r45120 , latin america and the caribbean: issues in the 115th congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] crs report r44841 , venezuela: background and u.s. relations , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] crs report r44822 , cuba: u.s. policy in the 115th congress , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r43888 , cuba sanctions: legislative restrictions limiting the normalization of relations , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report r43311 , iran: u.s. economic sanctions and the authority to lift restrictions , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r43521 , u.s. international broadcasting: background and issues for reform , by [author name scrubbed] crs report rl32427 , millennium challenge corporation , by [author name scrubbed .

