the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) created a permanent risk adjustment program that aims to reduce some of the incentives insurers may have to avoid enrolling individuals who are at risk of high health care costs in the private health insurance market — specifically in the individual ( nongroup ) and small - group markets .

section 1343 of the aca established the risk adjustment program , which is designed to assess charges to health plans that have relatively healthier enrollees compared with other health plans in a given state .

the program uses collected charges from plans with comparatively healthy enrollees to make payments to plans in the same state that have relatively sicker enrollees .

the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) administers the risk adjustment program as a budget - neutral program , so that payments made are equal to the charges collected in each state .

risk adjustment transfers are intended to account for differences in health risk among plans in each state while allowing for premium differences based on allowable rating factors .

cms assesses payments and charges on an annual basis , beginning in the 2014 benefit year .

all nongrandfathered , individual market and small - group market health plans , both inside and outside of the exchanges , participate in this program .

prior to the aca , most state laws ( and federal law under limited circumstances ) allowed insurers to minimize their exposure to high - risk individuals by charging higher or lower premiums to potential enrollees based on factors such as age , gender , and health status .

however , under current federal law , insurers in the individual and small - group markets are unable to set premiums based on gender or health status and are limited in how much they may vary premiums by age .

without being permitted to account for the risk from individuals who expect or plan for high use of health services on the basis of the aforementioned criteria , insurers still may attempt to avoid such individuals by using benefit designs , networks , formularies , and / or marketing techniques that are not likely to appeal to them ( though insurers are limited by other aca requirements , such as being required to offer coverage for the essential health benefits ) .

under the aca's permanent risk adjustment program , the secretary of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) established criteria and methods to determine the actuarial risk of plans within a given state in order to make payments and assess charges .

enrollees in health plans differ in their degree of risk based on such factors as their health status , with sicker individuals considered high risk and expected to have greater health costs than healthier , or low - risk , individuals .

individuals who perceive themselves as high risk , as opposed to those who perceive themselves as low risk , are likely to have different behaviors related to health insurance .

high - risk individuals , who perceive that they will need more health services , may be more motivated to seek out and enroll in plans with more comprehensive coverage and benefits than might low - risk individuals .

since individuals have more information about their own health status than does an insurer , they are able to consider this information when choosing a health plan ; by contrast , an insurer is not able to take this information into account when establishing coverage , benefits , and premiums for the plan .

the risk adjustment program is intended to reduce the likelihood that an insurer will aim to enroll only low - risk individuals and help ensure that price differences of plans reflect the plan design and benefits available rather than risk .

risk adjustment is a risk mitigation strategy that has been incorporated into other insurance programs .

it is a component of the medicare program , as well as some state medicaid programs .

other countries with regulated , private health insurance markets , such as the netherlands , switzerland , germany , australia , and south africa , also have risk adjustment mechanisms .

in addition , risk adjustment was part of the commonwealth care program in massachusetts from 2009 through 2016 .

although risk adjustment programs may have similar aims , program designs may vary .

hhs used the medicare risk adjustment program as the basis for the aca risk adjustment program , although hhs made modifications especially to account for the different populations in the programs .

the risk adjustment program is the only permanent program that was part of the three aca risk mitigation programs , including the transitional reinsurance program and the temporary risk corridors program .

this report provides responses to frequently asked questions related to the risk adjustment program .

the first several questions pertain to background on insurance markets , why risk mitigation matters , and the role of risk adjustment in risk mitigation .

the following questions relate to the mechanics of the risk program , including how enrollee risk scores are calculated and how risk adjustment payments and charges are determined .

responses to the concluding questions provide information on the experience of the risk adjustment program thus far and future changes to the program .

understanding the sources of private health insurance coverage and how such coverage is regulated at the federal level may be useful in providing context around the current federal law and the permanent risk adjustment program ( see text box "sources and regulation of private health insurance coverage" ) .

 figure 1 provides a summary of risk adjustment program operations for a given benefit year .

the below steps provide an overview of the operational steps to determine plan transfer payments .

step 1: collect data insurers submit enrollment and claims data for their plans in a state and market using the cms distributed data collection process .

step 2: determine enrollee risk scores cms uses the data to measure an insurer's risk for each plan .

the initial calculation is to determine a risk score for individuals actually enrolled for a particular benefit year based on the enrollee's demographic information and diagnoses for that year using cms's risk adjustment model .

the risk score is a relative measure of how costly that enrollee is anticipated to be for the plan .

step 3: calculate plan liability risk score cms uses the risk scores for each enrollee in the plan to calculate the plan liability risk score — the insurer's risk — for the plan in a rating area .

step 4: determine insurer payment or charge the plan liability risk score is used in the payment transfer formula , which compares the predicted costs of enrollees to the expected premiums that a plan may collect .

this complex formula also includes various other factors that may impact predicted costs and expected premiums .

the differences between predicted costs and expected premiums ( both relative to the state average for the market ) for all of the plans within a state are compared to the state average premiums to translate these differences into payments and charges .

payments and / or charges are then aggregated across rating areas by plan and then by insurer in the individual or small group market in each state .

all nongrandfathered , individual market , and small - group market health plans both inside and outside of the exchanges participate in this program .

step 5: inform insurers / states of payments and charges cms releases a final report for the risk adjustment program with the transfers .

the final risk adjustment report for the benefit year is due to be released on june 30 following the benefit year .

the risk adjustment program began in 2014 and recently completed calculations for the 2017 benefit year ( its fourth year ) .

according to regulation , the risk adjustment report for a given benefit year will be published on june 30 of the following benefit year ( eg , the risk adjustment report for the 2016 benefit year was published on june 30 , 2017 ) .

the final risk adjustment report and its appendixes can be found at on the center for consumer information and insurance oversight website at https: / / www.cms.gov / cciio / programs - and - initiatives / premium - stabilization - programs / index.html .

although cms suspended collections and payments on july 7 , 2018 , based on a court decision related to the risk adjustment methodology , the agency issued a final rule on july 24 , 2018 , which reissued the risk adjustment methodology with additional explanation , which cms stated would allow the agency to continue operating the program .

since the risk adjustment program is a relatively new program , there has not yet been a lot of analysis done on this program .

however , both the american academy of actuaries and cms found evidence suggesting that the risk adjustment program was functioning as intended in 2014 .

the american academy of actuaries reported that risk adjustment transfers reduced the medical loss ratios for insurers with high loss ratios and increased the loss ratios among insurers with low cost ratios , generally bringing the loss ratios closer together for insurers that received payments and those that experienced charges .

the medical loss ratio for an insurer is the percentage of premium spent on health care claims and other expenses related to improving health care quality .

by bringing the loss ratios for insurers closer together , the risk adjustment program is evening out an insurer's experience in a particular market .

premiums include factors other than risk associated with claims cost , such as administrative costs and profit .

thus , even if risk adjustment perfectly captured each insurer's risk ( and compensated accordingly ) , the american academy of actuaries stresses that it would expect to see some variation in loss ratios .

also , cms found that insurers with risk adjustment charges generally had relatively low plan liability risk scores and relatively low amounts of paid claims per enrollee ; conversely , insurers that had a relatively high amount of paid claims per enrollee also had higher plan liability risk scores and were more likely to receive a risk adjustment payment .

in their respective reports , both the american academy of actuaries and cms analyzed the relative impact of risk adjustment according to the size of the insurer .

both organizations found that smaller insurers ( i.e. , those with less market share ) had more variability in their risk adjustment payments and charges as a percentage of premium .

the american academy of actuaries reported that smaller insurers were somewhat more likely than larger insurers to have a higher risk adjustment transfer relative to the percentage of premium .

this correlation was attributed to the nature of the risk adjustment program , because insurers with a higher market share are by definition more likely close to the market average than insurers with smaller market share , which are more likely to have enrollees skewed toward either lower - than - average or higher - than - average risk .

cms also reported that the size of an insurer did not determine whether or not it received a risk adjustment payment or charge .

in addition , both reports enumerated potential operational difficulties insurers may have experienced during the first year of the risk adjustment program .

the american academy of actuaries suggested that because risk adjustment was a new program in 2014 , some insurers may have experienced technical difficulties with the distributed data collection process and that these difficulties may have impacted small and new insurers more than larger , more established insurers , though not necessarily .

cms noted that some insurers had difficulty submitting data .

both organizations suggested that over time , data submission would become easier .

furthermore , both organizations suggested that pricing premiums to take into account risk adjustment transfers for the first year of the risk adjustment program may have been difficult and that pricing would be more accurate as time passed .

while there have been several changes made to the risk adjustment program since it began , two more substantial changes to the risk adjustment program were finalized to be implemented for the next benefit year ( 2018 ) .

they are ( 1 ) adding prescription drugs in the risk adjustment model to help improve the accuracy of an enrollee's risk score and ( 2 ) creating a high - cost risk pool .

below is a brief description of the changes .

prescription drugs were added to the adult risk adjustment model starting in the 2018 benefit year .

cms created prescription drug categories ( rxcs ) to group drugs to be included in the risk adjustment model .

some rxcs are used to impute ( i.e. , ascribe ) diagnoses , and some are used to indicate the severity of a diagnosis that is included through medical coding .

cms worked with clinician consultants and staff clinicians to determine rxcs both for ascribing diagnoses and for indicating a more severe case of the related diagnosis ( making it likely that the enrollee will incur greater medical expenses than an enrollee who has the diagnosis but not a prescription drug ) .

cms included prescription drug classes where there is a low risk of unintended impacts on provider prescribing behavior .

the agency intends to monitor prescription drug utilization for any unintended impacts and may make changes to the rxcs in the future if it finds evidence of such impacts .

the american academy of actuaries suggested including prescription drugs in the risk adjustment model in its report on risk adjustment .

during the rulemaking process for the 2018 benefit year , the academy commented that including prescription drugs would improve the model's accuracy , enhance the prediction of costs for partial - year enrollees , and improve payments for conditions that are treated with high - cost drugs .

starting in the 2018 benefit year , cms created a national - level , high - cost risk pool for the individual market and the small group market to remove any potential incentive for insurers to avoid extremely high - cost enrollees and to better capture the risk associated with these enrollees in risk adjustment payments and charges .

while an enrollee who is considered high - risk is expected to have higher overall claims cost , other enrollees who are not high - risk may have ( one time ) expensive claims and thus be considered high - cost in a given year .

for high - cost enrollees ( whether high risk or not ) an insurer will receive an adjustment to their transfer amounts equal to 60% of the costs above a defined threshold ( the threshold for high - cost enrollee is defined as enrollees with total claims costs above $1 million in a benefit year ) .

to maintain budget neutrality , cms first will calculate the total amount of paid claims costs above the threshold to determine the amount to be transferred .

then , cms will calculate an adjustment as a percentage of an insurer's total premiums in each market .

once determined , this amount will be added to or subtracted from an insurer's transfer amount calculated by excluding costs above the threshold the high - cost enrollees .

cms indicated that it expects this adjustment to be a very small percentage of premiums , estimating less than 0.5% of premiums for either market .

the american academy of actuaries noted in its risk adjustment report that risk adjustment typically does not compensate insurers adequately for very high - cost enrollees and that it may be appropriate for the risk adjustment program to incorporate a process for transfers for high - cost outliers .

cms also reported that most risk adjustment programs do not predict the existence of high - cost enrollees very precisely because the risk scores reflect the average costs for individuals in a specific age group , with a specific sex , and with specific diagnoses .

since most spending for insurance companies is related to high cost enrollees , insurers may still have an incentive to avoid very high cost enrollees .

additionally , other research also has found that risk adjustment programs do not adequately account for high - cost cases and , as a result , that insurers have an incentive to avoid these high - cost enrollees .

the creation of a high - cost risk pool to provide payments to insurers for a portion of the costs of high - cost enrollees works similarly to how the aca's transitional reinsurance program did .

however , the attachment point ( referred to as the threshold under the high - cost risk pool ) is significantly higher ( i.e. , $1 million ) than the attachment points that were used for the transitional reinsurance program ( i.e. , $90,000 in 2016 ) .

see the text box labeled "high cost risk pool example" for an illustration of the difference .

