electricity generation is vital to the commerce and daily functioning of the united states .

the electric power grid in the united states comprises all of the power plants generating electricity , together with the transmission and distribution lines and systems which bring power to end - use customers .

the grid also connects the many publicly and privately owned electric utility and other wholesale power companies in different states and regions of the united states .

the u.s. electric grid has historically operated with a high level of reliability ; however , the various parts of the electric power system are all vulnerable to failure due to natural , operational , or manmade events .

while natural and operational failures can be mitigated somewhat by planning and prudent investments , cybersecurity is a growing concern for both electric utilities and other critical infrastructure entities .

adoption of digital technologies has improved the efficiency and speed of operations and processes , and allowed for an almost instantaneous exchange of information between connected devices .

often , these digital devices are also connected to the internet to increase the ability to share information with a multitude of users and devices .

while the benefits of internet - connected digital technologies are many , so too are the risks of a cybersecurity breach from exposure to a globally internet - connected environment .

the electric grid relies on a number of electronic devices , switches , and circuit breakers to regulate and report on the flow of electricity at different parts of the system .

together , these pieces of mechanical and automated equipment constitute the grid's industrial control system ( ics ) network , managing power plant controls , transformer yard and power bus functions , transmission , and distribution substations .

the grid's ics networks essentially operate in a "control loop" in which sensors continually check key components , with variable responses against control variables to ensure that the system is functioning as designed .

ics networks control industrial processes in a number of energy and manufacturing operations .

one particular type of ics network common in the electric power industry is a supervisory control and data acquisition ( scada ) system which gathers information from remote stations across a utility system to control geographically dispersed assets .

in 2015 , a cyber attack on distribution utility substations in ukraine shut off power to over 225,000 utility customers for several hours , and was the first time that a cyber attack was publicly acknowledged to have caused a grid power outage .

a second cyber attack in ukraine in 2016 was reported on an electricity control center in the city of kiev , shutting down substations which controlled 200 megawatts of capacity .

the potential for a similar attack on the u.s. grid was seen as a possibility .

some recent reports about foreign hackers targeting the u.s. electric power system and other critical infrastructure are summarized below .

while these intrusions have not been reported as having resulted in significant disruptions , concerns have increased over the potential for these intrusions to result in damaging cyber attacks in the future .

the intrusions , which have been directed at the ics networks of energy , manufacturing , communications and nuclear entities , include the following: cyber intrusions on the scada systems of the bowman dam in rye , new york resulted in federal indictments against a group of hackers linked to iran's islamic revolutionary guard corps .

cyber intrusions in october 2017 were reported to have targeted electric company ics networks in a reconnaissance and information gathering campaign attributed to north korea .

in march 2018 , the united states computer emergency readiness team ( us - cert ) issued an alert concerning cyber intrusions at critical energy and manufacturing infrastructure companies .

the department of homeland security and the federal bureau of investigation concluded that russian government hackers conducted a multi - stage intrusion campaign to access files on ics networks .

the malware conducted network reconnaissance , collecting information on ics and scada systems before being found .

further attacks on u.s. critical energy infrastructure are expected , as nation states view disruption of the u.s. economy as a potential target .

this report discusses the current state of electric grid cybersecurity , and the interconnected dependency of critical infrastructure with regard to electric sector reliability .

current efforts to ensure the reliability of the grid are highlighted , and potential grid vulnerabilities are explored with a focus on the electric power sector's mutual dependency on other critical infrastructure .

technologies and actions to address perceived future threats are described , and possible risks to approaches moored in technology - based cybersecurity defense systems .

finally , since the possibility does exist for a major cyber and / or physical security attack to result in significant damage or impairment , the potential need to build resilience into the grid to enable a quicker recovery is discussed .

congress gave the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) authority to oversee the reliability of the bulk - power system under the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ; epact05 ) .

reliability standards were added as section 215 of the federal power a ct ( fpa ) in an effort to help ensure the reliable operation of the bulk power system so that "instability , uncontrolled separation , or cascading failures" will not occur as a result of a sudden disturbance .

section 215 of the fpa also defines ferc's jurisdiction in terms of "users , owners and operators" of the bulk power system .

ferc can approve or remand back reliability standards proposed by the electric reliability organization ( ero ) , which bulk - power system owners and operators must follow to help ensure the reliable operation of the grid .

currently , the north american electric reliability corporation ( nerc ) serves as the ero .

nerc therefore proposes reliability standards for critical infrastructure protection ( cip ) , which are updated considering the status of reliability and cybersecurity concerns for the grid .

reliability standards address programs ranging from vegetation clearances in electric transmission line rights - of - way to policies and procedures for critical infrastructure protection focused on the cyber - and physical security of power plants and supporting facilities .

the standards are both mandatory and enforceable in that violators of reliability rules may be subject to a civil fine of up to $1 million per violation for each day that it continues .

while the bulk electric power system has mandatory and enforceable standards for both cyber and physical security for critical infrastructure protection , these are developed on a consensus basis before being submitted to ferc , which determines whether to accept or remand the standard back to nerc for revision .

under the federal power act , ferc's authority is largely limited to wholesale power sales and the transmission of electricity in interstate commerce , while states have authority over retail sales by electric distribution systems .

ferc acknowledges that epact05 excluded local distribution systems from its reliability mandate under section 215 of the federal power act , as not being part of the bulk power system .

that criterion excluded facilities in alaska and hawaii , and virtually the entire grid in cities with large distribution systems like new york city .

in 2012 , ferc approved nerc's criteria for the definition of the bulk electric system .

these criteria and definitions apply to all nerc regions and are a bright - line threshold including all transmission elements operated at 100 kilovolts ( kv ) or higher , and real power and reactive power resources connected at 100 kv or higher .

the increase in the number of cyber attacks aimed at u.s. critical energy infrastructure has led to heightened attention from the federal government .

while a cyber attack on the u.s. grid similar to the cyber attacks in ukraine was not expected to result in the same type of consequences ( given the older electricity systems in place in ukraine ) , the potential for financial market and economic disruption may be a legitimate concern .

the energy sector is one of 16 infrastructure sectors designated as critical infrastructure by presidential policy directive - 21 ( ppd - 21 ) .

the stated goal of ppd - 21 is to advance "a national unity of effort to strengthen and maintain secure , functioning , and resilient critical infrastructure. .

the energy sector under the policy directive includes electricity , oil , and natural gas .

the reliance of virtually all industries on electric power is recognized by the u.s. department of homeland security ( dhs ) , which has the primary responsibility for implementing ppd - 21 .

a report released by the national research council ( nrc ) in 2012 recognized the vulnerability of the electric power delivery system to either cyber and / or physical attacks .

the nrc report concluded that well - informed terrorists could black out a large region of the country for weeks or even months .

an event of this magnitude and duration could lead to turmoil , widespread public fear and an image of helplessness that would play directly into the hands of the terrorists .

if such large extended outages were to occur during times of extreme weather , they could also result in hundreds or even thousands of deaths due to heat stress or extended exposure to extreme cold .

the largest power system disruptions experienced to date in the united states have caused high economic impacts .

considering that a systematically designed and executed terrorist attack could cause disruptions that were even more widespread and of longer duration , it is no stretch of the imagination to think that such attacks could entail costs of hundreds of billions of dollars — that is , perhaps as much as a few percent of the u.s. gross domestic product ( gdp ) , which is currently about $12.5 trillion .

the nrc report further commented on the potential effects of a combined cyber and physical attack on the grid .

if they could gain access , hackers could manipulate scada systems to disrupt the flow of electricity , transmit erroneous signals to operators , block the flow of vital information , or disable protective systems .

cyber attacks are unlikely to cause extended outages , but if well coordinated they could magnify the damage of a physical attack .

for example , a cascading outage would be aggravated if operators did not get the information to learn that it had started , or if protective devices were disabled .

similar conclusions were reached in a 2015 report from the university of cambridge and lloyds of london , which stated that a targeted cyber attack could leave 15 states and 93 million people from new york city to washington , d.c. , without power .

the scenario estimated the total impact to the u.s. economy at between $243 billion and $1 trillion , resulting from "direct damage to assets and infrastructure , decline in sales revenue to electricity supply companies , loss of sales revenue to business and disruption to the supply chain. .

the 2013 attack on the metcalf substation in california further cast light on the physical vulnerabilities of the grid .

after someone broke into a nearby underground vault to cut telephone cables , snipers opened fire on the substation , knocking out 17 large power transformers sending power to silicon valley .

a blackout was averted by rerouting power around the substation , and local power plants were called upon to produce more electricity .

it took the local utility 27 days to restore the substation .

the federal energy regulatory commission's ( ferc's ) chairman at the time reportedly said that "if [the attack] were widely replicated across the country , it could take down the u.s. electric grid and black out much of the country. .

largely as a result of the grid vulnerabilities highlighted by this incident , ferc directed nerc to develop a physical security standard ( which culminated in cip - 014 ) .

since the 2015 cyber attack in ukraine , some have expressed increased concerns over the cybersecurity of interconnected u.s. electric power systems .

the 2015 ukraine cyber attack and blackouts demonstrated that an electric grid could be infiltrated , controlled , and rendered inoperable through internet - connected systems by an outside , unauthorized entity .

recovery from a well - planned cyber and physical attack on the grid could be complicated by the cost and vulnerability of critical components .

while a physical attack on transmission towers to bring down power lines could cause blackouts , the strategic destruction of a number of critical high - voltage transformers could potentially cause long - lasting power outages .

these transformers are large , and difficult to move .

a large - scale attack may use up the limited inventory of spare units , and it may take months or years to build new units ( due mainly to the size and often unique specifications of high - voltage transformers ) .

the availability of other large components , such as high - voltage circuit breakers could also hamper recovery efforts .

the security of the supply chain for grid devices and components is discussed later in this report .

the bulk power system faces new and evolving cybersecurity threats on a daily basis .

cyber risks can come from direct attacks aimed at the electric grid or other critical infrastructure which could impact the operations or security of the grid .

arguably , the greatest cyber threats to the grid have been attacks focused on manipulating industrial control systems which are increasingly connected to the internet to manage the production and regional flows of electricity .

the electric utility industry increasingly depends on operational technology ( ot ) and information technology ( it ) systems for the safe and efficient production and delivery of electricity .

ot and it systems rely on hardware devices and software systems , procured from a variety of manufacturers and vendors , often from international sources .

the security of the design , manufacture , and patch management practices of these devices and systems is a potential vulnerability due to their global nature , and the general lack of consistent oversight of standards and practices to prevent impaired or compromised functionality .

managing cyber supply chain risks require ensuring the integrity , security , quality and resilience of the supply chain and its products and services .

cyber supply chain risks may include insertion of counterfeits , unauthorized production , tampering , theft , insertion of malicious software and hardware , as well as poor manufacturing and development practices in the cyber supply chain .

the components of smart grid devices present another potential vulnerability .

most of the smart meter , sensor , and other equipment makers are international companies who obtain their components from multinational sources .

taiwan , singapore , china , and south korea are among the largest overseas manufacturers of semiconductors and microprocessors for smart devices .

the reliable operation of semiconductor and microprocessor - based devices is based on the low - level firmware controlling the device's basic functions .

firmware , in the form of fixed machine - language code , is found in almost all the electronic devices making up smarter grid products such as programmable controllers and programmable logic arrays .

if access were gained to such devices ( especially during the manufacturing process ) , a section of code could be covertly inserted in the device and activated in such a way as to impair its functioning in a reliable manner .

since testing all such devices is likely impractical , some might suggest random or statistically based testing of the firmware in smarter grid devices .

but the impairment would not need to be placed in all such devices coming off an assembly line .

if a large enough sample was impaired , the effect might be enough to cast doubt on the reliability of a whole class of such devices .

older , legacy systems may also be affected by potential supply chain vulnerabilities .

legacy systems are a challenging vulnerability because upgrades and repairs of equipment may not include the installation of up - to - date , security - focused patches .

in 2016 , ferc issued order no .

829 directing nerc to develop a critical infrastructure protection reliability standard that would require affected entities to develop and implement a plan that includes security controls for supply chain management for industrial control system hardware , software , and services associated with bulk electric system operations .

according to ferc , the new or modified reliability standard should address: software integrity and authenticity ; vendor remote access ; information system planning ; and , vendor risk management and procurement controls .

ferc states that there is no requirement for any specific controls , nor does ferc require any "one - size - fits - all" requirement .

according to ferc , the new or modified reliability standard should instead require responsible entities to develop a plan to meet the four objectives while providing flexibility to responsible entities as to how to meet those objectives .

in september 2017 , nerc submitted a petition for approval of the new reliability standard cip - 013-1 , addressing supply chain risk management , and proposed revisions to two existing reliability standards ( i.e. , cip - 005-6 and cip - 010-3 ) .

the proposed set of new and revised standards would address cybersecurity risks in the supply chain by: establishing and implementing organizationally defined processes that integrate a cybersecurity risk management framework ( proposed cip - 013-1 ) ; implementing methods to identify active vendor remote access sessions and disable active vendor remote access when necessary ( proposed modification to cip - 005-5 ) ; and , verifying the identity of software publishers , and the integrity of all software and patches intended for use on bes cyber systems ( proposed modification to cip - 010-2 ) .

there are gaps in cybersecurity for electric power and energy systems .

some gaps are related to regulatory jurisdiction , while other gaps may relate to cost and relative complexity to address the issue .

but considering the potential impact of a major grid cybersecurity event , the gaps may require further attention .

with the introduction of digital smart grid technologies to enhance and modernize grid operations , the speed and processing power of microprocessor - based ics networks enhances the efficiency and control of power production and flows across electricity transmission and distribution systems .

while the benefits to the electric power system and its users are many , there are potential risks as many it and ot systems are connected to the internet to improve data collection and information sharing .

however , this exposure to the internet leads to increased cybersecurity risks .

the aurora simulation in 2007 was the first known event which proved that power plants could be vulnerable to a cyber attack .

an aurora attack results when a circuit breaker or breakers are opened and closed , resulting in an out - of - phase condition that can damage alternating current ( ac ) equipment connected to the grid .

a demonstration of this for the department of homeland security , conducted at the idaho national laboratory ( inl ) in 2007 , was broadcast by cnn .

aurora demonstrated how a cyber attack could be used to destroy power generation equipment .

three years later , the stuxnet attack against the industrial control system of an iranian nuclear fuel enrichment plant provided the next warning .

electric utilities were now aware that they must be prepared to address cyberthreats from a number of potential sources .

cybersecurity threats can arise from a number of sources , including deliberate cyber attacks by professional hackers , and acts of malice from discontented current or former employees .

they can also result from professional attackers , industrial spies , and organized crime groups , and other groups with hacking capabilities such as hacktivists .

however , some observers would say that while terrorists eg , in seeking to damage the u.s. economy ) may be able to buy the technical capacity for a cyber attack on the grid from hacktivists , they would be more likely to seek an attack causing direct physical destruction .

the electric power industry does not have the intelligence gathering capabilities to deal with the many cyber and physical threats to the grid , many of which appear to originate internationally .

instead , the u.s. government analyzes all - source intelligence to understand threats to the energy grid and shares that information with the electricity industry , which has the capability and expertise to understand the risks posed to the grid .

how that information could be better disseminated and on a timelier basis has been raised as an issue by the electric power industry .

the bulk electric system is subject to mandatory and enforceable critical infrastructure protection rules for cyber and physical security under the ferc's reliability mandate .

however , the energy sector is one of 16 critical infrastructure sectors identified by the department of homeland security .

given that the grid relies on several of the other sectors ( for example , for water and fuel transportation ) , the question of whether these other sectors should also have similar , mandatory standards focused on support of the electric power sector may be an issue for congress to consider .

the electric power system in the united states is evolving , but not consistently across sectors and regions of the country .

while some may say such inconsistencies may add a level of complexity that may make a nationwide cyber event more unlikely , the consistent development of a modern electric power system would likely add to the prospects of u.s. economic health and competitiveness .

policy options designed to ensure that the developing electric power system is as secure as possible will likely be a major consideration for congress .

the grid cybersecurity research and development act ( h.r .

4120 ) , introduced in october 2017 , would require the doe to develop an initiative to mitigate the consequences on the electric grid of cyber attacks by increasing grid cybersecurity .

doe would also be required to work with other agencies and the private sector to develop guidance for cybersecurity research and development to improve electric sector cybersecurity .

nist would be required to develop voluntary training standards , and maintain a public database of cybersecurity training programs .

the escc would be required to develop a coordinated interagency strategic plan to advance grid cybersecurity capabilities .

the pipeline and liquefied natural gas facility cybersecurity preparedness act ( h.r .

5175 ) , introduced in march 2018 , would require the secretary of energy to carry out a program in consultation with other federal agencies , states , and the energy sector to ensure security , resiliency , and survivability of natural gas pipelines , hazardous liquid pipelines , and liquefied natural gas facilities .

the doe would also be required to coordinate response and recovery to physical and cyber incidents impacting the energy sector , and demonstrate advanced cybersecurity and technologies projects for physical and cybersecurity .

the cyber sense act of 2018 ( h.r .

5239 ) , introduced in march 2018 , would establish a voluntary doe program for testing product cybersecurity and technologies intended for use in the bulk - power system , including products related to ics .

it would also authorize the doe to provide technical assistance to electric utilities , product manufacturers , and other electricity sector stakeholders to help mitigate cybersecurity vulnerabilities .

the enhancing grid security through public - private partnerships act ( h.r .

5240 ) , introduced in march 2018 , would promote and advance physical and cybersecurity of electric utilities .

the bill would require the secretary of energy to carry out a program ( in concert the energy reliability organization , industry stakeholders , and other federal agencies ) to , among other activities , develop voluntary implementation of maturity models , self - assessments , and auditing methods to assess the physical and cybersecurity of electric utilities ; provide training for electric utilities to address and mitigate supply chain risks ; increase opportunities for sharing best practices ; assist with cybersecurity training for electric utilities ; and advance the cybersecurity of third - party vendors that work in partnerships with electric utilities .

the promoting cybersecurity for rural electric utilities act ( s. 2991 ) , introduced in june 2018 , would amend the rural electrification act of 1936 ( 7 u.s.c .

931 et seq. ) .

to provide that cybersecurity and grid security improvements are eligible for electric loans and guarantees under that act .

