trade plays a critical role in the u.s. agricultural sector .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) estimates that exports account for about 20% of total u.s. agricultural production .

furthermore , given the substantial volume of its agricultural exports , the united states plays a significant role in many international agricultural markets .

as a result , u.s. farm policy is often subject to intense scrutiny both for compliance with current world trade organization ( wto ) rules and for its potential to diminish the breadth or impede the success of future multilateral negotiations .

in part , this is because a farm bill locks in u.s. policy behavior for an extended period of time during which the united states would be unable to accept any new restrictions on its domestic support programs .

farm income and commodity support programs have been a part of u.s. farm legislation since the 1930s .

today , these support programs are authorized as part of omnibus u.s. farm legislation — referred to as the farm bill — which has typically been renewed every five or six years .

each successive farm bill usually involves some modification or replacement of existing farm programs .

the current omnibus farm bill , the agricultural act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-79 ; the 2014 farm bill ) , which was signed into law on february 7 , 2014 , made several substantial changes to the previous farm safety net of the 2008 farm bill .

the commodity programs of the 2014 farm bill became operational with the 2014 crop year .

they are scheduled to expire on september 30 , 2018 , or with the 2018 crop year .

ultimately , the current farm bill will either be ( 1 ) replaced with new legislation , ( 2 ) temporarily extended , or ( 3 ) allowed to lapse and replaced with "permanent law" — a set of essentially mothballed provisions for the farm commodity programs that date from the 1930s and 1940s .

a potential major constraint affecting u.s. agricultural policy choices is the set of commitments made as part of membership in the wto .

the wto has three basic functions: ( 1 ) administering existing agreements , including those governing agriculture and trade ; ( 2 ) serving as a negotiating forum for new trade liberalization ; and ( 3 ) providing a mechanism to settle trade disputes among members .

with respect to disciplines governing domestic agricultural support , two wto agreements are paramount — the agreement on agriculture ( aoa ) and the agreement on subsidies and countervailing measures ( scm ) .

the aoa sets country - specific aggregate spending limits on the most market - distorting policies .

it also defines very general rules covering trade among member countries .

in general , domestic policies or programs found to be in violation of wto rules may be subject to challenge by another wto member under the wto dispute settlement process .

if a wto challenge is successful , the wto remedy would likely imply the elimination , alteration , or amendment by congress of the program in question to bring it into compliance .

since most governing provisions over u.s. farm programs are statutory , new legislation could be required to implement even minor changes to achieve compliance .

as a result , designing farm programs that comply with wto rules can avoid potential trade disputes .

this report provides a brief overview of the wto commitments that are most relevant for u.s. domestic farm policy .

a key question that many policymakers ask of virtually every new farm proposal is how it will affect u.s. commitments under the wto .

the answer depends not only on cost but also on the proposal's design and objectives , as described below .

the united states is currently committed , under the aoa , to spend no more than $19.1 billion per year on amber box trade - distorting support .

the wto's aoa procedures for classifying and counting trade - distorting support are somewhat complex .

however , four questions might be asked to determine whether a particular farm measure will cause total u.s. domestic support to be above or below the $19.1 billion annual ams limit .

a subsequent fifth question may be asked to ascertain whether aoa - compliant outlays are also scm - compliant .

1 .

can the measure be classified as a "green box" policy — one presumed to have the least potential for distorting production and trade and therefore not counted as part of the ams ? .

2 .

can it be classified as a "blue box" policy — that is , a production - limiting program that receives a special exemption and therefore is also not counted as part of the ams ? .

3 .

if it is a potentially trade - distorting "amber box" policy , can support still be excluded from the ams calculation under the so - called 5% de minimis exemption ( explained later in more detail ) because total support is no more than 5% of either: the value of total annual production if the support is non - product specific , or the value of annual production of a particular commodity if the support is specific to that commodity ? .

4 .

if such support exceeds the de minimis 5% threshold ( and thus cannot be exempted ) , when it is added to all other forms of non - exempt amber box support is total u.s. ams still beneath the $19.1 billion limit ? .

5 .

if a program is fully compliant with the aoa rules and limits , does its support result in price or trade distortion in international markets that , in turn , cause adverse effects upon another wto member ? .

if so , then it may be subject to challenge under scm rules .

the aoa's structure of varying spending limits across the amber , blue , and green boxes is intentional .

by leaving no constraint on spending in the green box while imposing limits on amber box spending , the wto implicitly encourages countries to design their domestic farm support programs to be green box compliant .

negotiations to further reform agricultural trade within the context of the wto — referred to as the doha round of multilateral trade negotiations — began in 2001 .

in 2009 , negotiations hit an impasse but resumed in 2011 when ministers agreed to concentrate on topics where progress was most likely to be made .

they are not expected to be completed in the near future .

as u.s. lawmakers consider policy options for agriculture , other countries will likely be evaluating not only whether , in their view , these options will comply with the u.s. commitments under the aoa but also how they reflect on the u.s. negotiating position in wto multilateral talks .

the u.s. objective , in the past , has been for the negotiations to result in substantial reductions in trade - distorting support and for stronger rules that ensure that all production - related support is subject to discipline ( to avoid costly and time - consuming challenges via the wto dispute settlement process ) while still preserving criteria - based "green box" policies that can support agriculture in ways that minimize trade distortions .

at the same time , congress might seek domestic farm policy measures that it can justify as aoa - and scm - compliant .

