i nitial coin offerings ( icos ) are a hot topic among federal legislators , regulators , financial market professionals , and even athletes and celebrities .

an ico is a method of raising capital in exchange for digital "coins" or "tokens" that entitle their holders to certain rights .

the promoter of an ico may raise capital to develop a digital platform , software , or other projects , and the tokens issued pursuant to the ico may entitle their holders to access the platform , use the software , or share in any profits generated by the projects .

in many cases , these tokens may be resold to others in a secondary market via virtual currency exchanges or other platforms .

icos have been described as "a new form of crowdfunding" that startups and other online businesses can use to raise money without issuing stock or obtaining venture capital funding .

the popularity of icos has surged over the past 18 months .

according to one report , total ico fundraising in 2017 has been estimated as ranging between $5.6 billion and $6.5 billion , up from $225 million in 2016 .

according to an estimate from goldman sachs , ico funding of internet companies during certain periods in 2017 exceeded early - stage venture capital funding of such businesses .

this general trend has continued in 2018 .

one estimate puts the total proceeds generated by icos in 2018 at over $14 billion as of the publication of this report .

commentators have attributed this surge in popularity to , among other things: ( 1 ) large increases in the value of virtual currencies like bitcoin , which investors can often exchange for new virtual currencies issued pursuant to an ico and thereby diversify their holdings ; ( 2 ) enthusiasm about the blockchain technology involved in the projects funded by certain icos ; and ( 3 ) large returns that certain icos have provided to early token purchasers .

some commentators have expressed enthusiasm about the rise of icos , noting their potential to "energize and democratize start - up funding" by offering retail investors the opportunity to participate in the early - stage funding of new businesses .

other observers have expressed skepticism , raising concerns about fraud , market manipulation , and cybersecurity .

regulators are likewise divided in their approaches to icos .

china and south korea have banned icos altogether , and policymakers in a number of other countries have warned that certain unregistered icos may run afoul of their securities laws .

other countries have developed proposed rules or legislation specifically directed at regulating icos , while still others have released guidance clarifying the application of existing laws to icos .

u.s. securities regulators have also actively monitored the rise of icos .

the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) has cautioned that depending on their features , icos may qualify as offerings of "securities" subject to federal regulation under the securities act of 1933 ( securities act ) and the securities exchange act of 1934 ( exchange act ) .

the chairman of the sec has indicated that the agency's division of enforcement will "vigorously" police icos for violations of the acts' registration and anti - fraud provisions .

consistent with this representation , the sec has brought a number of enforcement actions related to unregistered and fraudulent icos , and has reportedly issued a number of subpoenas to other token issuers .

while the sec's enforcement efforts do not present a complete picture of the agency's views on when icos will qualify as offerings of "securities," they provide insight into the agency's general approach to these transactions .

this report discusses the principles that the sec and courts use to determine whether a transaction qualifies as an offering of "securities" under the securities act and the exchange act , and the application of those principles to icos .

first , the report discusses the four - part test guiding that inquiry that the supreme court adopted in the 1946 case sec v. w.j .

howey co .

the report provides an overview of each of the four howey requirements and discusses their application to icos .

second , the report reviews a popular method for structuring icos — the simple agreement for future tokens ( saft ) — that has been developed with the goal of allowing the tokens issued pursuant to certain icos to trade free from sec oversight .

third , the report provides an overview of two prominent sec enforcement actions concerning icos and a recent speech given by the director of the sec's division of corporation finance that offer some guidance as to how the agency will apply the howey test to icos .

fourth , the report examines a number of exemptions from the securities act's registration requirements and discusses their possible application to icos .

finally , the report reviews a number of legal changes that congress could consider concerning the regulation of icos .

whether an ico involves an offering of "securities" has important legal implications .

under section 5 of the securities act , an issuer of "securities" must either ( 1 ) file a registration statement with the sec containing a variety of information about the issuer and its business , or ( 2 ) conduct the offering pursuant to a specific exemption from registration .

commentators have noted that many businesses regard the detailed and complex disclosures required in registration statements , and the large fees charged by securities lawyers , as burdensome .

federal law also imposes anti - fraud liability on certain securities transactions , as issuers and sellers of securities are liable to buyers for false statements and misleading omissions in prospectuses and registration statements .

on top of the requirements imposed by the securities act , the exchange act imposes certain continuous disclosure obligations on securities issuers and anti - fraud liability on securities issuers and sellers .

moreover , the platforms on which securities trade must register with the sec as "securities exchanges" in certain circumstances .

the sec has the authority to investigate violations of the securities act and the exchange act and to impose civil monetary penalties and certain other remedies against persons who violate either act .

these disclosure and anti - fraud requirements are widely viewed as protecting investors and promoting the accurate pricing of securities , which in turn facilitates the efficient allocation of capital .

as discussed , in order for the registration and anti - fraud requirements of the securities act and the exchange act to apply , a transaction must involve the offer or sale of "securities. .

the securities act defines the term "security" broadly as encompassing a range of specified financial products , including "investment contract[s]," a "[c]atchall phrase[] .

 .

 .

included to cover unique instruments not easily classified. .

the act does not define the term "investment contract," and its legislative history does not significantly clarify the term's meaning .

in 1946 , the supreme court outlined a four - part test ( shown in figure 1 ) for determining whether a transaction qualifies as an "investment contract" within the meaning of the act .

in sec v. w.j .

howey co .

 , the court explained that a transaction is an "investment contract" when it involves ( 1 ) an investment of money , ( 2 ) in a common enterprise , ( 3 ) with an expectation of profit , ( 4 ) to be derived solely from the efforts of others .

in howey , a company sold investors tracts of land in a citrus grove coupled with ten - year service contracts pursuant to which the company agreed to cultivate the groves , harvest and market the fruit , and remit any profits to the investors .

the sec brought an action to enjoin the company from offering the land sale and service contracts on the grounds that they qualified as unregistered "securities. .

the supreme court agreed with the sec and held that the scheme qualified as an offering of "securities" based upon the four - part test noted above .

the court explained that because purchasers of the land and service contracts ( 1 ) invested money in citrus groves that "gain[ed] .

 .

 .

utility only when cultivated and developed as component parts of a larger area," and ( 2 ) expected profits based on the management expertise and labor of others , the contracts qualified as "investment contracts" ( and , by extension , "securities" ) within the meaning of the securities act .

the court has made clear that the howey test "embodies a flexible rather than a static principle , one that is capable of adaptation to meet the countless and variable schemes devised by those who seek the use of the money of others on the promise of profits. .

accordingly , in applying the test , the court has emphasized the importance of the "economic realities underlying a transaction," as opposed to a transaction's form or the name that its promoters give it .

commentators have noted that "[t]he intentional breadth and adaptability" of the test "necessarily leads to complex and fact - intensive judicial inquiries" into a transaction's granular details .

perhaps unsurprisingly , courts have concluded that a wide variety of financial arrangements qualify as "investment contracts" under the howey test , ranging from pyramid schemes and ice machine leases to interests in earthworm farms and chinchilla ranches .

whether an ico involves an offering of "securities" will accordingly depend primarily on its "economic realities" and not on its formal characteristics or the name given to the relevant coins or tokens .

because the coins or tokens issued pursuant to icos are incredibly diverse , and the howey test's application depends upon highly fact - intensive evaluations of a transaction's specific features , it is impossible to draw broad conclusions concerning the application of the howey test to all icos .

with that caveat in mind , the following subsections discuss the four parts of the howey test and examine how possible features of specific icos may affect the test's application .

the complexities surrounding the howey test's application to icos have prompted the development of a framework for token offerings called the "simple agreement for future tokens" ( saft ) .

the saft is a framework for certain token offerings developed by protocol labs , inc. and attorneys at the law firm cooley llp .

the goal of the saft is to obtain certain advantages related to securities , money services , and tax laws for icos that would otherwise involve "pre - functional utility tokens. .

as discussed , a "utility token" is a token purchased not for investment purposes but primarily to use or consume a good or service for which the token can be exchanged .

a "pre - functional utility token" is a token that lacks utility when it is sold , but will become useful ( that is , exchangeable for some good or service ) at some later date , perhaps after the construction of a platform or products on which the tokens will be used .

a "functional utility token," by contrast , is a utility token that is useful when it is delivered to purchasers .

because "pre - functional utility tokens" do not have utility when they are sold and become useful only after the development of some type of platform or service that the tokens can be used to access , some commentators have suggested that they are more likely to involve an "expectation of profit" and depend on the "efforts of others" ( and therefore qualify as "securities" under the howey test ) than "functional utility tokens. .

the basic goal of the saft vis - à - vis federal securities laws is to allow companies to raise money through a token offering for the development of a platform or service that is not yet fully functional , but without offering "pre - functional utility tokens" ( which are arguably more likely than "functional utility tokens" to qualify as "securities" ) .

the saft framework attempts to accomplish this goal through a contract pursuant to which investors exchange money for the right to receive functional utility tokens at some future date , instead of receiving "pre - functional utility tokens. .

the developers of the saft concept have explained that the saft contract itself — that is , the agreement to exchange money for the right to receive functional utility tokens in the future — is "very likely a security" under the howey test .

the saft's developers have accordingly proposed that promoters enter into safts with investors pursuant to sec regulation d , which provides an exemption to registration for offerings that meet certain conditions .

however , the developers of the saft concept have argued that the functional utility tokens delivered pursuant to saft contracts may not themselves qualify as "securities. .

specifically , the saft's developers argue that tokens issued pursuant to safts may not involve the required "expectation of profit" derived from the "efforts of others" because ( 1 ) token purchasers are motivated primarily by a desire to use or consume products or services , and ( 2 ) the relevant "efforts" to make the tokens useful occur before the tokens are delivered to investors .

accordingly , the saft framework attempts to allow organizations to raise capital for the construction of a platform or service that tokens can be used to access , while potentially avoiding classification of the tokens as "securities" so that they can trade in secondary markets largely free from sec regulation .

notably , the saft's developers caution that use of the saft framework does not prevent all "functional utility tokens" from qualifying as "securities. .

specifically , the saft's developers note that where utility tokens are genuinely useful only by members of a particular industry or other small group , purchases of such tokens by the public at large are likely to be motivated primarily by a desire for financial returns and not by a desire to use or consume goods or services .

in such cases , icos will likely involve the required "expectation of profit" under howey .

the saft's developers also note that where a token issuer promises to engage in significant post - delivery activities that will enhance the value of tokens , an ico likely satisfies the "efforts of others" requirement despite the saft structure .

finally , the saft's developers caution that where a token issuer maintains control over the "monetary policy" for tokens — that is , if an issuer promises to redeem tokens based on its revenue or to engage in other activities to support secondary trading or enhance a token's price — an ico likely involves dependence on the "efforts of others" and therefore qualifies as an offering of "securities. .

the saft concept has emerged as a popular method of structuring icos .

according to one estimate , over 60 companies had raised $564 million using safts in the first four months of 2018 .

however , courts and the sec have not evaluated whether the saft framework in fact achieves its intended goal of avoiding regulation under the securities laws .

moreover , in february 2018 , the wall street journal reported that the sec had issued subpoenas and information requests to a number of token issuers , including issuers who have relied upon the saft framework .

some commentators have also criticized the legal analysis in the saft white paper .

indeed , in november 2017 , the cardozo blockchain project at the benjamin n. cardozo school of law issued a research report raising four general concerns with the saft framework .

first , the report argues that the saft white paper "wrongly suggest[s] that application of the .

 .

 .

federal securities laws will turn on bright - line rules" by maintaining "that the question of whether a utility token will be deemed a security will generally turn on whether the token is 'functional.' .

the paper argues that this suggestion is in tension with the flexible , case - by - case analysis mandated by howey and its progeny .

second , the report contends that following the saft framework could present token creators with greater risk under federal securities laws than they might otherwise face .

specifically , the report argues that because token creators who use the saft will tend to emphasize the profit - generating potential of their tokens in offering saft contracts to accredited investors under regulation d , use of the saft could have the unintended consequence of "transform[ing] an inherently consumptive digital good ( the token itself ) .

 .

 .

into an investment contract. .

the report argues further that a premise on which the saft concept relies — that the timing of a token creator's efforts makes a difference in assessing the "efforts of others" element of the howey test — lacks meaningful support in the case law .

specifically , the report notes that although the d.c .

circuit drew a distinction between a promoter's pre - purchase and post - purchase efforts in life partners , other courts ( such as the eleventh circuit in mutual benefits corp. ) have come to the opposite conclusion and have held that pre - purchase entrepreneurial activities ( such as developing a platform ) are relevant to the "efforts of others" analysis .

the report also questioned whether the post - purchase activities performed by most developers using safts in fact qualify as insignificant "ministerial" efforts , noting that platform developers routinely release updated versions of their platforms with additional features after tokens are sold .

third , the report argues that one of the concerns motivating the saft concept — that "pre - functional utility tokens" are likely to be "securities" because they involve dependence on the "efforts of others" — is misplaced .

the report argues that because purchasers of "pre - functional utility tokens" are likely motivated primarily by a desire to use or consume the platform or products they are funding and not by a desire for financial returns , such tokens do not involve an "expectation of profit" under howey , and accordingly do not qualify as "securities" even if they involve dependence on the "efforts of others" for their ultimate consumptive value .

fourth , the report argues that use of the saft could harm consumers .

specifically , the report contends that unlike traditional equity offerings , which often involve "lockup periods" during which investors cannot sell their shares , safts offer investors the ability to quickly "flip" their tokens for a profit , incentivizing token creators to focus on the profitability of such near - term sales at the expense of viable long - term projects .

the report also raises concerns about the ability of saft purchasers who hold large numbers of tokens to manipulate the market for those tokens to the detriment of other investors and the token issuer .

in light of this ongoing debate over the saft framework and the lack of guidance from regulatory agencies and the courts , it remains unclear whether ( and in what circumstances ) tokens issued pursuant to safts will qualify as "securities" under federal law .

the sec has pursued a number of enforcement actions against token issuers and other actors in the virtual currency industry , and sec officials have testified before congress and given other public statements on their general approach toward icos .

the subsections below review two prominent sec enforcement actions concerning icos and a recent speech by the director of the sec's division of corporation finance that has generated considerable discussion about the agency's views on icos .

in light of the various uncertainties with the application of the howey test to icos and the limited guidance offered by the sec to date , commentators have discussed whether , assuming icos qualify as offerings of "securities," certain exemptions from the securities act's registration requirements may be available to token issuers .

as a threshold matter , it is important to note that an issuer that relies upon an exemption from registration generally has the burden of proving that its offering falls within the exemption .

moreover , such exemptions concern only an issuer's obligation to register securities with the sec .

the anti - fraud provisions of the securities act and the exchange act apply to securities even if they are exempt from registration .

nevertheless , registration exemptions may offer token issuers valuable benefits by allowing them to avoid the detailed and complex disclosures required in registration statements .

this section of the report reviews a number of exemptions from the securities act's registration requirements and discusses their possible application to icos .

the features of the relevant exemptions are summarized in table 1 below .

while discussion of the legal issues raised by icos is still in its relative infancy , commentators have offered a variety of proposals to improve ico regulation .

the subsections below review a number of these proposals .

some commentators have criticized the sec's policy of "regulation through enforcement," in which the agency has made its views of icos known primarily through actions taken against individual defendants rather than by providing more general guidance applicable to all regulated entities .

according to these commentators , this type of "piecemeal" approach "leaves token sale participants without ready answers to the questions that will determine whether or not the tokens they offer are securities. .

these observers contend that this absence of legal certainty may drive token sales overseas , "harming healthy innovation in the u.s." in order to avoid these innovation - chilling effects , some commentators have proposed that the sec issue interpretive guidance clarifying its views on icos or , in the absence of such guidance , offer "meaningful guideposts to token sale participants" in future administrative orders and reports .

if the sec does not issue such guidance of its own volition , congress has the authority to require it to do so .

some commentators have proposed that the sec promulgate an exemption from the securities act's registration requirements for token issuers that is modeled after regulation a .

as discussed , regulation a provides for two tiers of exempt offerings ( tier 1 offerings are capped at $20 million , while tier 2 offerings are capped at $50 million ) , and securities sold pursuant to regulation a are not subject to resale restrictions .

commentators have proposed retaining these features of regulation a for a token - specific exemption , but modifying regulation a's disclosure requirements "to better fit with tokens and token - funded projects. .

among other changes , a token - specific exemption could require disclosure of the relevant computer code supporting a network on which tokens can be used ( which may be relevant to the network's viability ) , and any evaluations of the code performed by technical experts .

if the sec does not promulgate such an exemption pursuant to its general exemptive authority , congress could adopt one statutorily or direct the sec to do so .

some observers have proposed that congress adopt legislation providing a "safe harbor" for token exchanges , under which exchanges are immune from liability for facilitating the sale of unregistered securities in certain circumstances .

specifically , commentators have proposed granting immunity to exchanges that ( 1 ) perform technical due diligence to verify a token's cybersecurity practices , ( 2 ) obtain an opinion from qualified counsel concluding that a token is not a "security," and ( 3 ) immediately de - list tokens that are subsequently found to be "securities. .

these commentators contend that such a safe harbor would prevent "utility tokens" from moving to overseas exchanges in response to refusals by u.s. exchanges to incur the risks associated with listing them .

finally , a number of commentators have called upon congress to consider changes to the regulatory structure surrounding icos .

currently , a variety of federal regulatory agencies have responsibility for different aspects of virtual currency regulation .

the sec is responsible for regulating virtual currencies that qualify as "securities. .

the cftc has general jurisdiction over derivatives markets for virtual currencies like bitcoin that qualify as "commodities," and has the authority to police "spot" markets for such virtual currencies for fraud and market manipulation .

however , no federal agency has general jurisdiction over virtual currency "spot" markets .

the financial crimes enforcement network ( fincen ) , a bureau within the treasury department , also has responsibility for regulating virtual currencies .

fincen is responsible for enforcing the bank secrecy act ( bsa ) , a major federal anti - money laundering statute , and has issued guidance clarifying the bsa's application to various actors in the virtual currency industry .

dissatisfied with this multi - agency approach to virtual currency regulation , some commentators have proposed creating a new federal agency to focus specifically on the regulation of virtual currencies .

other observers have proposed that congress designate an existing regulator as having "primary jurisdiction" over virtual currencies .

to date no legislation has been introduced in the 115th congress on such a proposal .

