almost every conversation about surface transportation finance begins with a two - part question: what are the "needs" of the national transportation system , and how does the nation pay for them ? .

this report is aimed almost entirely at d iscussing the "how to pay for them" question .

since 1956 , federal surface transportation programs have been funded largely by taxes on motor fuels that flow into the highway trust fund ( htf ) .

a steady increase in the revenues flowing into the htf due to increased motor vehicle use and occasional increases in fuel tax rates accommodated growth in surface transportation spending over several decades .

in 2001 , though , trust fund revenues stopped growing faster than spending .

in 2008 congress began providing treasury general fund transfers to keep the htf solvent .

every year since 2008 , there has been a gap between the dedicated tax revenues flowing into the htf and the cost of the surface transportation spending congress has authorized .

congress has filled these shortfalls by transfers , largely from the general fund , that have shifted a total of $143.6 billion to the htf ( roughly 22% of outlays ) .

the last $70 billion of these transfers were authorized in the fixing america's surface transportation act ( fast act ; p.l .

114-94 ) , which was signed by president barack obama on december 4 , 2015 .

the fast act funds federal surface transportation programs from fy2016 through fy2020 .

when the act expires the de facto policy of relying on general fund transfers to sustain the htf will be 12 years old .

congressional budget office ( cbo ) projections indicate that the imbalance between motor fuel tax receipts and htf expenditures will persist beyond fy2020 .

in consequence , funding and financing surface transportation is expected to continue to be a major issue for congress .

the htf has two separate accounts — highways and mass transit .

the primary revenue sources for these accounts are an 18.3-cent - per - gallon federal tax on gasoline and a 24.3-cent - per - gallon federal tax on diesel fuel .

although the htf has other sources of revenue , such as truck registration fees and a truck tire tax , and is also credited with interest paid on the fund balances held by the treasury , fuel taxes in most years provide 85% to 90% of the amounts paid into the fund by highway users .

the transit account receives 2.86 cents per gallon of fuel taxes , with the remainder of the tax revenue flowing into the highway account .

an additional 0.1-cent - per - gallon fuel tax is reserved for the leaking underground storage tank ( lust ) fund , which is not part of the transportation program .

since the trust fund was created in 1956 , congress has increased federal motor fuel taxes four times: in 1959 , 1982 , 1990 , and 1993 .

since the 1993 increase , additional changes to the taxation structure have modestly boosted trust fund revenues .

however , since 2001 , revenue flowing into the htf has not met expectations in most years .

the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-357 ) , for example , provided the trust fund with increased future income by changing elements of federal "gasohol" taxation .

in 2005 , the safe , accountable , flexible , efficient transportation equity act: a legacy for users ( p.l .

109-59 ; safetea ) sought to bolster the trust fund by addressing tax fraud .

safetea also provided for the transfer of some general fund revenue associated with transportation - related activities to the trust fund .

it was believed at the time of safetea's passage that the tax changes , a $12.5 billion unexpended balance in the trust fund , and higher fuel tax revenue due to expected economic growth would be sufficient to finance the surface transportation program through fy2009 .

this prediction proved to be incorrect .

trust fund revenue has generally lagged inflation since fy2007 .

the shortfalls resulting from the overly optimistic forecasts associated with safetea were rectified by treasury general fund contributions .

in september 2008 , congress enacted a bill that transferred $8 billion from the general fund to shore up the htf .

other transfers followed ( see table 1 ) .

when the htf was conceived , annual vehicle miles traveled ( vmt ) , and therefore motor fuel tax revenue , were rising rapidly .

that is no longer the case .

the federal highway administration ( fhwa ) projects that vmt will grow at an average of roughly 1.2% per year over the next 20 years .

meanwhile , other policy changes are weakening the link between driving activity and motor fuel tax revenues .

under rules issued in 2012 , new passenger cars and light trucks are expected to attain an average fuel economy of 41.0 miles per gallon in model year 2021 and 49.7 miles per gallon in model year 2025 .

improved fuel economy is slowly reducing the average amount of fuel used per mile of travel .

the expanding fleets of hybrid and electric vehicles , respectively , pay less or nothing by way of fuel taxes , raising equity issues that are likely to become more prominent as the electric / hybrid vehicle fleet expands .

on april 2 , 2018 , the trump administration announced its intent to revise the corporate average fuel economy ( cafe ) standards for the model years 2022-2025 .

this change could slow the increase in the average fuel economy of the motor vehicle fleet .

an increase in the existing fuel tax rates would provide immediate relief to the trust fund .

as a rule of thumb , adding a penny to federal motor fuel taxes provides the trust fund with roughly $1.5 billion to $1.7 billion per year .

the prospect of reduced motor fuel consumption , however , casts doubt on the ability of the motor fuel taxes to support increased surface transportation spending beyond the next decade , even with significant increases in tax rates .

the first federal tax on gasoline ( 1 cent per gallon ) was imposed in 1932 , during the hoover administration , as a deficit - reduction measure following the depression - induced fall in general revenues .

the rate was raised to help pay for world war ii ( to 1.5 cents per gallon ) and raised again during the korean war ( to 2 cents per gallon ) .

the highway revenue act of 1956 ( p.l .

84-627 ) established the htf and raised the rate to 3 cents per gallon to pay for the construction of the interstate highway system .

the federal - aid highway act of 1959 ( p.l .

86-342 ) raised the rate to 4 cents per gallon .

the gasoline tax remained at 4 cents from october 1 , 1959 , until march 31 , 1983 .

during this period , revenues grew automatically from year to year as fuel consumption grew along with increases in vehicle miles traveled .

since 1983 lawmakers have passed legislation raising the tax rates on highway fuel use three times .

although infrequent , these rate increases were quite large in a proportional sense .

the gasoline tax was raised on april 1 , 1983 , from 4 to 9 cents per gallon , a 125% increase ; on september 1 , 1990 , from 9 to 14 cents ( not counting the additional 0.1 cent for lust ) , or 55% ; and on october 1 , 1993 , from 14 to 18.3 cents , or 31% .

the political difficulty of increasing motor fuel taxes has led to interest in alternative approaches for supporting the htf .

among options that have been proposed are the following .

the htf was set up as a temporary device that was supposed to disappear when the interstate system was finished .

it has endured , and its breadth of financing has expanded well beyond the interstates , most significantly with the 1982 creation of the mass transit account within the htf to support public transportation spending .

but the htf is not essential to a federal role in transportation funding .

congress routinely funds large infrastructure projects , such as those constructed by the army corps of engineers , from general fund appropriations .

before 1956 , it funded highway projects using annual appropriations .

as recently as the 1990s , significant highway programs such as the appalachian development highway system were funded from the general fund .

if congress chooses not to impose new taxes and fees dedicated to the htf , it could still maintain or expand the surface transportation program with general fund monies .

any of the revenues from the htf financing options discussed above could also be deposited into the general fund rather than the htf if congress considers alternatives to the trust fund financing model .

possible alternatives include the following: e liminate the t rust f und .

this would do away with the complicated budget framework of contract authority , obligations , and apportionments .

surface transportation would be forced to compete with other federal programs for funding each year , possibly affecting the level of funding provided for transportation .

there could be advantages to moving away from trust fund financing of surface transportation .

until recently , one of the most intractable arguments in reauthorization debates concerned which states were "donors" to transportation programs and which were "donees. .

donor states were states whose highway users were estimated to pay more to the highway account of the htf than they received .

donee states received more than they paid .

the donor - donee dispute was unique to the federal highway program , and occurred largely because of the ability to track federal fuel tax revenues by state .

this issue has faded as htf shortfalls have been resolved with injections of general fund transfers to the fund .

these general fund monies transferred into the htf have nothing to do with highway tax revenues , but have made nearly all states donees .

the donor - donee issue would likely disappear entirely if transportation - related taxes were deposited into the general fund instead of the trust fund .

this would provide congress with greater flexibility to allocate funding among various transportation modes and between transportation and nontransportation uses .

however , treating fuel taxes as just another source of federal revenue would weaken the long - standing link between road user charges and program spending .

most trust - fund outlays take the form of formula grants over which states have a great deal of spending discretion .

while there are numerous federal requirements attached to trust fund expenditures , there have been until recently relatively few performance - oriented goals that the states are required to meet in selecting projects to be undertaken with federal monies .

performance measures might be easier to implement without formula programs that automatically apportion funding to the states .

however , this may not be the case ; performance measures in recent years have been imposed on the federal - aid highway programs as they are currently structured , although implementation has been slow .

eliminating the trust fund might also allow for creativity in thinking about the provision of transportation infrastructure across the modal boundaries that now define much of federal transportation spending .

historically , important parts of u.s. transportation infrastructure , such as the transcontinental railroads and the panama canal , were authorized by specific congressional enactments rather than grant programs .

reconsidering the trust fund structure might reopen discussion of this approach .

devote htf r evenues e xclusively to h ighways .

this option would leave transit and other surface transportation programs to be funded entirely by annual appropriations of general funds or devolved to the states .

such a change would have political implications .

since the early 1990s , public transportation and cycling advocates , environmentalists , and a wide range of other groups have become full - fledged supporters of the surface transportation program .

they might be less enthusiastic about supporting a program that does not address their interests. .

d evolve" s urface t ransportation p rograms to the s tates .

the federal government could devolve most federal responsibility for highways and public transportation to the states .

under devolution proposals , the federal taxes that now support surface transportation programs , mostly fuel taxes , would be reduced accordingly , leaving individual states to raise their own taxes to pay for highway and transit projects as they see fit .

a small program , funded by much - reduced motor fuel taxes , would remain in place at the federal level to maintain roads on federal lands , fund highway safety efforts , and support other programs congress decides not to devolve .

by enacting the fast act , congress chose to support the current funding model by transferring funds into the htf , mostly from the treasury general fund .

whether such general fund support should continue is likely to become a major point of contention when congress debates reauthorizing surface transportation programs beyond fy2020 .

by fy2020 , the last year of the fast act , federal highway programs will have been funded for 12 years under a de facto policy of providing a treasury general fund share .

congress could address the inadequacy of motor fuel taxes to meet surface transportation needs by making the general fund share permanent .

the public transportation titles of surface transportation bills already fund the capital investment grants program through appropriations from the general fund .

the federal aviation administration ( faa ) budget is also supported by a combination of trust funds and general funds ; the general fund amount is supposed to approximate the value of the airways system to military and other government users and to "societal" nonusers ( people who do not fly but , for example , benefit from the delivery of freight via aircraft ) .

a similar argument could be made regarding the public good benefits of a well - functioning highway system to justify an annual general fund appropriation to support spending on roads .

should congress agree on a future policy of providing an annual general fund share for federal highway funding , the financing structure of the federal - aid highways program could change .

congress would have the choice of appropriating the general fund share to the htf and maintaining the programmatic status quo , or it could fund some programs from the trust fund and fund others via appropriations .

congress could also consider a two - pronged approach to authorization .

it could authorize the trust funded programs separately from the appropriated programs .

this would give congress the option of approving a very long authorization for trust - funded projects that typically take many years to plan and complete .

the long - term authorization could be paired with a series of short - term bills funded with appropriated general funds for programs whose projects are more likely to be completed quickly .

toll roads have a long history in the united states , going back to the early days of the republic .

during the 18 th century , most were local roads or bridges that could not be built or improved with local government tax revenue alone .

however , beginning with the federal aid road act of 1916 ( 39 stat .

355 ) , federal law has included a prohibition on the tolling of roads that benefited from federal funds .

during the late 1940s and early 1950s , the prospect of toll revenues allowed states to build thousands of miles of limited - access highways without federal aid and much sooner than would have been the case with traditional funding .

despite this , the tolling prohibition was reiterated in the federal - aid highway act and highway revenue act of 1956 ( 70 stat .

374 ) , which authorized funds for the interstate system , created the htf , and raised the fuel taxes to pay for their construction .

over the last three decades the prohibition has been moderated so that exceptions to the general ban on tolling now cover the vast majority of federal - aid roads and bridges .

there remains a ban on the tolling of existing interstate system highway surface lane capacity .

while new toll facilities have opened in several states , some of those projects have struggled financially .

generally , there are several levels of restrictions on tolling of federal - aid highways .

non - interstate system highways and bridges may be converted to toll roads but only after reconstruction or replacement .

existing interstate system surface lane capacity may not be converted to toll roads except under the auspices of two small pilot programs .

interstate system bridges and tunnels may be converted if they are reconstructed or replaced .

new capacity on the federal - aid highway system , including interstate highways , generally may be tolled .

there are no federal restrictions on tolling of roads that are not part of the federal - aid system .

value capture represents an attempt to cover part or all of the cost of transportation improvements from landowners or developers who benefit from the resulting increase in the value of real property .

value capture revenue mechanisms include tax increment financing , special assessments , development impact fees , negotiated exactions , and joint development .

the federal role in value capture strategies may be limited , as the government accountability office ( gao ) has noted , but it is worth describing these strategies to provide a fuller picture of the ways in which they might supplement or supplant more commonly used funding and financing mechanisms .

value capture is not a new idea .

land developers built and operated streetcar systems in the late 19 th century as a way to sell houses on the urban fringe , for example .

much of the recent experience with value capture has been associated with public transit .

gao found that the most widely used mechanism is joint development , in which a real estate project at or near a transit station is pursued cooperatively between the public and private sectors .

an example might involve a transit agency leasing the unused space over a station , its "air rights," to a developer in exchange for a regular payment .

joint development has generated relatively small amounts of money for transit agencies .

for example , the washington metropolitan area transit authority received about $10 million from joint development in fy2016 , about 1% of its operating revenue .

however , less widely used strategies , such as special assessment districts , are estimated to generate significant amounts of funding for specific projects .

in a special assessment district , properties within a defined area are assessed a special tax for a specific purpose .

a special assessment district in seattle produced $25 million of the $53 million ( 47% ) needed to fund the south lake union streetcar project .

there has been less use of value capture in highway projects , but this appears to be changing .

texas , for example , has authorized the use of tax increment financing through the creation of transportation reinvestment zones to help fund highway projects .

special assessment districts also have been set up in several states , including florida and virginia , to fund highway projects .

in virginia a special assessment district was used to help fund the expansion of route 28 near washington dulles international airport beginning in the late 1980s .

growing demands on the transportation system and constraints on public resources have led to calls for more private - sector involvement in the provision of highway and transit infrastructure through public - private partnerships ( p3s ) , which can be designed to lessen demands on public - sector funding .

private involvement can take a variety of forms , including design - build and design - build - finance - operate agreements .

typically , the "public" in public - private partnerships refers to a state government , local government , or transit agency .

the federal government , nevertheless , exerts influence over the prevalence and structure of p3s through its transportation programs , funding , and regulatory oversight .

to be viable , p3s involving private financing typically require an anticipated project - related revenue stream from a source such as vehicle tolls , freight container fees , or , in the case of transit station development , building rents .

private - sector resources may come from an initial payment to lease an existing asset in exchange for future revenue , as with the indiana toll road and chicago skyway , or they may arise from a newly developed asset that creates a new revenue stream .

either way , a facility user fee , such as a toll , is often the key to unlocking private - sector participation and resources .

in some cases , private - sector financing is backed by "availability payments," regular payments made by government to the private entity based on negotiated quality and performance standards of the facility .

aversion in the private sector to the risk that too few users will be willing to pay for use of a new facility , known as demand risk , has made availability payment p3s more common over the past few years .

as a result , state and local governments are retaining demand risk more often .

it is frequently asserted that hundreds of billions of dollars of private funds are available globally for infrastructure investment .

to date , however , the number of transportation p3s in the united states is relatively small , as is the amount of long - term private financing provided .

according to one source , from 1993 through september 2017 there were 30 surface transportation p3s involving long - term financing , with total project costs totaling $39 billion .

this includes the 99-year lease of the chicago skyway ; the i - 595 managed lanes project in florida ; and the purple line light rail transit project in maryland .

p3s and private investment in infrastructure , including surface transportation , are relatively larger in many other countries , including canada , australia , and the united kingdom .

while private investment may grow in the future , many impediments remain .

some of the major ones include the relative attractiveness of the tax - exempt financing available to state and local government , political opposition to tolling and privatization , and difficulties associated with project development .

private - sector financing generated through p3s might best be seen as a supplement to traditional public - sector funding rather than as a substitute .

in addition to attracting private capital , p3s may generate new resources for highway and transit infrastructure in at least two ways .

first , p3s may improve efficiency through better management and innovation in construction , maintenance , and operation — in effect providing more infrastructure for the same price .

private companies may be more able to examine the full life - cycle cost of investments , whereas public agency decisions are often tied to short - term budget cycles .

such cost reductions may not materialize , however , if the public sector has to spend a substantial amount of time on procurement , oversight , dispute resolution , and litigation .

second , p3s may reduce government agencies' costs by transferring the financial risks of building , maintaining , and operating infrastructure to private investors .

these risks include construction delays , unexpectedly high maintenance costs , and the possibility that demand will be less than forecast .

there is a danger , however , that this transfer of risk may prove illusory if major miscalculations force the public agency to renegotiate contracts or provide financial guarantees .

moreover , as gao points out , not all the risks can or should be shifted to the private sector .

for instance , private investors are unlikely to accept the risk of higher construction costs due to delays in the environmental review process .

asset recycling is the sale or lease to the private sector of government - owned infrastructure assets and the investment of the proceeds in new infrastructure .

for a few years , the national government of australia had a policy of making 15% incentive payments to state and territory governments if they agreed to sell or lease assets to the private sector and then "recycle" these payments to other infrastructure projects .

over the roughly three - year period the asset recycling initiative was in effect , the national government entered into four agreements with incentive payments totaling a$3.175 billion ( approximately us$2.4 billion ) .

one of the agreements involved the lease of 49% of the electricity network businesses owned by the state of new south wales and the investment of the proceeds in the sydney metro , parramatta light rail , and several road projects .

a similar program for the united states was proposed in a draft bill on infrastructure investment circulated by house transportation and infrastructure committee chairman bill shuster in 2018 .

the draft bill proposed to provide a federal payment of 15% of the assessed value of a leased infrastructure asset to eligible project sponsors , allotting $3 billion for this purpose from fy2019 through fy2023 .

no similar proposal has been introduced as legislation .

infrastructure assets that qualify for recycling in the draft bill include highways , public transit , airports , ports and port terminals , publicly owned railroads , intercity bus facilities , intermodal transportation facilities , and drinking and wastewater facilities .

municipal bonds , debt instruments used by states and all types of local government , are a major source of financing for transportation infrastructure .

the interest on municipal bonds is generally exempt from federal income tax ; consequently , an investor will usually accept a lower interest rate than on a non - tax - exempt bond , and the borrower can finance a project at a lower cost .

the forgone tax revenue is the federal government's contribution to a project financed with municipal bonds .

cbo estimates that the cost to the federal government of tax - exempt bonds in state and local transportation and water infrastructure investment is 26 cents per dollar financed .

private activity bonds ( pabs ) are a type of municipal bond in which a state or local government acts as a financial intermediary for a business or individual .

pabs are not eligible for federal tax exemption unless congress grants an exception for a certain purpose and other requirements are met .

congress has approved limited use of tax - exempt private activity bonds for airports , docks and wharves , mass commuting facilities , high - speed intercity rail facilities , and qualified highway or surface freight transfer facilities ( 26 u.s.c .

§142 ) .

in the case of qualified highway or surface freight transfer facilities , the secretary of transportation must approve the issuance of pabs , and the aggregate amount allocated must not exceed $15 billion ( 26 u.s.c .

§142 ( m ) ( 2 ) ) .

the authorization for the sale of qualified highway or surface freight transfer facilities was a provision in safetea , enacted in 2005 .

as of august 1 , 2018 , $8.38 billion of the $15 billion had been issued to finance 23 projects , and another $2.63 billion had been allocated to five other projects .

there have been proposals to increase the bond issuance cap so that pabs , which are seen as an important support for p3 deals , can continue to be issued in the future .

while municipal bonds are a popular financing method , there are a number of potential disadvantages to their use .

because they are issued by state and local governments , the federal government has less control over the types of projects supported and the amount of the federal contribution than it does with grant and loan programs .

tax - exempt bonds , moreover , can be an inefficient way to subsidize state and local debt because borrowing costs are reduced by less than the forgone federal revenue .

as cbo notes , "the remainder of that tax expenditure accrues to bond buyers in the highest income tax brackets. .

also , tax - exempt bonds are unattractive to investors that do not have a federal tax liability , such as pension funds and foreign individuals and organizations , shrinking the potential funds available to state and local governments .

tax credit bonds , an alternative type of tax - preferred municipal bond , might help to overcome some of these limitations .

tax credit bonds typically do not pay interest .

instead , the investor receives a tax credit , an amount that is the same for investors in different tax brackets .

tax credit bonds , therefore , are more efficient than tax - exempt bonds because the revenue forgone by the federal government equals the reduction in borrowing costs that state and local governments receive .

unused tax credits may be carried forward to another year or sold to another entity with tax liability .

with some types of tax credit bonds known as issuer credit or direct pay bonds , the credit is paid to the issuer ( a state or local government ) by the treasury , and the investor gets interest similar to taxable securities .

consequently , tax credit bonds can be attractive to investors with no federal tax liability .

federal authority exists for state and local governments to issue some types of tax credit bonds , but under current authority none can be used to finance transportation projects .

tax credit bonds authorized by the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) , known as build america bonds , were used to finance a wide range of projects including transportation .

the authorization to issue these bonds expired december 31 , 2010 .

an existing federal mechanism for providing credit assistance to relatively large transportation infrastructure projects is the transportation infrastructure finance and innovation act ( tifia ) program , enacted in 1998 .

tifia provides federal credit assistance in the form of secured loans , loan guarantees , and lines of credit .

federal credit assistance reduces borrowers' costs and lowers project risk , thereby helping to secure other financing at rates lower than would otherwise be possible .

another purpose of tifia funding is to leverage nonfederal funding , including investment from the private sector .

loans must be repaid with a dedicated revenue stream , typically a project - related user fee , such as a toll , but sometimes dedicated tax revenue .

as of september 2018 , according to dot , tifia had provided assistance of about $30 billion to more than 70 projects .

the overall cost of the projects supported is estimated to be nearly $110 billion .

the fast act ( p.l .

112-141 ) authorized $275 million for tifia in both fy2016 and fy2017 , $285 million in fy2018 , and $300 million in both fy2019 and fy2020 .

because the government expects its loans to be repaid , an appropriation need cover only administrative costs and the subsidy cost of credit assistance .

according to the federal credit reform act of 1990 , the subsidy cost is "the estimated long - term cost to the government of a direct loan or a loan guarantee , calculated on a net present value basis , excluding administrative costs. .

according to dot , $1 in tifia funding historically has provided about $10 in credit assistance , a 10% subsidy cost , although in recent years each dollar has provided closer to $14 .

the fast act also allowed states to use funds they receive from two other highway programs to pay for the subsidy and administrative costs of credit assistance .

these two programs are the nationally significant freight and highway projects program ( nsfhpp ) , authorized at $950 million in fy2019 , and the national highway performance program ( nhpp ) , authorized at $23.7 billion in fy2019 .

if states decide to use their formula funding in this way , the potential amount of loans and other credit assistance may be much greater than would be possible using the $275 million direct authorization alone .

the better utilizing investments to leverage development ( build ) transportation discretionary grants program ( formerly tiger program ) , funded by general fund appropriations , also can be used by grant recipients to pay the subsidy and administrative costs of a tifia loan .

several changes to the tifia program in the fast act were aimed at making it easier to finance smaller projects , particularly those in rural areas .

these provisions included providing authority for a tifia loan to a state infrastructure bank ( sib ) to capitalize a "rural project fund" ; adding transit - oriented development ( tod ) infrastructure as an eligible project ( tod infrastructure is a "project to improve or construct public infrastructure that is located within walking distance of , and accessible to , a fixed guideway transit facility , passenger rail station , intercity bus station , or intermodal facility" ) ; allowing up to $2 million of tifia budget authority each fiscal year to pay the application fees for projects costing $75 million or less instead of requiring payment by the project sponsor ; modifying or setting the minimum project cost thresholds for credit assistance at $10 million for tod projects , the capitalization of a rural project fund , and local government infrastructure projects ; and providing for a streamlined application process for loans of $100 million or less .

in addition , the fast act authorized the creation of a new national surface transportation and innovative finance bureau within dot to administer federal transportation financing programs , specifically the tifia program , the sib program , the railroad rehabilitation and improvement financing ( rrif ) program , and the allocation of authority to issue private activity bonds for qualified highway or surface freight transfer facilities .

to fulfill this mandate , dot established the build america bureau in july 2016 .

the bureau also will be responsible for establishing and promoting best practices for innovative financing and p3s , and for providing advice and technical expertise in these areas .

the bureau will administer the discretionary nationally significant freight and highway projects grant program , known as infra grants , and will have responsibilities related to procurement and project environmental review and permitting .

congress has considered several proposals to create a national infrastructure bank to help finance infrastructure projects .

one purported advantage of a national infrastructure bank over other loan programs , such as tifia , is that it would have more independence in its operation , such as in project selection , and have greater expertise at its disposal .

additionally , a national infrastructure bank would likely be set up to help a much wider range of infrastructure projects , including water , energy , and telecommunications infrastructure .

proponents claim that the best projects , or at least those that are the most financially viable , would be selected from across these sectors .

in many formulations , capitalization of a national infrastructure bank comes from an appropriation , but in others the bank is authorized to raise its own capital through bond issuance .

by issuing securities that are not tax exempt , it could tap pools of private capital that do not invest in tax - exempt bonds , such as pension funds and foreign citizens , the traditional source of much project finance .

tax - exempt municipal securities are unattractive to some investors , either because individual issues are too small to interest them or because the investors do not benefit from the tax preference .

taxable bonds with long maturities might be attractive to some of these investors .

an infrastructure bank also might also choose to reduce the federal government's share of project costs , putting greater reliance on nonfederal capital and user fees .

most infrastructure bank proposals assume the bank would improve the allocation of public resources by funding projects with the highest economic returns regardless of infrastructure system or type .

selection of the projects with the highest returns , however , might conflict with the traditional desire of congress to ensure funding for various purposes .

in the extreme case , major transportation projects might not be funded if the bank were to exhaust its lending authority on water or energy projects offering higher returns .

limitations of a national infrastructure bank include its duplication of existing programs like tifia and the wastewater and drinking water state revolving funds .

an infrastructure bank may not be the lowest - cost means of increasing infrastructure spending .

cbo has pointed out that a special entity that issues its own debt would not be able to match the lower interest and issuance costs of the u.s. treasury .

in some formulations , a national infrastructure bank exposes the federal government to the risk of default .

state infrastructure banks ( sibs ) already exist in many states .

in 32 states and puerto rico , sibs were created pursuant to a federal program originally established in surface transportation law in 1995 ( p.l .

104-59 ) .

several other states , among them california , florida , georgia , kansas , ohio , and virginia , have state investment banks that are unconnected to the federal program .

local governments have also begun to embrace the idea .

the city of chicago has established a nonprofit organization , the chicago infrastructure trust , as a way to attract private investment for public works projects , and dauphin county , pa , has established an infrastructure bank funded from a state tax on liquid fuels to make loans to the 40 municipalities and private project sponsors within its borders .

one of the biggest stumbling blocks to federally authorized sibs has been capitalization .

states can capitalize the banks using some of their apportioned and allocated highway and transit funds , and any amount of rail program funds .

under the fast act , capitalization of a rural project fund may now be made by a loan from the tifia program .

federal funds have to be matched with state funds , generally on an 80% federal , 20% state basis .

