t he public safety officers' benefits ( psob ) program provides cash benefits to federal , state , and local law enforcement officers ; firefighters ; employees of emergency management agencies ; and members of emergency medical services agencies who are killed or permanently and totally disabled as the result of personal injuries sustained in the line of duty .

the public safety officers' educational assistance ( psoea ) program , a component of the psob program , provides higher - education assistance to the children and spouses of public safety officers killed or permanently disabled in the line of duty .

both programs are administered by the psob office of the department of justice ( doj ) , bureau of justice assistance ( bja ) .

congress appropriates funds for these programs in the annual departments of commerce and justice , science , and related agencies appropriations act .

for fy2019 , the one - time lump - sum psob benefit is $359,316 and the monthly full - time attendance psoea assistance is $1,224 .

the psob and psoea benefit amounts are indexed to reflect changes in the cost of living .

table 1 shows psob and psoea claims and approvals as reported by doj .

the public safety officers' education assistance ( psoea ) program provides financial assistance with costs associated with higher education to the spouse or children of a public safety officer who is eligible for psob death or disability benefits .

a claimant who is dissatisfied with a psob disability benefit denial may request a reconsideration .

there is no reconsideration offered for denials of psob death or psoea benefits .

a claimant who is dissatisfied with a psob or psoea benefit denial may request a de novo hearing before a hearing officer assigned by the director of the doj psob office .

the determination of a hearing officer may be appealed to the psob office director .

the director's determination is considered the final agency determination and is not subject to any further agency administrative review or appeal .

however , provided all administrative appeals remedies have been exhausted , the psob office director's determination may be appealed to the united states court of appeals for the federal circuit .

the psob statute authorizes the bja to prescribe the maximum fee that an attorney or other representative may charge a claimant for services rendered in connection with a claim , with attorney fees generally limited to between 3% and 6% of the total benefit paid , depending on the level in the administrative appeals process the claim is approved .

program regulation prohibits stipulated - fee and contingency - fee arrangements for psob representation .

congress provides funding for psob and psoe benefits and associated administrative expenses in the annual departments of commerce and justice , science , and related agencies appropriations act .

funding for psob death benefits and associated administrative expenses is considered mandatory spending and congress appropriates "such sums as may be necessary" for the payment of these benefits .

funding for psob disability and psoea benefits is considered discretionary and is subject to specific congressional appropriations .

annual appropriations language grants the attorney general the authority to transfer from any available appropriations to the doj the funds necessary to respond to emergent circumstances that require additional funding for psob disability benefits and psoea benefits .

