since the 2016 election cycle , the policy community has focused on what roles the federal government plays — or could play — in protecting u.s. elections from foreign interference .

recent reports suggest that attempts to interfere with the 2018 election cycle also are under way .

congress is responsible for overseeing the federal presence in campaigns and elections , both with respect to traditional policy challenges and new ones .

this report is intended to help congress understand how the statutes and agencies it has created affect u.s. campaigns and elections .

currently , no single agency or statute provides overarching coordination .

as this report shows , at least 22 congressional committees ; 17 federal departments or independent agencies ( plus the intelligence community and the federal judiciary ) ; 9 federal statutes ; and several constitutional provisions can affect the federal role in campaigns and elections .

as this report discusses the federal role in campaigns and elections is limited , but can be extensive in those areas in which the federal government is involved .

congress has expanded the federal role in campaigns and elections in the past 50 years , particularly in campaign finance and voting rights .

campaigns and elections are different things and are regulated differently .

the federal government plays relatively little role in regulating campaigns , except for campaign finance .

the federal government primarily supports states in administering elections .

existing campaigns and elections policy primarily focuses on electioneering and voting .

topics such as issue advocacy or general attempts to influence public opinion are not necessarily regulated under federal law that covers campaigns and elections .

the election assistance commission and federal election commission are the only two agencies devoted solely to campaigns and elections .

the justice department administers and enforces some elections statutes .

agencies such as the department of homeland security are now more involved with elections than in the past .

several other agencies also play roles in campaigns and elections .

the following pages are based on crs research of statutory references to campaigns and elections ; legislative or other congressional activity ; federal agency documents and websites ; and media accounts .

citations appear throughout , including to other crs products that provide additional detail .

this report does not track legislation .

the report addresses those areas of law and public policy that most directly and routinely affect federal campaigns and elections .

it does not attempt to cover every instance of federal involvement in this policy area .

other agencies or provisions in law or regulation that are not addressed here might be relevant in specific cases .

for example , a campaign finance investigation might involve banking law , but because banking law typically is not a campaign finance policy or election administration matter in the united states , the report does not address it .

the report also excludes agencies that congress generally has prohibited from elections involvement , or in which involvement has merely been proposed .

the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) , for example , meets both criteria .

as another crs report explains , "evaluating the authority of congress to establish standardized election procedures would appear to require a consideration of a variety of different proposals and scenarios. .

this report does not provide such a legal or constitutional analysis .

in practice , the federal and state governments share responsibility for administering , regulating , or supporting campaigns and elections in the united states .

finally , in some cases , the federal government's activities and authorities change over time , or new information becomes available .

this report will be updated in the future to reflect major developments or new information .

c ampaigns and elections are distinct concepts .

this distinction affects the federal government's role in both .

practically and simply , campaigns are about persuading voters in an effort to win elections .

voters express their campaign preferences by casting ballots in elections .

except for campaign finance policy , u.s. campaigns are subject to relatively little regulation .

elections in the united states are highly regulated and primarily a state - level responsibility .

the constitution and federal statutes establish the federal role in u.s. campaigns and elections .

the following discussion addresses constitutional provisions ; statutes that primarily regulate campaigns and elections ; and , finally , statutes that can affect campaigns and elections but primarily address other policy issues .

the appendix at the end of this report provides citations to other areas of law that may be relevant in specific cases but are not otherwise addressed in the report .

the federal presence in campaigns and elections does not necessarily mean federal power .

the preceding pages confirm that the federal government does relatively little to actually administer elections .

where the federal government is involved , however , its presence can be extensive .

historically , the federal government has emphasized domestic campaigns and elections concerns .

these include topics such as transparent campaign financing , protecting voting rights , and providing states funding to upgrade election equipment .

new challenges , such as threats from foreign actors and through cyberattacks , suggest that the federal government's role in campaigns and elections is increasingly complex and interdisciplinary .

currently , no single agency or statute provides overarching coordination for the federal presence in campaigns and elections .

only two small independent agencies — the eac for election administration and the fec for campaign finance — are devoted solely to campaigns and elections policy .

agencies such as dhs can bring security expertise to elections , but are not elections specialists , as are the eac , fec , or parts of doj .

for some , greater coordination across statutes and agencies might be beneficial , while others likely will respond that the existing system is based on deliberately unique statutes and agency expertise .

currently , regulating campaigns and elections depends on a clear connection to defeating or electing candidates , or to voting for or against those candidates .

this report generally does not address some topics — such as issue advocacy or foreign propaganda — not because they are unimportant , but because congress has chosen primarily to regulate them outside of campaigns and elections statutes .

congress could choose to broaden the kinds of conduct that are subject to regulation in campaign finance or election law in the future .

if it does so , one or more of the statutes and agencies discussed in this report likely would be affected .

