the federal government has recognized the need to organize and coordinate the collection and management of geospatial data since at least 1990 .

in that year , the office of management and budget ( omb ) revised circular a - 16 — which provides guidance regarding coordination of federal surveying , mapping , and related spatial data activities — to establish the federal geographic data committee ( fgdc ) and to promote the coordinated use , sharing , and dissemination of geospatial data nationwide .

omb circular a - 16 also called for the development of a national resource for digital spatial information to enable the sharing and transfer of spatial data between users and producers , linked by criteria and standards .

executive order 12906 , issued in 1994 , strengthened and enhanced circular a - 16 and specified that the fgdc shall coordinate development of the national spatial data infrastructure ( nsdi ) .

historically , the federal government has been a primary provider of authoritative geospatial information ; however , the federal government has shifted , with some important exceptions , to consuming rather than providing geospatial information from a variety of sources .

as a result , the federal government's role also has shifted toward coordinating and managing geospatial data and facilitating partnerships among the producers and consumers of geospatial information in government , the private sector , and academia .

there are long - standing challenges to coordinating how geospatial data are acquired and used at the local , state , and federal levels — avoiding duplicative data sets , for example — and in collaboration with the private sector .

past congresses have recognized these challenges .

for example , the 108 th congress explored issues of cost , duplication of effort , and coordination of geospatial information in a series of hearings .

bills introduced in previous congresses would have addressed aspects of the geospatial enterprise , but none were enacted .

until enactment of the geospatial data act of 2018 , the executive branch had led nearly all efforts to better coordinate and share geospatial data within the federal government .

in the 114 th congress , senator orrin hatch introduced s. 740 , the geospatial data act of 2015 , a bill that essentially would have codified circular a - 16 and provided congress with additional capabilities to oversee the federal geospatial enterprise , among other authorities .

representative bruce westerman subsequently introduced companion legislation , h.r .

6294 .

congress did not act on either bill .

in the 115 th congress , senator hatch introduced s. 1253 , the geospatial data act of 2017 , on may 25 , 2017 ; representative westerman introduced companion legislation , h.r .

3522 , on july 27 , 2017 .

later that year , on november 15 , senator hatch introduced a slightly different version of the bill , s. 2128 ; representative westerman introduced the house version , h.r .

4395 , on the same day .

several other versions of the bill were circulated without formal introduction in 2018 .

in september 2018 , another version of the bill , the geospatial data act of 2018 ( gda ) , was included in h.r .

302 , the faa reauthorization act of 2018 , as subtitle f of title vii .

on october 3 , 2018 , congress passed the bill .

on october 5 , 2018 , president trump signed it into law as p.l .

115-254 .

this report provides a summary and analysis of each section of the gda .

it also discusses possible implications of the new law and issues for congress .

the gda codifies aspects of circular a - 16 , authorizing many of the circular's existing components and modifying or expanding upon other aspects .

the gda continues the federal geographic data committee and supports the goal of creating a national spatial data infrastructure .

it also adds several congressional oversight components ; for example , it adds a requirement for annual performance reporting from each of the covered agencies to the fgdc , and it requires a summary and evaluation by the fgdc of each agency in fulfilling the responsibilities listed in the gda .

the annual summaries and evaluations must be made available to the national geospatial advisory committee ( ngac ) , and the law directs the fgdc to respond to comments from the ngac .

further , it requires the fgdc to make available to congress , not less than every two years , a report summarizing and evaluating agency performance , comments from the ngac , responses to those comments , and responses to comments from the covered agencies themselves .

the following is a brief summary and analysis of each section of the gda , referencing section numbers as enumerated in the enacted bill under subtitle f - geospatial data , title vii , of p.l .

115-254 , the faa reauthorization act of 2018 .

the gda provisions are in sections 751-759 of title vii of p.l .

115-254 .

stakeholders have long recognized the need to better organize and manage geospatial data among federal agencies and among the federal government , local and state authorities , the private sector , and academia .

some observers have commented that the gda has the potential to improve the extent and efficiency of executive branch agency coordination of geospatial activities and thus to help minimize duplication of effort in acquiring and using geospatial data , saving taxpayers money .

however , others have argued that some level of duplication of effort , and of inefficiency in the management and sharing of geospatial information , will always exist across a vast federal bureaucracy in which a large amount of government information has some geospatial component .

it also could be argued that the size of the federal bureaucracy is only one factor contributing to the challenges of organizing and managing geospatial data .

surveying and mapping activities themselves are prone to duplication of effort among the executive branch's different missions and goals .

the gda largely codifies an executive branch structure for managing the federal geospatial enterprise under omb circular a - 16 , coordinated under the auspices of the fgdc .

the law , however , adds budgeting and reporting requirements for executive branch agencies that provide congress with a number of avenues for conducting oversight on how well the federal government manages its geospatial data assets .

the gda requires that covered agencies , for example , inventory and assess their geospatial data assets as part of their annual budget submissions .

this requirement could address long - standing issues about the extent and valuation of geospatial data and associated infrastructure within each agency — namely , what it costs the federal government to acquire , manage , share , and use geospatial data .

the gda potentially could illuminate for congress how each covered agency budgets for its geospatial activities and thus could allow congress to better evaluate what portion of agency appropriations contributes toward the federal geospatial enterprise .

this information may enable congress to query the director of omb ( a vice - chairperson of the fgdc ) , about the budgetary implications of agency expenditures on geospatial - related activities in each budget cycle .

the gda also contains a number of reporting requirements which may enable congress to evaluate covered agencies' progress toward implementing requirements for data themes and other metrics under the new law .

the gda requires that agency evaluations , comments received from the ngac , and responses to those comments be made available publicly .

thus , congress would have the ability to evaluate in some detail individual agency performance , the progress made in coordinating the broader geospatial enterprise via the fgdc , and the views from outside stakeholders as represented by members of the ngac .

the requirement for biannual audits by agency inspectors general under section 759 of the gda provides congress with another tool to evaluate covered agency performance .

another potentially useful provision within section 756 of the gda , for the purposes of coordination among agencies , is the requirement that each covered agency designate a point of contact "who shall be responsible for developing , maintaining , coordination relating to , and disseminating data" related to the geospatial data theme under that covered agency's responsibility .

that requirement could enhance communication and coordination of geospatial activities within the executive branch , a theme raised by congress in hearings during 2003 and 2004 .

a single point of responsibility and knowledge in each agency also may assist congress in its oversight activities .

