administrative agencies have long been criticized by some for taking too long to issue and implement regulations .

of course , there are often justifiable reasons cited for agencies to take time before they act .

agencies are charged with administering complex statutory schemes .

rulemakings generally follow the administrative procedure act's ( apa's ) notice - and - comment procedure , which entails soliciting input and marshaling information from the public , subject - matter experts , and other stakeholders .

it takes time to analyze that information , balance competing interests , and draft appropriate regulatory language .

agencies may have limited resources , and there may be other , more pressing matters requiring their time and attention .

some delay is necessary for reasoned decisionmaking .

however , excessive delay by agencies can raise serious policy concerns .

delays in rulemaking may violate statutory directives when congress has ordered an agency to regulate in a particular area .

if the regulatory area concerns the environment or public health , for instance , delays can endanger the public by leaving known harms unaddressed .

for regulated industries , excessive delay can create uncertainty , inhibit long - term planning , and cause economic harm .

habitual delays can undermine public trust in agency process .

in addition , not all delays are justified by deliberative process .

agency delays may be the result of capture by special interests , administrative error , misplaced priorities , or simple mismanagement .

excessive agency delay can therefore undermine the effectiveness of the statutory regime created by congress .

congress has a number of tools that it can use to combat agency delay .

to encourage agencies to act in a timely fashion , congress may set nonbinding time frames or statutory deadlines for particular agency actions , or impose penalties on agencies should they fail to meet those deadlines .

even if congress does not impose any specific timing requirements for a required agency action , the agency still must act within a "reasonable time" under the apa .

persons alleging unreasonable delay by agencies may sue in court to compel agency action .

however , the recourse such individuals will have , if any , depends on the statutory scheme and the severity of the delay .

in the absence of specific deadlines , most courts employ a multifactor balancing test to determine whether the agency's delay is "unreasonable" ; this test examines , among other things , the length of the delay , the importance of the regulation at issue , and the interests harmed by the delay .

courts are generally deferential to agencies in this analysis .

in other situations , such as when congress has imposed a specific statutory deadline , courts are more willing to compel agency action , with some courts holding that an order compelling agency action is mandatory whenever a statutory deadline is violated .

this report provides an overview of the various tools that congress can use to encourage agencies to act within a particular time frame .

it then analyzes how those tools inform judicial analysis of challenges to agency actions as "unreasonably delayed" or "unlawfully withheld" under the apa .

the report concludes by noting that lawsuits are not the only way to force agencies to issue delayed regulations ; congress can also use political pressure , its oversight powers , or its power of the purse to encourage the agency to act .

when drafting legislation granting agencies the power to engage in rulemaking , congress can employ a variety of means that create incentives for the agency to issue regulations in a timely manner .

at one end of the spectrum , congress may decline to impose any timing requirements on the agency .

in that case — presuming that the statute imposes some nondiscretionary duty to act — the agency will be subject only to the apa's general requirement that it complete its rulemaking within a "reasonable time. .

courts have interpreted this requirement deferentially , requiring an "egregious" delay before they will compel an agency to issue a proposed or final rule .

if the apa's default rule of reasonableness is not enough , congress may choose to impose more stringent timing requirements on the agency , such as a nonbinding time frame or an explicit statutory deadline .

courts are generally more willing to order the agency to act by a date certain when the agency is subject to a statutory time frame or deadline .

if congress considers a matter so important and time - sensitive that a deadline alone is insufficient , it may enact penalties that will ensue should the agency miss the deadline .

by imposing deadlines or other timing restraints on an agency , legislators face a potential tradeoff between timely action and deliberative process .

if congress dictates a deadline that is too constrained , it may decrease the thoroughness of agency decisionmaking and the quality of the final rule .

indeed , a principal reason that congress may wish to delegate a matter to an agency is the complexity of the issue and the agency's expertise in a specialized area .

given its expertise , the agency is often in a better position to know how long it will take to investigate a matter , seek public comment and technical input , and develop a well - crafted rule on a particular issue .

perhaps for this reason , congress declines to impose any specific statutory deadline for the vast majority of federal regulations .

that said , given the potential costs of agency delay , congress may not always want to leave the timing of regulations entirely up to the agency's discretion .

the statutory requirements imposed by congress shape the scrutiny that courts use to determine whether an agency's delay is unreasonable .

the apa authorizes suit by a person "suffering a legal wrong because of agency action , or adversely affected or aggrieved by agency action within the meaning of a relevant statute. .

in the absence of a specific statutory time frame or deadline , the apa requires that "each agency shall proceed to conclude a matter presented to it" within "a reasonable time. .

section 706 ( 1 ) of the apa provides a remedy to enforce this requirement: reviewing courts shall "compel agency action unlawfully withheld or unreasonably delayed. .

the apa thus creates a private right of action to compel an agency to issue a regulation or complete an adjudication that has been unreasonably delayed .

however , an individual can only sue to compel discrete actions that the agency is required to take .

presuming that the agency is required to take a particular action , the plaintiff typically must show that the agency's delay is "unreasonable" under a multifactor balancing test .

however , some courts will dispense with this balancing test when the agency has violated a statutory deadline .

even if a litigant succeeds in proving that an agency has unreasonably delayed , judicial remedies are limited .

although courts can compel an agency to act in some situations , courts cannot "specify what the action must be. .

for example , a court may order an agency to issue a regulation when the agency has missed a statutory deadline , but it cannot dictate the content of that regulation .

essentially , the most that a court can do is order the agency to act promptly or impose a deadline on the agency .

as discussed above , congress possesses a variety of means to reduce the likelihood of agency delay and influence the lawsuits under section 706 ( 1 ) to compel agency action .

in addition , congress has a number of tools to address agency delays after they arise .

if troubled by a particular agency's delay , congress can use its oversight powers to put pressure on the agency to act .

individual members may send letters to agencies expressing concern about delays that affect their constituents .

congressional committees can hold hearings , call agency leaders as witnesses to explain their inaction , and issue committee reports , all of which can bring public attention to the matter and put political pressure on the agency .

perhaps the most potent weapon at congress's disposal is the power of the purse , which congress can use either as a carrot or a stick to motivate the agency to act .

if there are systematic delays at an agency due to insufficient resources , congress may appropriate money for that agency to hire new staff to clear a backlog .

alternatively , congress may threaten to eliminate funding for an agency if it does not take action more quickly .

finally , if congress is concerned with agency delays more programmatically , it has the power to shape the procedures and requirements of agency rulemaking as a general matter .

the apa is a statute ; it can be reformed and amended like any other law .

for example , the regulatory flexibility act requires that agencies prepare an initial regulatory flexibility analysis of the regulation's impact on small business when the agency publishes a notice of proposed rulemaking under the apa .

congress could amend the apa to exempt more rules from notice - and - comment requirements or otherwise streamline agency pro cedures for rulemaking .

