the survivor benefit plan ( sbp ) , enacted in 1972 , provides cash benefits to a surviving spouse or other eligible recipient ( s ) of a retiree or deceased member of the uniformed services .

the original intent of the sbp ( and its antecedents ) was to "ensure that the surviving dependents of military personnel who die in retirement or after becoming eligible for retirement will continue to have a reasonable level of income. .

coverage was later expanded to those who die while on active service .

under the sbp , a military retiree can have a portion of his or her monthly retired pay withheld in order to provide a beneficiary with a monthly survivor benefit .

the cost of this protection is shared by the retiree ( in the form of reductions from monthly military retired pay after retirement ) , the government , and sometimes the beneficiary ( under certain types of coverage ) .

this report describes the categories of beneficiaries eligible for survivor benefits under the military survivor benefit plan ( sbp ) , the formulas used in computing the income level ( including the integration of sbp benefits with other federal benefits ) , and the costs of sbp participation incurred by the retiree and / or the beneficiary .

while this report focuses primarily on sbp , survivors of military members may be eligible for other benefits , including life insurance , tricare health benefits , annuity for certain military surviving spouses ( acmss ) , the minimum income widow annuity , department of defense ( dod ) death gratuity , commissary and exchange privileges , and other federal benefits , such as social security .

when sbp was enacted in 1972 , it replaced the retired serviceman's family protection plan ( rsfpp ) , which also provided benefits to dependents of deceased retirees .

the rsfpp had a number of unpopular features .

first , it was intended to be actuarially neutral in terms of costs — in other words , the cost of this program was fully paid for by its participants .

as a result , it could be expensive for the retiree .

in addition , the decision to elect rsfpp coverage had to be made by the prospective military retiree before his or her 18 th year of military service .

as such , the methods used in computing the rsfpp's cost and benefit could change between the time at which the servicemember elected to provide coverage and the time at which the member actually retired .

therefore , the costs and benefits remained an unknown quantity , limiting the ability of the retiree to make future financial plans .

during its 19-year history , participation in the rsfpp never exceeded more than 15% of eligible military retirees .

rsfpp continues to pay survivor annuities for spouses of covered servicemembers who retired before 1972 and who did not convert to the sbp .

dod obligations for the remaining 5,045 rsfpp survivors in fy2017 were $15 million .

it was expected — and has largely been proven — that the sbp would be more popular than the rsfpp , due to lower costs to the retiree and broader benefits for the survivors .

however , sbp also entails higher costs to taxpayers because the sbp costs are shared with the government in most cases .

coverage provisions and calculation of the benefit vary depending on the status of the member ( i.e. , active duty retiree , reserve retiree , or deceased on active duty ) , the member's dependents , and certain elections that the member makes at the time of retirement .

when sbp was enacted in 1972 , lawmakers sought to integrate the program within the existing system of federal benefits available to servicemembers and their families , namely , social security and va - related benefits .

consequently , sbp serves a two - fold purpose: ( 1 ) to provide full survivors coverage in cases where no social security or va - related benefits are payable and ( 2 ) to provide supplemental survivor coverage in cases where social security or va - related benefits are insufficient to provide a reasonable level of support ( generally 55% of the servicemember's retired pay ) .

when a surviving spouse ( or surviving former spouse ) is entitled to both sbp and va dependency and indemnity compensation ( dic ) , sbp law requires that the sbp benefit be reduced , dollar for dollar , by the amount of the dic benefit .

if the surviving spouse's dic benefit is less than the sbp benefit , then the surviving spouse receives a reduced sbp benefit in an amount that , when combined with the dic benefit , equals the unreduced sbp benefit .

if the surviving spouse's dic benefit is equal to or greater than the sbp benefit , then no sbp benefit is payable and the surviving spouse receives only the dic benefit .

the partial or full reduction in the sbp benefit due to receipt of dic is commonly known as the sbp - dic offset .

in lieu of receiving full sbp benefits , surviving spouses and surviving former spouses subject to the sbp - dic offset receive a refund of the deceased retiree's sbp premiums based on the amount of the offset .

there is no dic offset for children who are designated as the sbp recipient .

as such , younger surviving spouses of active duty personnel may designate their children , if any , as the recipient of the sbp benefit .

unlike retirees , active duty personnel do not designate a beneficiary .

unmarried children remain eligible to receive sbp until they reach age 18 or 22 ( if a student ) ; or for life if mentally or physically incapacitated and if the incapacitating condition existed prior to age 18 .

eligibility terminates if the child marries .

the total of dic and offset - sbp payments combined is , at least , equal to the full sbp benefit .

also , if dic is paid to an sbp - eligible surviving spouse or former spouse , a percentage of the deceased retiree's original contributions to the sbp offset by dic is to be returned to the surviving spouse or former spouse .

in other words , if the sbp is offset by dic , the proportion of deductions from the deceased retiree's retired pay that financed the offset portion of the sbp is to be refunded to the surviving spouse or former spouse .

in general , a surviving spouse or former spouse who remarries loses his or her entitlement to dic payments .

upon losing dic , however , the remarried spouse or former spouse has his or her full sbp benefit restored , provided the remarriage — in accordance with sbp restrictions — occurs after age 55 .

sbp payments can be restored , if the beneficiary becomes ineligible for dic and remains eligible for sbp , provided that any refunded sbp premiums are returned to the government .

as a result of a 2009 court decision ( sometimes referred to as the sharp decision ) , surviving spouses who remarry after attaining the age of 57 are eligible to receive the full sbp and dic benefit without an offset , provided any refunded sbp premiums are returned to the government .

most un - remarried surviving spouses who receive both an annuity from dod as a beneficiary of the sbp and from the va's dic have their sbp payments reduced by the amount of dic .

effective 2009 , congress created the special survivor indemnity allowance or ssia to offset that reduction .

the original authorization provided an additional $50 per month to those subject to the offset .

this amount was scheduled to be increased by $10 each year until 2014 , when it would reach $100 .

the benefit was scheduled to sunset in 2016 .

during the 111 th congress , ssia was made more generous in that for the years 2014 through 2017 , the amount would increase from $150 , to $200 , $275 , and finally , $310 , after which the benefit was to terminate on october 1 , 2017 .

however , section 621 of the ndaa for fy2018 , p.l .

115-91 , permanently authorized the ssia .

in 2018 , the ssia benefit was $310 per month and is to be adjusted to the cola for each calendar year beginning in 2019 .

both the sbp annuity and the ssia are taxable while dic is not taxable income .

the amount received under ssia may not be greater than the amount of the sbp offset .

table 7 shows hypothetical examples of how ssia might apply to monthly payments to survivors .

over the years , several bills have been introduced that would eliminate the sbp - dic offset completely .

supporters of a full repeal refer to the offset as the "widow's tax" , and argue that the benefits are different types of compensation , there are two different survivor benefits .

the sbp is a purchased annuities benefit , or type of insurance benefit .

this is purchased out - of - pocket by military retirees for their surviving spouses .

the sbp is our service members' earned benefit , not an entitlement received from the dod .

the other benefit is dic .

dic is an indemnity payment , received from the va. dic serves as an indemnity payment for death .

since death is the ultimate disability the surviving spouses should be entitled to concurrent receipt of both sbp and dic .

in addition , military spouse advocates have argued that the inability for families to receive both benefits in full creates financial hardship .

lastly , changes in how the offset is applied based on the status of the beneficiary ( i.e. , age , remarriage age , or child v. spouse ) has led to confusion and charges of inequitable treatment among eligible recipients .

on the other hand , some point to long - standing laws preventing receipt of two benefits from the government for the same period of service ( also known as double - dipping ) .

one argument is that because the federal government pays the full dic cost and subsidizes the sbp coverage , allowing survivors to receive both sbp and dic is inherently unfair to the taxpayer .

some contend that repealing the sbp - dic offset would allow certain survivors to triple dip in that they could receive full sbp and dic benefits as well as social security benefits from the federal government for the same period of employment .

the military compensation and retirement modernization commission ( mcrmc ) , established by congress in the fy2013 ndaa , offered another option to address dissatisfaction with the sbp - dic offset .

the mcrmc recommended adding a new sbp option under which members would fully fund the sbp costs , but would no longer be subject to the offset .

this option would have higher costs ( premiums ) for the servicemember , but would provide a greater overall benefit under certain circumstances .

under this option , the legacy , subsidized sbp would remain an option ; however , the full sbp - dic offset would apply .

most recently , language in the house version of the fy2019 ndaa would have expressed a sense of congress that ( 1 ) surviving spouses and dependent children will not be subject to a full offset of survivor benefit plan payments by dependency and indemnity compensation ; and ( 2 ) congress must work to eliminate the widows' tax entirely .

in 2009 , the congressional budget office estimated the cost of eliminating this offset would be $7 billion over the 2010-2019 period .

appendix a .

legislative history of the survivors benefit plan tabl .

