social security and medicare assist in providing financial security to most elderly and disabled individuals in the united states .

in 2017 , 61.9 million individuals received social security benefits , of which 69% were retired workers aged 62 or older and 14% were disabled workers aged 61 or younger .

in 2017 , nearly 90% of the u.s. population aged 65 or older received social security benefits , representing approximately 33% of income for this population .

for half of married elderly couples in 2017 , social security represented 50% or more of their income and for 23% of married elderly couples , social security represented 90% or more of their income .

in medicare , 58.4 million individuals were enrolled in 2017 , of which 85% were aged 65 or older and 15% were disabled and aged 64 or younger .

in 2017 , total social security expenditures were $952.5 billion ( 4.9% of gross domestic product , or gdp ) .

in the same year , total medicare expenditures were $710.2 billion ( 3.7% of gdp ) .

eligible individuals may enroll in one program and not the other ; however , for individuals who are enrolled in both social security and medicare , certain interactions between the two programs may have important financial implications .

for instance , individuals who are both social security beneficiaries and medicare part b enrollees have their medicare part b premium automatically deducted from their monthly social security benefit .

although annual adjustments are made to both the social security benefit an individual receives and the medicare premiums an individual pays , these adjustments are indexed to different inflation measures .

the social security annual cost - of - living adjustment ( cola ) is based on the consumer price index - urban wage earners and clerical workers ( cpi - w ) , which is a measure of general inflation .

medicare premium growth , by contrast , is based on program expenditure growth , which reflects spending for covered medical services .

these different inflation measures can mean that , over time , medicare premiums absorb a larger portion of an individual's social security benefit .

congress has acted several times to protect beneficiaries from the impact of large medicare part b premium increases .

for example , congress established a hold - harmless provision in the social security act for those enrolled in both social security and medicare .

this provision protects an individual from being charged a higher medicare part b premium if the increase would cause the dollar amount of his or her social security benefit to decrease from one year to the next .

however , several groups of beneficiaries are not held harmless and increases in the medicare part d premium are not considered in this provision .

this report discusses the relationship between social security colas and medicare premiums and provides data on recent experience of the annual adjustments to social security benefits and medicare premiums .

the report explains how and when the hold - harmless provision is activated for certain beneficiaries and discusses the projected impact of medicare premium growth on social security benefits over the next 75 years .

social security , established by title ii of the social security act of 1935 and administered by the social security administration , provides monthly cash benefits to retired or disabled workers and their family members and to family members of deceased workers .

medicare is a federal program that provides health insurance coverage for elderly and permanently disabled individuals .

medicare was established in 1965 under title xviii of the social security act and is administered by the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) .

medicare consists of four main programs , or parts : part a ( hospital insurance , or hi ) covers inpatient hospital services , skilled nursing care , hospice care , and some home health services .

most individuals are entitled to premium - free part a coverage .

individuals pay certain deductibles , co - payments , and other out - of - pocket expenses depending on the services used .

part b ( supplementary medical insurance , or smi ) covers physician services , outpatient services , and certain home health and preventive services .

enrollees pay a monthly premium , an annual deductible ( $183 in 2018 ) , and a 20% coinsurance rate for most services .

part c ( medicare advantage , or ma ) is a private plan option for beneficiaries that covers all medicare part a and part b services , except hospice .

typically , ma plans offer additional benefits or require smaller co - payments or deductibles than medicare part a and part b .

part d covers outpatient prescription drug benefits .

medicare part d plans offer either standard coverage or alternative coverage , which must have actuarially equivalent benefits .

plans may also offer enhanced coverage for additional premiums .

enrollees pay a monthly premium , an annual deductible ( set at a maximum of $405 in 2018 for standard coverage ) , and other cost - sharing requirements .

social security benefits and medicare part b premium amounts are adjusted annually using different methods , which typically has resulted in a higher percentage increase in medicare part b premiums than in social security benefit increases .

specifically , social security benefits are adjusted for inflation annually by colas .

the social security cola is a measure of general inflation based on the cpi - w. by contrast , medicare part b premiums are adjusted annually to account for changes in medicare program expenditures for covered medical services .

medicare part b premiums represent a percentage of the actual costs of the program , and thus premiums rise as health care costs rise .

the annual percentage increase in social security benefits and medicare part b premiums for years 2000 to 2018 is shown in figure 1 .

since 2000 , social security colas have ranged from 0.0% to 5.8% with an average social security cola of 2.2% .

there was no social security cola increase in 2010 , 2011 , or 2016 and only a relatively small ( 0.3% ) social security cola in 2017 .

although medicare part b premium changes also have varied from year to year , there is a general trend of increasing premiums paid by beneficiaries .

standard medicare part b premium changes have ranged from - 13.4% to 17.4% since 2000 , with an average increase of 6.1% .

the 13.4% decline in the standard medicare part b premium in 2012 occurred primarily as a result of a large number of individuals no longer being held harmless because of the 3.6% cola following two years of 0.0% colas .

the 3.6% cola allowed for the full amount of the previous years' premium increases to be spread to most beneficiaries , rather than the minority of beneficiaries not held harmless during the 0.0% cola years ( see " hold - harmless provision for medicare part b premiums " ) .

other than the years in which there was no medicare part b premium increase ( 2000 , 2009 , 2012 , 2014 , 2015 , and 2018 ) , increases in medicare part b premiums historically have been greater than the social security cola increases .

since 2000 , the social security annual cola has resulted in a cumulative benefit increase of approximately 50% , considerably less than the medicare part b premium growth of close to 195% .

a hold - harmless provision in the social security act prevents certain social security beneficiaries' benefit amount from decreasing from one year to the next due to an increase in standard medicare part b premiums .

if , in a given year , the increase in the standard medicare part b premium would cause a beneficiary's social security check to be less , in dollar terms , than it was the year before , the medicare part b premium is reduced to ensure that the nominal amount of the individual's social security check stays the same .

the number of individuals held harmless can vary widely from year to year , depending on annual inflation rates and projected medicare part b program costs .

in a typical year , few individuals are held harmless .

however , in years in which there is no social security cola , many individuals may be affected by this provision .

for example , there was a 2% social security cola in 2018 and 28% of medicare part b enrollees were held harmless .

by contrast , in 2016 , there was no social security cola and 70% of medicare part b enrollees were held harmless from the standard medicare part b premium increase .

the hold - harmless provision does not apply to medicare part d premiums .

therefore , a beneficiary is not held harmless if the increase in his or her medicare part d premium or the combined increase in medicare part b and part d premiums causes his or her social security check to decline .

in other words , an individual's social security check may decrease as a result of a medicare part d premium increase .

medicare per capita cost growth is expected to continue to increase at a faster rate than inflation measured by the cpi - w , thus increasing medicare premiums at a faster rate than social security colas .

the medicare trustees project that medicare beneficiaries will use a larger portion of their social security benefits to pay medicare part b and part d premiums in the future .

for example , in 2018 , the medicare part b and part d premiums account for 12.4% of the average social security benefit ; the medicare trustees project that this will increase to approximately 14.0% in 2028 and to 16.8% in 2092 .

out - of - pocket costs are also expected to continue to absorb an increasing amount of the average social security benefit ; the medicare trustees project that out - of - pocket costs as a percentage of the average social security benefit will increase from approximately 23.6% in 2018 to approximately 26.9% in 2028 and to approximately 34.5% in 2092 .

the historical and estimated increases in average social security benefits , the average medicare part b and part d benefits , average medicare part b and part d premiums , and average out - of - pocket costs as indicated by the medicare trustees' long - range projections are shown in figure 2 .

