the bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) , part of the department of the interior ( doi ) , operates the multipurpose federal central valley project ( cvp ) in california , one of the world's largest water storage and conveyance systems .

the cvp runs approximately 400 miles in california , from redding to bakersfield ( figure 1 ) .

it supplies water to hundreds of thousands of acres of irrigated agriculture throughout the state , including some of the most valuable cropland in the country .

it also provides water to selected state and federal wildlife refuges , as well as to some municipal and industrial ( m&i ) water users .

this report provides information on hydrologic conditions in california and their impact on state and federal water management , with a focus on deliveries related to the federal cvp .

it also summarizes selected issues for congress related to the cvp .

the drought of 2012-2016 , widely considered to be among california's most severe droughts in recent history , resulted in major reductions to cvp contractor allocations and economic and environmental impacts throughout the state .

these impacts were of interest to congress , which oversees federal operation of the cvp .

although the drought ended with the wet winter of 2017 , many of the water supply controversies associated with the cvp predated those water shortages and remain unresolved .

absent major changes to existing hydrologic , legislative , and regulatory baselines , most agree that at least some water users are likely to face ongoing constraints to their water supplies .

due to the limited water supplies available , proposed changes to the current operations and allocation system are controversial .

as a result of the scarcity of water in the west and the importance of federal water infrastructure to the region , western water issues are regularly of interest to many lawmakers .

legislation enacted in the 114 th congress ( title ii of the water infrastructure improvements for the nation [wiin] act ; p.l .

114-322 ) included several cvp - related sections .

these provisions directed pumping to "maximize" water supplies for the cvp ( including pumping or "exports" to cvp water users south of the sacramento and san joaquin rivers' confluence with the san francisco bay , known as the bay - delta or delta ) in accordance with applicable biological opinions ( biops ) for project operations .

they also allowed for increased pumping during certain storm events generating high flows , authorized actions to facilitate water transfers , and established a new standard for measuring the effects of water operations on species .

in addition to operational provisions , the wiin act authorized funding for construction of new federal and nonfederal water storage projects .

cvp projects are among the most likely recipients of this funding .

due to increased precipitation and disagreements with the state , among other factors , the wiin act's cvp operational authorities did not yield significant new water exports south of the delta in 2017 and 2018 .

however , the authorities may be more significant in years of limited precipitation and thus may yield increased supplies in the future .

although use of the new operational authorities was limited , reclamation received funding for wiin act - authorized water storage project design and construction in fy2017-fy2019 ; a significant amount of this funding has gone to cvp - related projects .

several state and federal proposals are also currently under consideration and have generated controversy for their potential to significantly alter cvp operations .

in mid - 2018 , the state of california proposed revisions to its bay - delta water quality control plan .

these changes would require that more flows from the san joaquin and sacramento rivers reach the california bay - delta for water quality and fish and wildlife enhancement ( and would thus further restrict water supplies for other users ) .

at the same time , the trump administration is exploring options to increase cvp water supplies for users .

california's central valley encompasses almost 20,000 square miles in the center of the state ( figure 1 ) .

it is bound by the cascade range to the north , the sierra nevada to the east , the tehachapi mountains to the south , and the coast ranges and san francisco bay to the west .

the northern third of the valley is drained by the sacramento river , and the southern two - thirds of the valley are drained by the san joaquin river .

historically , this area was home to significant fish and wildlife populations .

the cvp originally was conceived as a state project ; the state studied the project as early as 1921 , and the california state legislature formally authorized it for construction in 1933 .

after it became clear that the state was unable to finance the project , the federal government ( through the u.s. army corps of engineers , or usace ) assumed control of the cvp as a public works construction project authority provided under the rivers and harbors act of 1935 .

the franklin d. roosevelt administration subsequently transferred the project to reclamation .

construction on the first unit of the cvp ( contra costa canal ) began in october 1937 , with water first delivered in 1940 .

additional cvp units were completed and came online over time , and some usace - constructed units also have been incorporated into the project .

the new melones unit was the last unit of the cvp to come online ; it was completed in 1978 and began operations in 1979 .

the cvp made significant changes to california's natural hydrology to develop water supplies for irrigated agriculture , municipalities , and hydropower , among other things .

most of the cvp's major units , however , predated major federal natural resources and environmental protection laws such as the endangered species act ( esa ; 87 stat .

884 .

16 u.s.c .

§§1531-1544 ) and the national environmental policy act ( nepa ; 42 u.s.c .

§§4321 et seq ) , among others .

thus , much of the current debate surrounding the project revolves around how to address the project's changes to california's hydrologic system that were not major considerations when it was constructed .

today , cvp water serves a variety of different purposes for both human uses and fish and wildlife needs .

the cvp provides a major source of support for california agriculture , which is first in the nation in terms of farm receipts .

cvp water supplies irrigate more than 3 million acres of land in central california and support 7 of california's top 10 agricultural counties .

in addition , cvp m&i water provides supplies for approximately 2.5 million people per year .

cvp operations also are critical for hydropower , recreation , and fish and wildlife protection .

in addition to fisheries habitat , cvp flows support wetlands , which provide habitat for migrating birds .

concerns over cvp water supply deliveries persist in part because even in years with high levels of precipitation and runoff , some contractors ( in particular sod water service contractors ) have regularly received allocations of less than 100% of their contract supplies .

allocations for some users have declined over time ; additional environmental requirements in recent decades have reduced water deliveries for human uses .

coupled with reduced water supplies available in drought years , some have increasingly focused on what can be done to increase water supplies for users .

at the same time , others that depend on or advocate for the health of the san francisco bay and its tributaries , including fishing and environmental groups and water users throughout northern california , have argued for maintaining or increasing existing environmental protections ( the latter of which likely would further constrain cvp exports ) .

hydrology and state water rights are the two primary drivers of cvp allocations .

however , at least three other regulatory factors affect the timing and amount of water available for delivery to cvp contractors and are regularly the subject of controversy: state water quality requirements pursuant to state and the federal water quality laws ( including the clean water act [cwa , 33 u.s.c .

§§1251-138] ) ; regulations and court orders pertaining to implementation of the federal endangered species act ( esa , 87 stat .

884 .

16 u.s.c .

§§1531-1544 ) ; and implementation of the central valley project improvement act ( cvpia ; p.l .

102-575 ) .

each of these factors is discussed in more detail below .

development of the cvp made significant changes to california's natural hydrology .

in addition to the aforementioned cvpia efforts to address some of these impacts , three ongoing , congressionally authorized restoration initiatives also factor into federal activities associated with the cvp: the trinity river restoration program ( trrp ) , administered by reclamation , attempts to mitigate impacts and restore fisheries impacted by construction of the trinity river division of the cvp .

the san joaquin river restoration program ( sjrrp ) is an ongoing effort to implement a congressionally enacted settlement to restore fisheries in the san joaquin river .

the california bay - delta restoration program aims to restore and protect areas within the bay - delta that are affected by the cvp and other activities .

in addition to their habitat restoration activities , both the trrp and the sjrrp involve the maintenance of instream flow levels that use water that was at one time diverted for other uses .

each effort is discussed briefly below .

reductions in available water deliveries due to hydrological and regulatory factors have caused some stakeholders , legislators , and state and federal government officials to look at other methods of augmenting water supplies .

in particular , proposals to build new or augmented cvp and / or swp water storage projects have been of interest to some policymakers .

additionally , the state of california is pursuing a major water conveyance project , the california waterfix , with a nexus to cvp operations .

congress plays a role in cvp water management and previously has attempted to make available additional water supplies in the region by facilitating efforts such as water banking , water transfers , and construction of new and augmented storage .

in 2016 , congress enacted provisions aiming to benefit the cvp and the swp , including major operational changes in the wiin act and additional appropriations for western drought response and new water storage that have benefited ( or are expected to benefit ) the cvp .

congress also continues to consider legislation that would further alter cvp operational authorities and responsibilities related to individual units of the project .

the below section discusses some of the main issues related to the cvp that may receive attention by congress .

the cvp is one of the largest and most complex water storage and conveyance projects in the world .

congress has regularly expressed interest in cvp operations and allocations , in particular pumping in the bay - delta .

in addition to ongoing oversight of project operations and previously enacted authorities , a number of developing issues and proposals related to the cvp have been of interest to congressional decisionmakers .

these include study and approval of new water storage and conveyance projects , updates to the state's bay - delta water quality plan , and a multipronged effort by the trump administration to make available more water for cvp water contractors , in particular those south of the delta .

future drought or other stressors on california water supplies are likely to further magnify these issues .

the below sections provide a brief discussion some of the major contractor groups and individual contractors served by the cvp .

sacramento river settlement contractors and san joaquin river exchange contractors ( water rights contractors ) cvp water generally is made available for delivery first to those contractors north and south of the delta with water rights that predate construction of the cvp: the sacramento river settlement contractors and the san joaquin river exchange contractors .

 ( these contractors are sometimes referred to collectively as water rights contractors . ) .

water rights contractors typically receive 100% of their contracted amounts in most water year types .

during water shortages , their annual maximum entitlement may be reduced , but not by more than 25% .

sacramento river settlement contractors include the 145 contractors ( both individuals and districts ) that diverted natural flows from the sacramento river prior to the cvp's construction and executed a settlement agreement with reclamation that provided for negotiated allocation of water rights .

reclamation entered into this agreement in exchange for these contractors withdrawing their protests related to reclamation's application for water rights for the cvp .

the san joaquin river exchange contractors are four irrigation districts that agreed to "exchange" exercising their water rights to divert water on the san joaquin and kings rivers for guaranteed water deliveries from the cvp ( typically in the form of deliveries from the delta - mendota canal and waters north of the delta ) .

during all years except for when critical conditions are declared , reclamation is responsible for delivering 840,000 af of "substitute" water to these users ( i.e. , water from north of the delta as a substitute for san joaquin river water ) .

in the event that reclamation is unable to make its contracted deliveries , these exchange contractors have the right to divert water directly from the san joaquin river , which may reduce water available for other san joaquin river water service contactors .

friant division contractors cvp's friant division contractors receive water stored behind friant dam ( completed in 1944 ) in millerton lake .

this water is delivered through the friant - kern and madera canals .

the 32 friant division contractors , who irrigate roughly 1 million acres on the san joaquin river , are contracted to receive two "classes" of water: class 1 water is the first 800,000 af available for delivery ; class 2 water is the next 1.4 million af available for delivery .

some districts receive water from both classes .

generally , class 2 waters are released as "uncontrolled flows" ( i.e. , for flood control concerns ) , and may not necessarily be scheduled at a contractor's convenience .

deliveries to the friant division are affected by a 2009 congressionally enacted settlement stemming from friant dam's effects on the san joaquin river .

the settlement requires reductions in deliveries to friant users for protection of fish and wildlife purposes .

in some years , some of these "restorations flows" have been made available to contractors for delivery as class 2 water .

unlike most other cvp contractors , friant division contractors have converted their water service contracts to repayment contracts and have repaid their capital obligation to the federal government for the development of their facilities .

in years in which reclamation is unable to make contracted deliveries to exchange contractors , these contractors can make a "call" on water in the san joaquin river , thereby requiring releases from friant dam that otherwise would go to friant contractors .

south - of - delta ( sod ) water service contractors: westlands water district as shown in figure 3 , sod water service contractors account for a large amount ( 2.09 million af , or 22.1% ) of the cvp's contracted water .

the largest of these contractors is westlands water district , which consists of 700 farms covering more than 600,000 acres in fresno and kings counties .

in geographic terms , westlands is the largest agricultural water district in the united states ; its lands are valuable and productive , producing more than $1 billion of food and fiber annually .

westlands' maximum contracted cvp water is in excess of 1.2 million af , an amount that makes up more than half of the total amount of sod cvp water service contracts and significantly exceeds any other individual cvp contactor .

however , due to a number of factors , westlands often receives considerably less water on average than it did historically .

westlands has been prominently involved in a number of policy debates , including proposals to alter environmental requirements to increase pumping south of the delta .

westlands also is involved in a major proposed settlement with reclamation , the san luis drainage settlement .

the settlement would , among other things , forgive westlands' share of federal cvp repayment responsibilities in exchange for relieving the federal government of its responsibility to construct drainage facilities to deal with toxic runoff associated with naturally occurring metals in area soils .

central valley wildlife refuges the 20,000 square mile california central valley provides valuable wetland habitat for migratory birds and other species .

as such , it is the home to multiple state and federally - designated wildlife refuges north and south of the delta .

these refuges provide managed wetland habitat that receives water from the cvp and other sources .

the central valley project improvement act ( cvpia ; p.l .

102-575 ) , enacted in 1992 , sought to improve conditions for fish and wildlife in these areas by providing them coequal priority with other project purposes .

cvpia also authorized a refuge water supply program to acquire approximately 555,000 af annually in water supplies for 19 central valley refuges administered by three managing agencies: california department of fish and wildlife , u.s .

fish and wildlife service , and grassland water district ( a private landowner ) .

pursuant to cvpia , reclamation entered into long - term water supply contracts with the managing agencies to provide these supplies .

authorized refuge water supply under cvpia is divided into two categories: level 2 and level 4 supplies .

level 2 supplies ( approximately 422,251 af , except in critically dry years , when the allocation is reduced to 75% ) are the historical average of water deliveries to the refuges prior to enactment of cvpia .

reclamation is obligated to acquire and deliver this water under cvpia , and costs are 100% reimbursable by cvp contractors through a fund established by the act , the central valley project restoration fund ( cvprf ; see previous section , " central valley project improvement act " ) .

level 4 supplies ( approximately 133,264 af ) are the additional increment of water beyond level 2 supplies for optimal wetland habitat development .

this water must be acquired by reclamation through voluntary measures and is funded as a 75% federal cost ( through the cvprf ) and 25% state cost .

in most cases , the level 2 requirement is met ; however , level 4 supplies have not always been provided in full for a number of reasons , including a dearth of supplies due to costs in excess of available cvprf funding and a lack of willing sellers .

in recent years , costs for the refuge water supply program ( i.e. , the costs for both level 2 and level 4 water ) have ranged from $11 million to $20 million .

