the u.s. nuclear weapons complex , which the department of energy ( doe ) refers to as the nuclear security enterprise , is the current incarnation of an evolving infrastructure designed to meet the requirements mandated by the atomic energy act to "ensure ... the [u.s. nuclear] stockpile is safe , secure , and reliable to perform [as intended] as the nation's nuclear deterrent. .

these requirements include production of nuclear materials ; fabrication of nuclear components ; fabrication of nonnuclear components ; assembly and disassembly of nuclear warheads ; integration of components with nuclear weapons delivery vehicles ; and support operations .

some of the functions within this complex have changed over time .

the united states no longer produces highly enriched uranium or plutonium for use in nuclear weapons , although doe continues to reuse materials removed from retired weapons .

in addition , although the united states instituted a moratorium on explosive nuclear testing in 1992 , several of the facilities in the complex now conduct science - based research and testing in support of the stockpile stewardship program .

the sites in this complex , and their locations within the united states , appear in figure 1 .

the functions at each site are displayed in table 1 .

responsibility for u.s. nuclear weapons resides in both the department of defense ( dod ) and the doe .

dod develops , deploys , and operates the missiles , submarines , and aircraft that deliver nuclear warheads .

it also generates the military requirements for the warheads carried on those platforms .

this report , however , focuses on the facilities managed by the doe and its semi - autonomous national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) .

nnsa oversees the research , development , test , and acquisition programs that produce , maintain , and sustain the nuclear warheads .

doe is responsible for storing and securing the warheads that are not deployed with dod delivery systems , securing special nuclear materials , and dismantling warheads that have been retired and removed from the stockpile .

the current nuclear weapons complex ( i.e. , the major facilities within the nuclear security enterprise that are used to meet the requirements for maintaining the nuclear weapons stockpile ) consists of nine government - owned , contractor - operated sites in seven states , and a tennessee valley authority ( tva ) nuclear reactor used to produce tritium for nuclear weapons .

facilities at these sites include three laboratories , five component fabrication / materials production plants , one assembly and disassembly site , a geologic waste repository , and one testing facility that now conducts research but was previously the location for u.s. underground nuclear tests .

the 2018 nuclear posture review ( npr ) , prepared by dod and released in early february 2018 , notes that over the past several decades , the u.s. nuclear weapons infrastructure has suffered the effects of aging and underfunding .

over half of nnsa's infrastructure is over 40 years old , and a quarter dates back to the manhattan project era .

in addition , the 2018 npr notes that each of the nuclear posture reviews completed since the end of the cold war ( in 1994 , 2001 , and 2010 ) has "highlighted the need to maintain a modern nuclear weapons infrastructure. .

however , it argues that the united states has not pursued the investments needed to ensure that the infrastructure can maintain the current nuclear stockpile as well as respond to unforeseen technical or geopolitical developments by providing the united states with sufficient capacity to sustain and replace its nuclear forces .

after declining during the first two decades after the cold war , funding for nuclear weapons activities at nnsa has increased steadily in recent years .

in a 2010 editorial , then - vice president biden noted that u.s. nuclear laboratories and facilities had been "underfunded and undervalued" for more than a decade .

he stated that president obama's budget request for fy2011 would include "$7 billion for maintaining our nuclear - weapons stockpile and complex , and for related efforts," an amount that was $600 million more than congress appropriated for fy2010 .

he also stated that the administration would "boost funding for these important activities by more than $5 billion" over the next five years .

while the passage of the budget control act in 2011 slowed the increases in nnsa budgets , appropriations for nnsa's weapons activities have grown in each of the subsequent years , reaching $9.25 billion in fy2017 , the last year of the obama administration .

the trump administration , in its budget for fy2018 , requested an additional $1 billion for nnsa weapons activities over the level appropriated in fy2017 .

the trump administration's budget for fy2019 continues to fund increases in nnsa's weapons activities , requesting $11.02 billion , an increase of nearly $400 million over the funding enacted in fy2018 .

these amounts do not include site overhead costs ( eg , site security , maintenance , administration ) paid through the environmental management ( em ) program funding for certain sites ( eg , the savannah river site , where em funding provided 70% of the site budget ) .

these funding increases have not , however , assuaged concerns about the aging facilities in the nuclear weapons infrastructure .

in testimony before the senate armed services committee in 2016 , general frank g. klotz , who was then the administrator of nnsa , noted that "the age and condition of nnsa's infrastructure will , if not addressed , put the mission , the safety of our workers , the public , and the environment at risk. .

at a hearing held by the strategic forces subcommittee of the house armed services committee , general klotz noted that the resources available to maintain nnsa's infrastructure "have historically not kept pace with growing needs. .

further , press reports indicate that , in late 2015 , then - secretary of energy ernest moniz requested a $5.2 billion increase in the planned budget for nnsa between fy2018 and fy2021 to address "programmatic gaps. .

he noted , in a letter described in the wall street journal , that "a majority of nnsa's facilities and systems are well beyond end - of - life" and that "infrastructure problems such as falling ceilings are increasing in frequency and severity. .

lisa e. gordon - hagerty , the current administrator of nnsa , echoed the concerns raised by general klotz during her testimony before the strategic forces subcommittee of the house armed services committee in march 2018 .

she stated that nnsa's fy2019 budget request of $3 billion for infrastructure and operations represented a 7% increase over the fy2018 request .

she asserted that this funding would support both nnsa's deferred maintenance problem in existing facilities and its need to construct new facilities , including the uranium processing facility at oak ridge , tn , and the chemistry and metallurgy research replacement ( cmrr ) project at los alamos national laboratory in new mexico .

in may 2018 , nnsa announced that it was recommending a strategy to achieve the goal of producing 80 nuclear pits per year , which would both maximize pit production at los alamos within the cmrr project and repurpose the mixed oxide ( mox ) fuel fabrication facility at the savannah river site in south carolina .

nnsa argued that "this two - prong approach — with at least 50 pits per year produced at savannah river and at least 30 pits per year at los alamos — is the best way to manage the cost , schedule , and risk of such a vital undertaking. .

as funding for nnsa continues to rise , interest has grown in u.s. nuclear policy , in general , and in the facilities and programs managed by nnsa , in particular .

this report provides details about each of the sites within the complex .

it begins with a brief history of the nuclear weapons complex and then reviews current issues that congress may address during the annual authorizations and appropriations process .

interest in the development of nuclear weapons was evident in discussions among academic scientists and federal officials shortly before the united states entered world war ii .

the nuclear weapons program , in an effort known as the manhattan project , began in 1942 .

many of the sites and facilities established early in the program to support the design , development , and production of the first nuclear weapons remain in operation today as a part of the doe nuclear security enterprise .

the end of the cold war saw numerous changes to the nuclear enterprise .

the number of sites involved in nuclear warhead production declined , as the united states reduced the number of warheads in the stockpile while maintaining the capability to sustain the remaining nuclear weapons .

in addition , the focus of the work shifted away from weapons research , development , and production — the core mission during the cold war — toward a science - based stockpile stewardship program designed to enable the united states to sustain and maintain its warheads without conducting explosive nuclear testing .

the enterprise has also increased its focus on research into technologies and processes that can prevent , counter , and respond to threats of nuclear proliferation while addressing the degradation remaining from the environmental contamination and waste generated during the cold war .

these goals are not addressed in this report .

the current nuclear weapons complex , which nnsa refers to as the nuclear security enterprise , includes "nnsa headquarters ( located in washington , dc ; germantown , maryland ; and albuquerque , new mexico ) , the nnsa field offices , the three national security laboratories ( two of which also have production missions ) , the four nuclear weapons production facilities , and the nevada national security site. .

two other facilities are essential for maintaining the stockpile: ( 1 ) the tva's watts barr nuclear power reactor in tennessee , which produces tritium , a relatively short - lived nuclear material vital to modern nuclear warheads , and ( 2 ) the wipp site in new mexico , which is used to manage , isolate , and store plutonium - bearing wastes from the warhead operations at other sites .

the site descriptions that follow do not describe the headquarters or field offices , but focus instead on the laboratories , testing , production , and support facilities more commonly known as the nuclear weapons infrastructure .

the sites are largely government - owned , contractor - operated facilities .

according to nnsa , the primary mission of national security laboratories "is to develop and sustain nuclear weapons design , simulation , modeling , and experimental capabilities and competencies to ensure confidence in the stockpile without nuclear explosive testing. .

the laboratories also "engage in long - term research , development , test , and evaluation ( rdt&e ) activities" for the nuclear weapon mission , as well as "apply science , engineering , and technology to solve other national challenges. .

five production facilities produce and assemble materials and components for nuclear weapons .

some weapon components must be replaced on a regular basis ( eg , tritium produced by tva reactors and processes at savannah river site ) , while others are produced on an as - needed basis , as part of the program to extend the life of the nuclear arsenal .

two of the facilities — the pantex plant near amarillo , tx , and y - 12 in oak ridge , tn — are also responsible for dismantling retired weapons and storing most of the plutonium and highly enriched uranium that exists outside of weapons .

the nevada national security site near las vegas , formerly a test site , no longer conducts nuclear explosive tests , but it still maintains several facilities needed for other types of testing critical to the stockpile stewardship program .

the site also maintains the capability to resume nuclear explosive testing in a two - to three - year time frame , if ordered to do so by the president .

the waste isolation pilot plan ( wipp ) in new mexico manages plutonium - contaminated ( transuranic ) waste produced by nuclear weapons facilities , such as los alamos national laboratory , savannah river site , and pantex .

without wipp , nuclear warhead operations generating plutonium - contaminated waste would be restricted because of the limited quantity of such waste that can be stored onsite .

wipp's strategic plan prioritizes the management of newly generated wastes from ongoing nuclear warhead missions .

as congress conducts oversight of doe's and nnsa's management , operations , and programs , and as it authorizes and appropriates funds for the nuclear security enterprise , it may address a wide range of issues that have been of concern , and contentious , some for years .

this section reviews five topics that congress has addressed in hearings and legislation relating to the nuclear weapons complex and nnsa: ( 1 ) the defense nuclear facilities safety board , ( 2 ) organization and management at nnsa , ( 3 ) infrastructure recapitalization , ( 4 ) plutonium pit production , and ( 5 ) concerns about access to necessary supplies of tritium .

the department of energy has recently altered the authorities of the defense nuclear facilities safety board , which , according to press reports , could affect public and congressional access to information about incidents at the facilities in the nuclear security enterprise .

congress created the defense nuclear facilities safety board ( dnfsb ) in 1988 , as an independent oversight organization to provide advice and recommendations to the secretary of energy regarding public health and safety at the defense nuclear facilities managed by the department of energy .

according to the dnfsb , its mission is "to inform the secretary , in the role of the secretary as operator and regulator of the defense nuclear facilities of the department of energy , in providing adequate protection of public health and safety at such defense nuclear facilities. .

historically , the board has had access to the all the sites in the nuclear weapons complexes "to assess accidents or safety concerns that could pose a grave risk to workers and the public. .

however , according to recent press reports , doe issued a new order in may 2018 that "outlines new limits on the defense nuclear facilities safety board — including preventing the board from accessing sensitive information and imposing additional legal hurdles on board staff. .

critics of this order argue that it is an effort to limit transparency and weaken the board's ability to conduct oversight ; this recent action follows reports , from 2017 , indicating that the chairman of the board had recommended "downsizing or abolishing the group," a position supported by some of the contractors managing sites within the nuclear weapons complex .

as noted earlier , responsibility for the nuclear weapons program has moved , over the years , from the army , to the atomic energy commission , to the energy research and development administration , and then to the department of energy in 1977 .

in 2000 , congress established the semi - autonomous national nuclear security administration as part of doe to manage both the nuclear weapons complex and nonproliferation activities .

the nnsa has also sometimes included the office of environmental management .

these reorganizations stem , in part , from long - standing concerns about the management of the nuclear weapons complex .

many reports and legislative provisions have been written over the past several decades to address this issue .

in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 ( p.l .

112-239 ) , congress established the congressional advisory panel on the governance of the nuclear security enterprise and directed the panel to make recommendations on "the most appropriate governance structure , mission , and management of the nuclear security enterprise. .

in its report to congress , the panel stated the following: the panel finds that the existing governance structures and many of the practices of the enterprise are inefficient and ineffective , thereby putting the entire enterprise at risk over the long term .

these problems have not occurred overnight ; they are the result of decades of neglect .

this is in spite of the efforts of many capable and dedicated people who must nonetheless function within the confines of a dysfunctional system.… one unmistakable conclusion is that nnsa governance reform , at least as it has been implemented , has failed to provide the effective , mission - focused enterprise that congress intended .

the panel's recommendations included strengthening presidential guidance and oversight of the nuclear enterprise ; establishing new congressional mechanisms for leadership and oversight of the enterprise ; replacing nnsa with a new office of nuclear security within doe , renamed to the department of energy and nuclear security , with the secretary responsible for the mission ; and building a culture of performance , accountability , and credibility .

nnsa , in its review of the report , supported many of the suggested changes in management and contracting within nnsa , but it did not support the proposed changes in the name and structure of the organization or its leadership .

congress has recently expressed continuing concerns with nnsa's organization and management , and has noted its lack of progress in implementing many of the recommendations from the 2014 report .

for example , the senate version of the fy2019 defense authorization bill sought to address these issues by clarifying the roles and authorities of the national nuclear security administration in a way that would provide nnsa with greater authority to act without oversight from the department of energy .

the senate armed services committee , in its report on the senate version of the legislation , ( s.rept .

115-262 ) states that "delays and cost overruns in the nnsa's weapons programs and recent disagreements about major programs associated with weapons activities evince the tensions inherent in the current organizational structure. .

therefore , according to the committee report , the legislation would "implement a number of recommendations of the augustine - mies panel and other studies" by making "the administrator of the nnsa responsible for a number of duties currently assigned to the secretary of energy , clarify the lines of authority at the doe to emphasize the role of administrator , and expand the remit and authority of the administrator in statute. .

the conference report on the fy2019 defense authorization act ( h.r .

5515 ) struck the senate language from the final bill .

however , the conferees did review the long - standing congressional concerns with nnsa management and highlighted several of the reports that called for change in nnsa's organization and management procedures .

the report noted that "almost 4 years have elapsed since the augustine - mies panel made its recommendations , and almost 6 years have elapsed since the 2013 statement of managers described the nuclear security enterprise as broken. .

the conferees then argued that "continued cost overruns on major projects , critical capital acquisition decisions mired in dispute , ongoing safety and security concerns , and delayed infrastructure modernization projects indicate that significant progress has not been made. .

they concluded by noting that they expected "appropriate levels of engagement by the secretary of energy , the deputy secretary of energy , and the administrator for nuclear security with the committees of jurisdiction on priority atomic energy defense programs to ensure that the nnsa meets the military requirements set by the department of defense while making efficient and responsible use of taxpayer dollars. .

as mentioned earlier , the 2018 nuclear posture review noted that "the u.s. nuclear weapons infrastructure has suffered the effects of aging and underfunding" over the past several decades .

nnsa's administrators have testified to congress about the backlog in deferred maintenance , and about the need to invest promptly to replace aging facilities so that the united states can maintain a "safe , secure , and effective" nuclear arsenal .

there is little question that congress , at this point , understands and generally supports the need for attention to this problem , but questions remain about whether nnsa has placed a high enough priority on this effort in its budget proposals and program management .

nnsa's recapitalization projects are funded through its budget for infrastructure and operations ( i&o ) .

the budget for this activity has shown steady growth over the past few years , with congress often adding funds above the budget request .

for example , nnsa requested nearly a 20% increase in funding for i&o funding between fy2016 and fy2017 , and congress further increased this amount by $86.4 million .

nnsa did not request an increase in i&o funding for fy2018 , but congress provided $3,117.8 million in the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) , an increase of more than 10% and more than triple the increase from fy2016 to fy2017 .

nnsa has requested $3,002.7 million for this program area in fy2019 .

at this time , the house has further increased that budget , while the senate has reduced it .

within the i&o budget , funding for recapitalization , the program that nnsa claims is key to arresting the declining state of nnsa infrastructure , has shown mixed results .

nnsa requested $667.3 million for recapitalization in fy2017 , an increase of almost 90% over the appropriated level of $352.5 million in fy2016 .

in the consolidated appropriations act of 2017 , congress provided $743.1 million , but nnsa requested only $427.3 million in fy2018 .

budget documents note that this reduction reflected the completion of the work at the bannister federal complex in kansas city .

congress , however , provided $612.6 million for this program area , noting it had included "funds above the budget request to address the nnsa's high - risk excess facilities and deferred maintenance. .

nnsa has requested $540.7 million in fy2019 .

the house has recommended $612.6 million , to restore funding to the fy2018 level , but the senate has reduced the request to $425 million .

on may 10 , 2018 , nnsa announced that the nuclear weapons council ( nwc ) had approved its plan to meet the requirement of producing a minimum of 80 plutonium pits per year by repurposing "the mixed oxide fuel fabrication facility at the savannah river site in south carolina to produce plutonium pits while also maximizing pit production activities at los alamos national laboratory in new mexico. .

according to nnsa , this alternative would provide capacity for "at least 50 pits per year produced at savannah river and at least 30 pits per year at los alamos. .

nnsa claimed that this approach "is the best way to manage the cost , schedule , and risk of such a vital undertaking" and "represents a resilient and responsive option to meet department of defense ( dod ) requirements. .

the united states has sought to establish a significant and reliable pit production capability in the years since the rocky flats plant ceased plutonium operations .

in 2014 crs found many projects had been proposed over the years , but none had been successfully completed .

moreover , key parameters , such as cost , schedule , proposed facility site , and capacity , had changed from one proposal to the next .

currently , the united states has the capacity to produce small numbers of pits in the pf - 4 building at los alamos national laboratory .

the facilities needed to support this effort at los alamos are aging , with one particular building , the chemistry and metallurgy research facility ( cmr ) , dating from the early 1950s .

the facilities at los alamos have been unable to produce anywhere near the requisite 15-30 pits per year , and it ceased operations entirely in 2013 , following a safety lapse .

it has slowly begun to restore its production capability , producing one demonstration pit in recent years .

the obama administration proposed a plan to replace the aging cmr with a new chemistry and metallurgy research replacement facility ( cmrr ) to expand the capacity for pit production at los alamos to 30-50 pits per year .

however , escalating cost estimates and budget reductions led first to a delay and then to the cancellation of the cmrr .

instead , nnsa planned to expand capacity at los alamos by constructing smaller buildings , known as modules , both to control costs and to expand the facilities in a timely manner .

this plan remains in place , but it has been joined by a plan to repurpose the mfff facility at savannah river to expand capacity from 30-50 pits per year to a minimum of 80 pits per year .

as congress reviews the administration's plan for pit production , it may address a number of questions , including the expected total cost of the plan , along with the relative cost of repurposing mfff for pit production as compared with the construction of new modules at los alamos ; the rationale for ramping up pit production by 2030 , when many experts argue that existing pits could remain effective for more than 80 years ; and whether the plan will , as nnsa claims , improve "the resiliency , flexibility , and redundancy of our nuclear security enterprise by not relying on a single production site. .

congress may also address the question of why the united states needs to produce a minimum of 80 pits per year .

dod and the nnsa argue that the united states will need new pits to support some warhead life extension programs ( leps ) and to replace pits in weapons as they age .

however , the pit production capacity that nnsa has considered necessary has varied greatly .

during the george w. bush administration , nnsa sought to construct a modern pit facility with the capacity to produce from 125 to 450 pits per year in single - shift operation .

in 2005 , congress rejected the modern pit facility , viewing this capacity as excessive .

during the obama administration , the nuclear weapons council determined that , to meet the likely demands of future leps , nnsa would need a pit production capacity of 50 to 80 pits per year .

in testimony before the senate armed services committee in april 2013 , andrew weber , then the assistant secretary of defense for nuclear , chemical , and biological defense programs , stated that "there is no daylight between the department of energy and the department of defense on the need for both a near - term pit production capacity of 10 to 20 and then 30 by 2021 , and then in the longer term for a pit production capacity of 50 to 80 per year. .

but , as noted above , the nuclear weapons council has now certified that nnsa needs to produce a minimum of 80 pits per year by 2030 .

neither the npr nor nnsa's recent announcement indicates why the goal has increased .

congress has sought some of the information needed to answer these questions in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2019 ( h.r .

5515 ) .

in section 3120 , congress mandated that dod seek an independent assessment of nnsa's preferred plutonium strategy from a federally funded research and development center ( ffrdc ) .

it also mandated that nnsa submit a report to congress that detailed a plan to produce 30 pits per year at los alamos national laboratory by 2026 and a detailed plan for designing and carrying out production of plutonium pits 31 – 80 at los alamos national laboratory , in case the repurposed mfff facility at savannah river was not operational and producing pits by 2030 .

the legislation also mandates that the chairman of the nuclear weapons council and the nnsa administrator brief congress on the implementation plan for the plutonium strategy , and that the chairman certify , annually through 2025 , that the plutonium pit production plan is on track to meet the military requirement of 80 pits per year by 2030 .

the final version of the bill did not , however , include two reporting requirements that were included in the house version of the bill .

one requested a report on the rationale for the nuclear posture review's change in the annual plutonium pit requirement from 30-50 pits to "at least 80 pits" from a previous requirement of "50-80 pits," and the second requested a study on the potential to reuse existing plutonium pits .

tritium , a radioactive form of hydrogen , is used to boost the yield ( the amount of energy released upon detonation ) of nuclear weapons .

because it has a half - life of 12.4 years and degrades at a rate of 5.5% per year , the tritium in nuclear weapons must be replenished regularly .

as noted above , the u.s. nuclear weapons program currently uses tritium produced at the tva watts bar reactor and processed at the srs .

to meet the demand for tritium in the weapons program in the future , doe is seeking to add tritium production to a second reactor at watts barr .

longstanding u.s. policy has sought to separate domestic nuclear power plants from the u.s. nuclear weapons program — this is not only an element of u.s. nuclear nonproliferation policy but also a result of foreign "peaceful - use obligations" that constrain the use of foreign - origin nuclear materials .

this issue became a concern when doe decided to use the watts bar reactor to produce tritium for nuclear weapons , as the reactor also produces electricity for the domestic market .

as a result , the reactor is required to burn u.s. - origin low - enriched uranium .

the united states , however , no longer has the capacity to enrich uranium for use in nuclear power plants .

the last u.s. enrichment facility , a gaseous diffusion plant in paducah , ky , closed in 2013 .

with two reactors operating to produce tritium for nuclear weapons , nnsa expects that that existing stocks of u.s. - origin low - enriched uranium will begin to run out in the mid - 2020s .

nnsa is currently examining plans to extend the stockpile until around 2030 .

nnsa has not yet articulated a strategy to acquire the fuel needed to produce tritium in the long - term .

options for acquiring low - enriched uranium could include building a new centrifuge plant inside the united states , at the possible cost of billions of dollars over more than 10 years ; blending down highly enriched uranium , at the risk of depleting stocks needed to fuel naval nuclear reactors ; and using foreign - origin low - enriched uranium , with potential implications for u.s. nonproliferation policy .

appendix a. u.s. nuclear stockpile appendix b. u.s. nuclear testin .

