in august 2018 , the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) proposed the "affordable clean energy" ( ace ) rule .

ace would modify provisions for existing power plants under two major clean air act ( caa ) programs .

among other things , ace would "replace the clean power plan ( cpp ) ," a greenhouse gas ( ghg ) rulemaking that epa promulgated under caa section 111 ( d ) in 2015 .

ace would also modify an applicability determination for new source review ( nsr ) , which is a caa preconstruction permitting program intended to ensure that new and modified stationary sources of air pollution do not significantly degrade air quality .

epa proposed ace in response to executive order 13783 , in which president trump directed federal agencies to "review existing regulations and policies that potentially burden the development or use of domestically produced energy resources. .

among the order's specific directives was that epa review the cpp , which was one of the obama administration's key actions directed at reducing ghg emissions .

epa's review also led the agency to convene an "nsr reform task force" to assess opportunities to simplify the nsr application and review process .

congress has also considered questions about nsr .

a house hearing , held in early 2018 , highlighted some long - standing and divergent views on the nsr program .

witnesses speaking in favor of nsr emphasized the program's health and environmental benefits , while other stakeholders described it as an outdated , cumbersome impediment to economic growth .

for example , one of the witnesses testified that the complexities and costs of the nsr permitting process discourage pollution control and energy efficiency projects .

in addition , two bills — h.r .

3127 and h.r .

3128 — were introduced in the 115 th congress that would amend the caa definition of modification , a key term in determining nsr applicability .

notable interest in the cpp and subsequent proposals to repeal or replace it reflects the perceived importance of their potential effects on the economy and the health , safety , and well - being of the nation .

some stakeholders contend that the u.s. economy would be adversely affected by controls on ghg emissions from power plants .

at the same time , national and international scientific assessments of climate change have concluded that there is an increasing likelihood of "severe , pervasive and irreversible" ghg - induced impacts .

after epa proposed the cpp in 2014 , the agency received more than 4.3 million public comments , the most ever for an epa rule .

epa responded by making numerous changes to the rule between proposal and promulgation .

congressional and public interest has continued since epa promulgated the cpp final rule in 2015 .

this report provides background information about the caa and ghg emissions from the power sector and highlights some of the major components of epa's ace proposal .

the topics discussed do not represent an exhaustive list of the proposal's elements .

for a more comprehensive analysis of the cpp , see crs report r44341 , epa's clean power plan for existing power plants: frequently asked questions , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

for an analysis of the cpp's potential impact on the electric power sector , see crs report r44265 , epa's clean power plan: implications for the electric power sector , by [author name scrubbed] .

the report does not provide a legal analysis of the actions and legal interpretations proposed in ace .

for a detailed discussion of legal issues , see: crs legal sidebar lsb10198 , epa proposes the affordable clean energy rule to replace the clean power plan , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs legal sidebar lsb10199 , epa proposes new permitting test for power plant modifications , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r44480 , clean power plan: legal background and pending litigation in west virginia v. epa , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs legal sidebar lsb10016 , epa proposes to repeal the clean power plan , by [author name scrubbed] .

this section provides background information on sources of u.s. ghgs emissions ( particularly co 2 ) , caa section 111 , the cpp , and nsr .

epa estimated the emission changes and the monetized benefits and costs under four scenarios , comparing each one to a baseline that assumed implementation of the cpp .

the first scenario — the "no cpp" scenario — modeled a world without either the cpp or the ace proposal .

the remaining three scenarios considered implementation of the ace proposal and modeled different levels of hri at corresponding levels of assumed capital costs at affected coal - fired egus in the contiguous united states .

epa explained that data limitations required the agency to assume a uniform level of hri and capital cost within each ace scenario rather than modeling a "more customized hri and cost functions to specific units. .

epa projected that power sector emissions of co 2 , so 2 , and no x would increase under the ace proposal compared to the cpp .

for example , compared to the cpp in the year 2030 , epa estimated that co 2 emissions would increase 3% ( 47 million short tons to 61 million ) , so 2 emissions would increase 5.0-5.9% ( 45,000 short tons to 53,000 ) , and no x emissions would increase 4.1-5.0% ( 32,000 short tons to 39,000 ) in the year 2030 under each of the ace scenarios .

epa also projected that ace would , in most scenarios , decrease co 2 , so 2 , and no x emissions compared to a baseline without the cpp .

for example , compared to a baseline without the cpp in the year 2030 , epa estimated that co 2 emissions would decrease 1% ( 13 million short tons to 27 million ) , so 2 emissions would decrease 0.7-1.6% ( 7,000 short tons to 15,000 ) , and no x emissions would decrease 1.0-1.8% ( 8,000 short tons to 15,000 ) in 2030 under ace .

epa also compared this no - cpp baseline to a cpp implementation scenario , which showed that co 2 emissions would decrease 4% ( 74 million short tons ) , so 2 emissions would decrease 6.3% ( 60,000 short tons ) , and no x emissions would decrease 5.7% ( 47,000 short tons ) in 2030 .

in sum , epa's projections show that , compared to a world without the cpp , ace would generally reduce co 2 , so 2 , and no x emissions , but the reductions are lower than those projected for the cpp .

as discussed below , however , the emissions estimates for the ace scenarios are particularly uncertain given the "considerable uncertainty regarding the specific technology measures that might be applied by states. .

this section compares projections of co 2 emissions from each of the scenarios epa modeled in its 2018 proposed rule and emission projections from other organizations .

epa's ace proposal and its supporting documents contain estimates of co 2 emission projections in future years for several different scenarios , including: no cpp .

this scenario models a repeal of the cpp without any replacement .

it assumes that none of the affected sources adopt hri .

cpp .

this scenario , which epa refers to as its baseline scenario , assumes states use their mass - based targets to comply with the 2015 cpp .

in particular , epa assumes intrastate trading between covered sources but no incremental demand - side energy efficiency investments .

cpp with demand - side energy efficiency .

152 this scenario is the same as the above cpp scenario , except that it assumes that demand - side energy efficiency measures are undertaken as a compliance option under the cpp framework .

ace ( 2% hri at $50 / kilowatt ) .

this scenario models "modest improvements" in hri in the absence of the nsr revisions also proposed in ace .

the model required each affected coal - fired egu to improve its heat rate by 2% at a capital cost of $50 per kilowatt .

the model allowed a source to either adopt the improvement or retire , depending on the economics of either option .

ace ( 4.5% hri at $50 / kilowatt ) .

this scenario assumes implementation of the proposed nsr revisions and , at each source , models a 4.5% hri at a capital cost of $50 per kilowatt .

the model allowed a source to either adopt the improvement or retire , depending on the economics of either option .

ace ( 4.5% hri at $100 / kilowatt ) .

this scenario assumes implementation of the proposed nsr revisions and , at each source , models a 4.5% hri at a capital cost of $100 per kilowatt .

the model allowed a source to either adopt the improvement or retire , depending on the economics of either option .

epa's co 2 projections show that , compared to a world without the cpp , ace would generally reduce co 2 emissions , but the reductions are lower than those projected for the cpp .

see figure 3 , which indicates that epa's projected co 2 emissions are generally lower than recent historical emissions .

figure 3 also presents a magnified view of epa's scenario projections in the subset box , which shows that co 2 emissions do not vary much under the different ace scenarios .

while uncertainty is inherent in any projection , the emission estimates for the ace scenarios may contain more uncertainty than the estimates for the cpp .

the cpp would establish unit - specific , federally enforceable performance standards underpinning the state - specific emission rate and emission reduction targets .

in contrast , the ace proposal would not establish a numeric performance standard for coal - fired egus .

the proposed rule authorizes states to determine performance standards at individual egus based on the technology options identified in epa's proposed rule ( i.e. , bser ) and other considerations , such as the remaining useful life of the unit .

epa states that "affected sources may not be able to apply the technology options because they have already adopted these technologies , they are not applicable to the source , or for other reasons. .

for these reasons , epa states that hri outcomes of the proposed rule contain "considerable uncertainty. .

another factor in the uncertainty of the emissions projections involves the "rebound effect. .

as discussed above ( see " hri and potential emission impacts " ) , epa raised concerns about the rebound effect in its 2015 cpp final rule , stating that "improved competitiveness and increased generation at the egus implementing heat rate improvements could weaken or potentially even eliminate the ability of building block 1 [i.e. , hri] to achieve co 2 emission reductions. .

however , in its 2018 proposed rule , epa stated that its "analysis indicates that the system - wide emission decreases due to reduced heat rate are likely to be larger than any system - wide increases due to increased operation. .

a resources for the future study examined the emission impacts of the rebound effect with an "inside the fence line" approach and found that implementing an average fleet - wide hri of 4% at coal - fired power plants could reduce co 2 emissions at power plants by 2.6% in 2030 compared to a no - policy baseline scenario .

the study pointed out that this result was a national estimate and that eight states would see co 2 emission increases ( and corresponding increases in co - pollutants ) at their power plants in 2030 ( compared to a baseline scenario ) .

a more recent resources for the future analysis of rebound effects noted that the agency's analysis did not account for federal energy sector initiatives that may extend the life of coal - fired power plants beyond planned retirement dates .

that is , actual emissions under ace could be higher than estimated emissions if the coal - fired power plants that were assumed to retire in epa's analysis continue operating beyond planned retirement dates .

as of october 2018 , crs is unaware of analyses other than the epa's that model the ace proposal and examine potential rebound effects .

in recent years , other organizations have prepared co 2 emissions projections , comparing policy scenarios with and without the cpp .

selected results from the 2018 proposed rule and other groups are identified in table 1 .

the emission estimates in table 1 include ( 1 ) electricity sector co 2 emission projections for 2030 and ( 2 ) the percent reduction in 2030 compared to 2005 electricity sector co 2 emission levels .

observations regarding the co 2 emissions percentage reduction in 2030 compared to 2005 emissions levels include the following: compared to the other studies , the emissions projections from epa's 2018 ace proposed rule display a more narrow range across the policy scenarios epa modeled .

for example , the cpp and non - cpp scenarios differ by 2% ( 4% with the cpp demand - side efficiency scenario ) .

the estimated percentage emission reductions between the ace proposed hri scenarios and the cpp and non - cpp scenarios range between 0% and 1% .

the emission reduction differences between cpp and non - cpp scenarios are greater in the studies from earlier years .

for example , a comparison between cpp and non - cpp scenarios from the past three eia analyses shows the percentage difference has decreased from 16% ( in 2016 ) to 8% ( in 2018 ) .

this reflects the fact that many of the changes epa expected to result from the cpp ( eg , natural gas and renewables replacing coal - fired units ) have already happened as the result of market forces in the electric power sector .

the reference case scenarios in more recent studies project significantly lower emissions in 2030 when compared to earlier studies .

for example , the reference case in the 2015 epa analysis projected an emission reduction of 16% below 2005 levels in 2030 , while the 2018 epa analysis projected an emission reduction of 32% below 2005 levels in 2030 .

as epa notes in its 2018 analysis , "over the past few years , the power sector has changed notably. .

in particular , epa's 2015 projections do not include the renewable energy tax extensions enacted in december 2015 .

comparisons between the projections in table 1 should be made with caution for several reasons .

models from different organizations may include different assumptions about future economic conditions and underlying energy inputs ( eg , natural gas prices ) .

as noted above , the underlying conditions have changed considerably in the past few years .

there is also uncertainty related to factors previously discussed , including potential rebound effects and about which technology measures would be adopted under ace .

a comparison between co 2 emissions projections and actual co 2 emissions illustrates the uncertainties of emission projections .

figure 4 compares actual u.s. co 2 emissions between 1990 and 2017 with selected eia emission projections made in past years .

in general , actual emissions have remained well below projections .

for example , the aeo from 2006 projected that co 2 emissions would be almost 6.9 billion metric tons in 2017 , about 33% higher than observed emissions .

compared to the current regulation — which is the cpp — the ace proposal would reduce compliance costs but would also yield lower emission reductions , thereby increasing the climate - related damages ( forgone benefits ) and human health damages ( forgone benefits ) .

epa's analysis shows that the estimated value of the forgone benefits would outweigh the compliance cost savings when replacing the cpp with ace , yielding net costs .

specifically , epa estimated that the net costs of replacing the cpp with ace range from $12.8 billion to $72.0 billion ( 2016 dollars ) over a 15-year period ( 2023-2037 ) .

these estimates account for forgone benefits — the forgone domestic climate benefits and the forgone co - benefits — that is , the human health benefits from emission reductions not targeted by either ace or the cpp: so 2 and no x emissions .

epa's analysis also shows that repealing and not replacing the cpp would yield net costs ranging from $14.8 billion to $76.2 billion ( 2016$ ) over a 15-year period ( 2023-2037 ) .

this range accounts for forgone domestic climate benefits and forgone human health co - benefits .

consideration of co - benefits and other indirect impacts is typically viewed as a principle of benefit - cost analysis and consistent with federal guidance .

in particular , omb circular a - 4 directs agencies to "look beyond the direct benefits and direct costs" of a rulemaking and quantify and monetize co - benefits as well as adverse impacts not already considered in the direct cost estimates .

likewise , epa's guidelines for preparing economic analyses recommends that the agency's economic analysis "include directly intended effects and associated costs , as well as ancillary ( or co - ) benefits and costs. .

epa excludes the forgone human health co - benefits from some of the benefit - cost comparisons .

epa explained these comparisons as a way to consider the benefit of reducing the "targeted pollutant" ( co 2 ) against the compliance cost .

the estimated compliance costs are the same regardless of whether epa counts the human health co - benefits .

therefore , the benefit - cost comparisons that exclude the co - benefits show a lower net impact — that is , they weigh a lower estimate of the forgone benefits against compliance cost savings .

specifically , the exclusion of forgone human health co - benefits from these comparisons yields estimates that range from net costs to net benefits .

these benefit - cost comparisons , which are limited to compliance cost savings and forgone domestic climate benefits — range from a net cost of $5.4 billion to a net benefit of $3.4 billion over a 15-year period ( 2023-2037 ) .

in addition , repealing without replacing the cpp appears more favorable when epa excludes the forgone human health co - benefits .

under this scenario , the estimated present value of repealing the cpp ranges from a net benefit of $1.2 billion to $2.7 billion ( 2016$ ) over a 15-year period ( 2023-2037 ) .

epa also compares the three ace scenarios to an alternative baseline that does not include the cpp .

when epa excludes the forgone human health co - benefits , these comparisons yield present value estimates that range from a net cost of $6.6 billion to a net benefit of $2.0 billion ( 2016$ ) over a 15-year period ( 2023-2037 ) .

the net cost figure signifies that the estimated value of the forgone domestic climate benefits outweighs the estimated compliance cost savings .

the net benefit figure signifies that the estimated compliance cost savings outweigh the estimated value of the forgone domestic climate benefits .

while these comparisons provide some perspective on the potential effects of ace ( separate from the cpp ) , the scenario design makes it difficult to discern the incremental effect of key components of the ace proposal .

epa designed two of the ace scenarios to account for "benefits from the proposed revisions to nsr. .

the third ace scenario does not .

the level and cost of hri improvements also vary among the three scenarios , making it difficult to understand how much the proposed nsr revisions and assumed level of hri affects the benefit - cost estimates .

