o n october 2 , 2017 , the supreme court began one of the most notable terms in recent memory , concluding its work at the end of june 2018 .

the latest term of the court was the first full term for justice neil gorsuch , who succeeded justice antonin scalia following his death in february 2016 , and the last term of justice anthony kennedy , who retired from the high court in july 2018 .

with nine justices on the court for the first time at the beginning of a term since october 2015 , the october term 2017 term witnessed an increasingly divided court .

for example , notwithstanding a comparable volume of cases at the court the last two terms , the most recent resulted in 28 unanimous rulings , a marked decrease from the term before , which saw the court issuing 41 unanimous decisions .

similarly , the supreme court issued 19 decisions that were decided by a single vote during the october term 2017 , which was 10 more than the previous term .

the increased divisions on the high court may have been a product of the nature of the cases on the court's docket , with the supreme court hearing a number of high profile matters implicating issues of considerable interest for congress and the public .

for instance , during its last term , the court considered a challenge to president trump's so - called travel ban , several redistricting disputes concerning partisan gerrymandering , and a dispute that pitted a state government's interests in enforcing certain civil rights laws against the interests of those who object to same - sex marriage on religious grounds .

some of the court's most highly anticipated rulings resulted in opinions where the justices resolved cases on grounds that did not reach the core issues of dispute , such as the court's rulings on partisan gerrymandering , in which the legal challenges were largely dismissed on procedural grounds , or the court's opinion in the case of a baker's refusal to make a cake for a same - sex wedding , which was decided on narrow grounds peculiar to the case before the court .

nonetheless , the october term 2017 resulted in several far - reaching opinions that are discussed below in more detail .

perhaps most notably , the court overturned several long - standing precedents , including ( 1 ) two 20th century cases interpreting congress's commerce clause power to limit the states' ability to require certain out - of - state retailers to collect and remit sales taxes ; ( 2 ) a 1977 ruling requiring nonconsenting members of public employee unions to pay certain fees as a condition of employment ; and ( 3 ) a long - criticized 1944 case that sanctioned the internment of japanese americans during world war ii .

this report highlights seven notable cases from the october term 2017 that could impact the work of congress: ( 1 )   epic systems corp. v. lewis , which concerned the enforceability of certain agreements between employers and employees to arbitrate labor disputes in lieu of class and other collective actions ; ( 2 ) carpenter v. united states , which examined the limits the fourth amendment imposes on the warrantless collection of the historical cell phone location records of a criminal suspect ; ( 3 )   murphy v. national collegiate athletic association ( ncaa ) , a case that explored whether congress , by prohibiting a state from partially repealing a state law , impermissibly commandeers the powers of the state ; ( 4 ) janus v. american federation of state , county , and municipal employees , council 31 ( afscme ) , which concerned whether so - called agency fee arrangements that require nonconsenting public employees to contribute a fee to a public employee union violate the first amendment ; ( 5 ) national institute of family and life advocates ( nifla ) v. becerra , a case that assessed whether a california law imposing various notice requirements for certain facilities providing pregnancy - related services was likely to violate the first amendment ; ( 6 ) trump v. hawaii , which challenged the lawfulness of president trump's so - called travel ban ; and ( 7 ) lucia v. securities and exchange commission ( sec ) , which explored whether the appointment of administrative law judges ( aljs ) within the sec complied with article ii of the constitution .

the discussion of each of these cases ( 1 ) provides background information on the case being discussed ; ( 2 ) summarizes the arguments that were presented to the court ; ( 3 )  explains the court's ultimate ruling ; and ( 4 ) examines the potential implications that the court's ruling could have for congress , including the ramifications for the jurisprudence in a given area of law .

in another significant ruling , the court in lucia v. sec held that administrative law judges ( aljs ) within the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) qualify as officers of the united states who must be appointed in accordance with the requirements of the appointments clause .

the constitution requires that officers be appointed by the president , a department head , or a court of law ; but does not impose any procedures for non - officer employees – that is , "lesser functionaries subordinate to officers of the united states. .

according to supreme court precedent , those individuals occupying "continuing positions" and exercising "significant authority" on behalf of the united states qualify as officers under the constitution .

nonetheless , determining precisely what constitutes the exercise of "significant authority" has divided lower federal courts .

given the substantial number of aljs and potentially similar hearing officers serving in the federal government , the decision has important ramifications for the structure and practice of the administrative state .

a central issue in lucia was whether aljs at the sec exercised significant authority , which would mean they are officers of the united states .

that inquiry , in turn , centered on a prior supreme court case , freytag v. commissioner , which had held that special trial judges of the u.s. tax court wielded significant authority and constituted officers .

the freytag court reached this conclusion because of the significance of the duties the special trial judges held .

specifically , the freytag court observed that the position of special trial judge is "established by law," and its "duties , salary , and means of appointment" are specified in statute .

in particular , the freytag court noted that special trial judges are entrusted with duties beyond "ministerial tasks," including ( 1 ) taking testimony , ( 2 )  conducting trials , ( 3 ) ruling on evidence , and ( 4 ) enforcing compliance with discovery orders .

and in carrying out these functions , the court recognized that special trial judges exercise significant discretion .

finally , the freytag court noted that even leaving aside these duties , special trial judges qualified as officers because the underlying statute authorized the chief judge of the tax court to assign authority to special trial judges to render binding independent decisions in certain cases .

in the lower court disposition that preceded the supreme court's ruling in lucia , a panel of the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit ( d.c .

circuit ) , relying on the final observation in freytag , ruled that sec aljs were not officers , but were instead mere employees .

specifically , the lower court concluded sec aljs were not officers because they did not render final decisions , as the alj's decisions are not final until either after de novo review by the commission or an order by the commission "declining to grant or order review. .

before the supreme court , lucia argued that , under freytag , the sec aljs were officers because they "perform all of the same discretionary functions that [the] court found 'significant' in freytag .

 .

 .

and then some. .

in a change from the position taken by the sec at the d.c .

circuit , the solicitor general agreed that sec aljs are officers .

in contrast , the amicus appointed by the supreme court to defend the d.c .

circuit's decision argued that significant authority is wielded only by one who "has been delegated ( i ) the power to bind the government or private parties ( ii ) in her own name rather than in the name of a superior officer. .

a rule that considered sec aljs to wield significant authority , the amicus argued , would "have significant adverse practical consequences," as it "could cast doubt on the constitutionality of the method of appointment of many thousands of civil servants. .

the supreme court , in a decision with four separate opinions , held that sec aljs qualified as officers who must be appointed according to the requirements of the appointments clause .

in the majority opinion for the court , justice kagan reasoned that because the duties of sec aljs essentially mirrored those of the special trial judges in freytag , the sec aljs also constituted officers .

as an initial matter , both "hold a continuing position established by law. .

further , special trial judges and sec aljs "exercise the same 'significant discretion' when carrying out the same 'important functions.' .

both positions ( 1 ) "take testimony," ( 2 ) "conduct trials," ( 3 ) "rule on the admissibility of evidence," and ( 4 ) are entrusted with "the power to enforce compliance with discovery orders. .

moreover , justice kagan observed , sec aljs actually had somewhat more independent authority to render decisions than did the special trial judges in freytag — while a major decision made by the special trial judges had no force unless a tax court judge adopted it as his own , the sec can decline to review an alj's decision , in which case the decision becomes final and "is deemed the action of the commission. .

accordingly , because sec aljs were "near carbon - copies" of the special trial judges in freytag , they constituted officers and must be appointed pursuant to the appointments clause .

the court ordered that lucia receive a new hearing before a properly appointed alj ( or the commission ) , and that the presiding judge could not be the one who originally presided over the hearing , even if he was subsequently appointed correctly .

justice thomas , joined by justice gorsuch , wrote separately to note that , while he agreed with the majority's conclusion that sec aljs were officers under freytag , the court's appointments clause decisions "do not provide much guidance" beyond the features found in that case .

while cases like freytag illuminate what is " sufficient " for officer status , the court has not fleshed out what is " necessary " to conclude that someone is an officer of the united states .

to answer that question , justice thomas would look to the "original public meaning" of the appointments clause , under which officers were "all federal civil officials 'with responsibility for an ongoing statutory duty.' .

justice breyer concurred in the judgment and dissented in part , noting that while he agreed with the majority's conclusion that the alj was appointed improperly , he would rest that decision on statutory , rather than constitutional , grounds .

the administrative procedure act , justice breyer wrote , authorized the commission to appoint aljs , but did not permit the delegation of that authority .

likewise , the authorizing statute for the sec granted power to delegate functions through a published order or rule , but the agency here did not do so with respect to the appointment of aljs .

resting his decision on statutory , rather than constitutional , grounds was , in justice breyer's view , necessary because free enterprise fund v. public company accounting oversight board ( pcaob ) held that two layers of removal protection from the president for a constitutional officer was unconstitutional .

justice breyer observed that because sec aljs also enjoy two layers of removal protection ( i.e. , an alj can only be removed for cause by the sec commissioners , who in turn may only be removed by the president for cause ) , holding that they constitute officers might mean that their removal protection are similarly unconstitutional , which would contradict congress's intent in originally establishing an independent alj position .

justice sotomayor , joined by justice ginsburg , dissented and wrote that sec aljs , in her view , were not officers because they lack "the ability to make final , binding decisions on behalf of the government. .

for justice sotomayor , requiring that a position wield such power in order to constitute an officer would establish a clear rule that could "provide guidance to congress and the executive branch," avoiding the confusion that currently clouds who counts as an officer .

the court's decision may have important consequences for the federal government and the nearly 2,000 aljs in federal service .

with regard to the sec , the commissioners ratified the appointment of the aljs and ordered that , for proceedings currently pending before an alj or the commission , respondents receive a new hearing before a properly appointed alj who did not participate in the matter previously .

the status of aljs at the sec is particularly significant given the expanded authority the agency received in the dodd - frank act to bring enforcement actions before aljs , rather than in federal court .

beyond proceedings before the sec , the impact of the decision for other federal agencies is uncertain .

the court explicitly declined to elaborate on the "significant authority" test for determining if an individual is an officer , concluding that its prior decision in freytag necessarily required finding that sec aljs are officers .

the executive branch employs a substantial number of aljs and other hearing officers with duties that might parallel that of sec aljs in certain respects , who are selected in a variety of ways , opening the possibility for future challenges to their appointment .

on july 10 , 2018 , president trump issued an executive order changing the hiring process for aljs , "excepting" them from the competitive service and granting agency heads greater flexibility in their hiring .

more broadly , as intimated by justice breyer's separate opinion , the court majority's decision may have future repercussions for the statutory restrictions on removing aljs from federal service .

the court has previously held , in free enterprise fund , that two layers of removal protection for officers of the pcaob improperly intruded on the president's power to supervise the executive branch .

although the court did not decide the issue in lucia , the solicitor general argued that , in addition to resolving the question of whether aljs are officers , the court could avoid any constitutional concerns about the president's authority by construing the removal protections narrowly , "to permit removal of an alj for misconduct or failure to follow lawful agency directives or to perform his duties adequately. .

going forward , to the extent that an alj position constitutes an officer under the reasoning of lucia , the constitutionality of dual removal restrictions might be open to challenge , although whether the court would look at such restrictions for aljs in the same way it did for officers of the pcaob is uncertain .

