policymakers and other stakeholders may hold a variety of views regarding the appropriate role of the private sector in meeting the health care needs of eligible veterans .

some believe that the best course for veterans is to provide all needed care in facilities under the direct jurisdiction of the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , veterans health administration ( vha ) , health care system .

on the other hand , some see the use of private sector providers as important in ensuring veterans' access to a comprehensive slate of services ( in particular , to specialty services that are needed infrequently ) , or in addressing geographic or other access barriers , such as long wait times for an appointment .

in addition , those who believe that all needed care should be provided by va providers in va - owned facilities express concern that private sector options for providing care to veterans may dilute the quality of care in the va health care system , and could fail to leverage key strengths of the va health care network .

furthermore , studies have shown that private sector community providers may not have the necessary training and skills to provide "complex and specialized multidisciplinary care including integrated behavioral health services that many veterans require. .

some are concerned that if veterans leave the va health care system for the private sector , some vha sites and specialized medical services may be eliminated from the va health care system , if comparable care is provided in the private sector .

however , some propose that over the long term , having private sector options could improve the quality of services within the va health care system through competition .

reaching the correct balance between providing care through vha's health care system and through non - va community providers has been an issue for policymakers , as well as for the va and other stakeholders , for many years .

on june 6 , 2018 , president donald trump signed into law the john s. mccain iii , daniel k. akaka , and samuel r. johnson va maintaining internal systems and strengthening integrated outside networks act of 2018 , or the va mission act of 2018 ( s. 2372 ; p.l .

115-182 ; h.rept .

115-671 ) .

the department of veterans affairs expiring authorities act of 2018 ( s. 3479 ; p.l .

115-251 ) , enacted on september 29 , 2018 , made some changes and technical amendments to the va mission act .

section 101 of this act , establishing the veterans community care program , or vccp , is a legislative outcome of this long - standing policy debate on the role of the private sector in the delivery of health care to the nation's veterans .

to understand the key amendments made by the va mission act with respect to care provided through private sector community providers , this report begins with a brief history of key legislative changes to community care passed by congress from the 1920s onwards .

it should be noted that over the years , care provided through private sector providers has been known by many names , including "hometown medical program," "non - va fee care," "fee - basis care," "purchased care," "preauthorized care," and the "fee - care program," among others .

in this report , such care is referred to as the veterans community care program , or vccp , as established by the va mission act .

following the brief legislative history of va provided community care , the report describes the background and legislative history leading up to the enactment of the va mission act .

this is followed by summaries of the major provisions in the va mission act by title .

the report concludes with an appendix providing implementation and reporting deadlines contained in the va mission act .

since the early 1920s , congress has authorized the va to contract for care in the community .

for instance , the world war veterans act of 1924 ( p.l .

68-242 ) , enacted on june 7 , 1924 , included language that authorized the director of the then veterans bureau to contract with private facilities in exceptional cases: in the event government hospital facilities are insufficient or inadequate the director may contract with state , municipal , or in exceptional cases , with private hospitals for such medical , surgical , and hospital services and supplies as may be required , and such contracts may be made for a period of not exceeding three years and may be for the use of a ward or other hospital unit or on such other basis as may be in the best interest of the beneficiaries under this act .

va's hometown medical care program , which was also known as the fee - basis care program , was established by the va in fy1946 , and under this program the va entered into contracts with state medical societies , or with designated agencies for authorized services , and was reimbursed based on a va fee schedule .

generally , the hometown medical program was used to provide out - patient care — including dental care for veterans who were in need of treatment for a service - connected disability — because at that time outpatient care was generally authorized for treatment of service - connected disabilities .

according to va's annual report from fy1950: this program has saved veterans many hours they would otherwise have been required to use in traveling to and from va clinics , some of which would have been lost from their work .

the convenience of treatment in their own hometown , together with the privilege of being treated by a doctor of their own choice , has made this [program] highly acceptable to veteran - patients .

in june 1957 , congress passed the veterans' benefit act of 1957 ( p.l .

85-56 ) , which provided the va the authority to contract with private facilities "in order to provide hospital care ( i ) in emergency cases for persons suffering from service - connected disabilities or from disabilities for which such persons were discharged or released from the active military , naval , or air service ; ( ii ) for women veterans of any war ; or ( iii ) for veterans of any war in a territory , commonwealth , or possession of the united states. .

the veterans health care expansion act of 1973 ( p.l .

93-82 ) broadly expanded out - patient care to nonservice - connected veterans , and by 1976 , to address the "patient and staff complaints generated by the overcrowded conditions in outpatient programs and ambulatory care services at va health care facilities across the nation. .

congress passed the veterans omnibus health care act of 1976 ( p.l .

94-581 ) .

this law made several changes to the fee - basis program .

it added current ( 38 u.s.c .

§1703 ) statutory language stating that "when facilities [departmental] are not capable of furnishing economical care because of geographical inaccessibility or of furnishing the care or services required" and further limited fee - basis or contract care to specific categories of veterans .

these included veterans receiving hospital care or medical services for the treatment of a service - connected disability or a disability for which a veteran was discharged or released from the active military , naval , or air service , among other categories .

further changes made by the veterans' health care amendments of 1979 ( p.l .

96-22 ) provided authority for fee - basis care for veterans with nonservice - connected disabilities and in receipt of increased pension or other additional compensation who are in need of regular aid and attendance or who are housebound .

the consolidated omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1985 ( veterans' health - care amendments of 1986 ; p.l .

99-272 ) clarified the definition of the term "veterans' administration facilities" and authorized the va to contract for medical care in private facilities .

these and other legislative changes in subsequent congresses eventually became codified at title 38 united state code ( u.s.c. ) .

section 1703 .

this section was completely amended by the va mission act ( s. 2372 ; p.l .

115-182 ; h.rept .

115-671 ; and p.l .

115-251 ) .

over time , congress has authorized additional programs to provide care through non - va community providers or entities , each with their own unique requirements .

in general , the va mission act amends the legal framework around several existing veterans care programs: the veterans choice program ( 38 u.s.c .

§1701 note ) , traditional va care in the community ( 38 u.s.c .

§1703 ) , project arch ( access received closer to home ) ( 38 u.s.c .

§1703 note ) , community nursing home and adult health day care , home health care services , respite care , and hospice care ( 38 u.s.c .

§§1720 ; 1720b and 1720c ) .

it also creates a new program for walk - in care ( 38 u.s.c .

§1725a ) .

however , it leaves intact other statutory provisions for emergency care for nonservice - connected conditions to certain veterans ( 38 u.s.c .

§1725 ) , authority to provide reimbursement for emergency care for service - connected veterans ( 38 u.s.c .

§1728 ) , authority to share health care resources with the department of defense ( 38 u.s.c .

§8111 ) , health care sharing and contracting authority ( 38 u.s.c .

§8153 ) , and agreements with indian health service and tribal health program providers ( 25 u.s.c .

§1645 ) .

in response to the allegations of wait time manipulation and access issues at many vha hospitals and clinics across the country , which were brought to the attention of congressional committees in the spring and summer of 2014 , the veterans access , choice and accountability act of 2014 ( vacaa ; p.l .

113-146 , as amended ) was enacted .

this act , among other things , established the temporary veterans choice program ( vcp ) , which authorized veterans meeting certain criteria , such as wait times for appointments and distance from the nearest va medical facility , to access care in the community .

in addition , section 802 of vacaa established the veterans choice fund ( vcf ) and provided $10 billion in mandatory appropriations .

significant challenges surrounding the implementation of the vcp are documented in several va office of inspector general ( oig ) and government accountability office ( gao ) reports , as well as congressional hearings .

acknowledging these implementation challenges associated with vcp , as well as the confusing and complex community care landscape created by the various statutory authorities , coupled with pilot programs such as project access received closer to home ( arch ) and patient - centered community care ( pc3 ) , congress passed the surface transportation and veterans health care choice improvement act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-41 ) and mandated the va to provide a plan to consolidate existing community care programs .

this plan was submitted to congress on october 30 , 2015 .

numerous hearings were held during the 114 th congress , and several measures were introduced to incorporate many of the concepts addressed in the va's plan to consolidate programs of department of veterans affairs to improve access to care , such as the improving veterans access to care in the community act ( s. 2633 ) and the veterans choice improvement act of 2016 ( s. 2646 ) .

however , at the end of the 114 th congress , no major legislative action occurred to revamp and consolidate veterans community care programs .

at the beginning of the 115 th congress , once again congress faced implementation issues regarding the vcp , including its expiration in august 2017 and funding shortfalls .

in response to this , congress passed p.l .

115-26 ( unofficially referred to as the veterans choice program improvement act ) , eliminated the august 7 , 2017 , sunset date , and allowed the vcp to continue until all funds in the vcf were expended .

later in 2017 , as vcf funding was diminishing , congress passed the va choice and quality employment act of 2017 ( p.l .

115-46 ) , and p.l .

115-96 , and provided additional funding of $4.2 billion to continue vcp .

in the meantime , on october 6 , 2017 , the va submitted to the house and senate veterans' affairs committees another plan to consolidate and streamline community care programs to replace the vcp .

this plan , known as the veterans coordinated access & rewarding experiences ( care ) plan , made additional enhancements to the initial plan that was provided in october 2015 .

more specifically , it focused on eligibility criteria for veterans to access care in the community , with criteria based on clinical need , quality of care , and convenience — which had not been specifically addressed in the october 2015 plan .

the house veterans' affairs committee ( hvac ) held a hearing on the care plan and other legislative proposals on october 24 , 2017 .

based on major concepts in this plan and other legislative proposals , the senate and house veterans' affairs committees began drafting legislation .

on november 3 , 2017 , the va care in the community act ( h.r .

4242 ) was introduced , and the measure was marked up by the hvac and ordered reported as amended on december 19 , 2017 .

it was subsequently reported with an amendment by the hvac ( h.rept .

115-585 ) on march 5 , 2018 .

on november 29 , 2017 , the senate veterans' affairs committee ( svac ) marked up a draft measure , and it was reported to the senate on december 5 , 2017 , entitled the caring for our veterans act of 2017 ( s. 2193 ; s.rept .

115-212 ) .

however , no further action occurred at the close of the first session of the 115 th congress .

at the beginning of the second session of the 115 th congress , combining various provisions of the va care in the community act ( h.r .

4242 ; h.rept .

115-585 ) , the va asset and infrastructure review act of 2017 ( h.r .

4243 ) , and the caring for our veterans act of 2017 ( s. 2193 ; s.rept .

115-212 ) , hvac chairman dr. phil roe introduced the va maintaining internal systems and strengthening integrated outside networks act of 2018 , or the va mission act of 2018 ( h.r .

5674 ) , on may 3 , 2018 .

the hvac marked up the legislation on may 8 .

the measure was reported by the hvac on may 11 ( h.rept .

115-671 , part 1 ) .

the text of h.r .

5674 was then substituted as an amendment to s. 2372 and modified to include a new short title known as the john s. mccain iii , daniel k. akaka , and samuel r. johnson va maintaining internal systems and strengthening integrated outside networks act of 2018 .

the house passed s. 2372 on may 16 .

the senate began consideration of the house amendment to s. 2372 on may 17 , and it passed the measure by concurring to the house amendment to s. 2372 on may 23 .

president donald trump signed the va mission act to law ( s. 2372 ; p.l .

115-182 ) on june 6 , 2018 .

the department of veterans affairs expiring authorities act of 2018 ( s. 3479 ; p.l .

115-251 ) made amendments and technical corrections to the va mission act .

the va mission act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-182 ) provides $5.2 billion in direct or mandatory appropriations for the vcf established by section 802 of the vacaa ( p.l .

113-146 , as amended ) .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates that this amount would continue to provide funding for the current vcp until about the first half of calendar year 2019 .

excluding this direct appropriation , the cbo estimates that implementing all the provisions of the va mission act would cost approximately $46.5 billion over the fy2019-fy2023 time frame , subject to discretionary appropriations from congress .

this estimate includes a cost of $21.4 billion for the new veterans community care program ( vccp ) and $6.7 billion for the provisions related to expansion of the program of comprehensive assistance for family caregivers to those veterans injured or disabled during military service on or before september 11 , 2001 .

the $6.7 billion estimate excludes any long - term implementation costs of this expansion , since the expansion would happen in two stages .

the cbo estimates that the va mission act would increase the deficit by $5.2 billion over six years ( fy2018-fy2023 ) and almost $4.5 billion over 11 years ( fy2018-fy2028 ) .

this report summarizes the major provisions of the john s. mccain iii , daniel k. akaka , and samuel r. johnson va maintaining internal systems and strengthening integrated outside networks act of 2018 ( va mission act ; p.l .

115-182 , h.rept .

115-671 ) , including amendments made by the department of veterans affairs expiring authorities act of 2018 ( s. 3479 ; p.l .

115-251 ) .

it does not analyze every provision in the act , but instead provides brief outlines of the matters addressed .

subsequent sections of the report are organized as follows: a summary is provided for each title of the act , followed by a summary of the provisions under that respective title .

relevant background is provided for context , where applicable , at the title level or subtitle level .

throughout this report , unless otherwise stated , the secretary means the secretary of veterans affairs , and the va means the u.s. department of veterans affairs .

in addition , this section refers to matters addressed under that specific section of the act .

this report uses a number of acronyms .

this title amends current law ( codified at 38 u.s.c .

§1703 ) that provided the secretary the authority — whether under a contract or an individual authorization — to provide care under certain circumstances care of a service - connected disability ; care for a disability for which a veteran was discharged or released from the active military , naval , or air service ; care of a disability of a veteran who has a total disability permanent in nature from a service - connected disability ; care of a disability associated with and held to be aggravating a service - connected disability ; care of a disability of a veteran participating in a rehabilitation program under 38 u.s.c .

chapter 31 ; hospital care for women veterans ; outpatient dental care for certain veterans ; and when there is a need for hospital care for reasons set forth in va regulations ( 38 c.f.r .

§17.52 ) .

title i liberalizes the va's current community care program by establishing a new veterans community care program ( vccp ) , which amends the above - mentioned statutory hierarchy and provides greater flexibility to all enrolled veterans in accessing care in the community , for hospital care , medical services , and extended care services , at their election .

under the new vccp , eligibility will apply more broadly to all enrolled veterans and service - connected disability will not be a major factor for eligibility for care in the community .

in addition , this title would eventually sunset the current veterans choice program ( vcp ) one year after the date of enactment of the va mission act ( i.e. , on june 6 , 2019 ) .

this title requires the secretary to establish access and quality standards for medical care and extended care services .

it authorizes the va to enter into veteran care agreements ( vcas ) that are not subject to the contracting requirements generally required under federal contracting regulations .

in addition , the va is authorized to enter into vcas with state veterans homes , thereby eliminating the need for contractual agreements with the va .

these vcas will not be considered federal contracts with the united states ; however , state veterans homes will still have to comply with all other applicable federal laws concerning employment and hiring practices .

title i also requires the secretary to conduct a quadrennial market area assessment of va health services , and to develop a broad - ranging quadrennial review of the vha .

it also expands eligibility for veterans to access walk - in care from private community providers .

moreover , this title amends va's prompt payment standards for all community care providers .

it also requires the secretary to develop and administer a program to educate veterans about the interaction between health insurance programs such as medicare , medicaid , and tricare and the services provided by the va health care system .

title i also requires the secretary to improve information sharing with community providers and to ensure the competency of private community providers .

it also provides va clinicians access to state prescription drug monitoring programs ( pdmps ) .

this title also provides authority for va providers to provide a telemedicine episode of care without regard to where the veteran patient and va provider are located within the united states and u.s. territories .

furthermore , it establishes a va innovation for care and payment center , and provides the secretary with authority to conduct pilot programs to develop innovative payment and health care delivery models .

lastly , title i liberalizes eligibility for the program of comprehensive assistance for family caregivers to pre - 9 / 11 veterans under two phases .

under the first phase , veterans with serious service - connected injuries incurred on or before may 7 , 1975 , will qualify for benefits over a two - year period beginning on the date when the va certifies to congress that it has fully implemented the information technology system required for this program .

under the second phase , those with serious service - connected injuries incurred between may 7 , 1975 , and september 11 , 2001 , will qualify for the comprehensive assistance for family caregivers program two years after the implementation of the first phase .

the vha operates in approximately 5,670 buildings and another 1,648 leased facilities .

the last major comprehensive review of va real property and medical facilities throughout the country was done under the capital asset realignment for enhanced services ( cares ) program .

in october 2000 , the va established the cares program with the goal of evaluating the projected health care needs of veterans over the next 20 years and of realigning va's infrastructure to better meet those needs .

in august 2003 , va's then - undersecretary for health issued a preliminary draft national cares plan ( dncp ) .

the dncp , among other things , recommended that seven va health care facilities close and that duplicative clinical and administrative services delivered at over 30 other vha facilities be eliminated .

the sites slated to be closed were in the following locations: canandaigua , ny ; pittsburgh , pa ( highland drive division ) ; lexington , ky ( leestown division ) ; cleveland , oh ( brecksville unit ) ; gulfport , ms ; waco , tx ; and livermore , ca .

patients currently receiving services at these vha facilities would have been provided care at other nearby sites .

the dncp recommended that new major medical facilities be built in las vegas , nv , and east central , fl .

furthermore , the dncp recommended significant infrastructure upgrades at numerous sites including , at or near locations where the va proposed to close facilities .

in addition , the draft plan called for the establishment of 48 new high - priority community based outpatient clinics ( cbocs ) .

following the release of the dncp , the then - va secretary anthony principi appointed a 16-member independent commission to study the draft plan .

the commission was composed of individuals from a wide variety of backgrounds outside of the federal government .

the cares commission developed and applied six factors in the review of each proposal in the dncp: ( 1 ) impact on veterans' access to health care , ( 2 ) impact on health care quality , ( 3 ) veteran and stakeholder views , ( 4 ) economic impact on the community , ( 5 ) impact on va missions and goals , and ( 6 ) cost to the government .

the commission conducted 38 public hearings and 81 site visits throughout 2003 and submitted its recommendations to the secretary in february 2004 .

after reviewing the recommendations , the then secretary announced the final details of the cares plan in may 2004 ( secretary's cares decision ) .

the final plan called for consolidating several facilities , as well as building new hospitals in orlando and las vegas ; adding 156 new cbocs , four new spinal cord injury centers , and two blind rehabilitation centers ; and expanding mental health outpatient services nationwide .

however , critics of the cares plan contended that closures were considered without assessing what kind of facilities would be needed for long - term care and mental health care in the future .

also , some believed that the cares plan did not focus enough on future nursing home needs , would leave the va short of beds in a few decades , and , as a result , would leave the va with no choice but to privatize some parts of the health care system .

moreover , some veterans' groups believed that cares was only about closing "surplus" hospitals and did not believe that cares would result in the building of new and modern facilities .

finally , the closure of some va medical facilities raised serious concern among some members of congress who felt that they had little control over the cares process .

the independent assessment required by section 201 of vacaa found that [c]urrent facilities , whether they have been maintained adequately or not , often do not match current models of care .

the overwhelming majority of vha hospitals were designed when care was focused more heavily around inpatient hospital treatments .

over the past eight years , veteran inpatient bed days of care have declined nearly ten percent while outpatient clinic workload has increased more than 40 percent .

space for outpatient care is typically housed in converted inpatient spaces or vha's growing number of clinics .

as a result , vha's capital needs fall into a broad range of categories , including ensuring adequate facility condition , providing sufficient and appropriate space for veteran care , and upgrading infrastructure .

as facilities age further and care continues to shift to the outpatient setting , the size of the capital need could continue to grow .

furthermore , the commission on care was established by vacaa "to examine the access of veterans to health care from the department of veterans affairs and strategically examine how best to organize the [vha] , locate health resources , and deliver health care to veterans. .

in its final report , it recommended that the va "develop and implement a robust strategy for meeting and managing vha 's facility and capital asset needs. .

within this context , the hvac began to examine va's capital asset program in the summer of 2017 .

at a hearing held on july 12 , 2017 , the then - va secretary who was involved in the cares plan testified that "under cares there was no requirement for congress to adopt or reject the commission's final recommendations as a package .

as a result , recommendations for some needed new hospitals and outpatient clinics were accepted .

most of those to change , realign , or maybe close the mission of other facilities were rejected. .

based on input and recommendations from various stakeholders , on november 3 , 2017 , the va asset and infrastructure review act of 2017 ( h.r .

4243 ) was introduced ; it was ordered reported on november 8 ( without a written report ) .

provisions from h.r .

4243 were then incorporated as title ii of the va mission act .

this title aims to address vha clinical workforce shortages by amending and creating new programs that provide scholarships , loan repayments , and bonuses to va personnel in hard - to - recruit fields as determined by the inspector general ( ig ) , who is required to publish annual reports on staffing shortages .

one provision amends the va's health professional scholarship program ( 38 u.s.c .

§7611 ) to prioritize recruiting physicians and to extend the program's authorization , which was set to terminate on december 31 , 2019 .

another three provisions amend the va's education debt reduction program , which provides loan repayment to vha clinical employees in hard - to - recruit and hard - to - retain specialties .

one provision increases the annual and cumulative limits , the second makes new provider types eligible for the program , and the third adds vet centers to the locations where they can fulfill their service commitment .

other provisions create a new pilot program to recruit veterans into medical schools in exchange for their commitment to provide clinical care at the vha , and to increase the amount of bonus payment that the va can award in certain years .

the provisions in this title aim to increase health services to veterans in underserved areas – – areas where there are access issues or shortages of health professionals .

it does so by developing a process to designate va facilities as underserved and reporting requirements around that process .

it also includes two provisions that aim to address staffing issues at these underserved facilities: the first by developing mobile teams that can be deployed to provide clinical services at underserved facilities , and the second to establish a medical residency training program at certain va and non - va facilities , including facilities operated by the indian health service ( ihs ) or an indian tribe or tribal organization .

prior to enactment of the va mission act of 2018 , the va did not have a process to designate its facilities as underserved and thereby to direct resources to facilities with greater need .

in contrast , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) designates facilities that serve the general population , indian tribes , or prisoners as being underserved if they meet certain criteria , including a low ratio of providers to population and high rates of certain health conditions .

hhs uses this designation to direct resources , including loan repayment for providers and higher reimbursement rates in certain programs to facilities that have this designation .

hhs does not designate whether va - operated facilities are underserved .

the va has a long - term historical role in supporting and directly training medical residents ( among other types of health professionals ) .

generally , its support for medical residency training ( called graduate medical education , or gme ) is through partnerships with non - va hospitals and medical schools that operate programs where residents spend a period of time training at a va facility .

generally , the va does not operate these programs , but it pays for resident training costs ( including faculty support ) during the time that a resident is at the va .

the va has not paid for costs when a resident is training at non - va facilities , because these costs are generally covered by other federal programs .

the vacaa required an increase in the number of gme positions by up to 1,500 over a 10-year period , beginning july 1 , 2015 , through 2024 , with an emphasis on primary care , mental health , and other specialties the va secretary deems appropriate .

the vacaa also required that the expansion focus on creating new programs at va facilities where there had not previously been gme training , and that the new positions be awarded for training in rural or otherwise underserved areas .

as of september 2017 , the va had allocated about one - third of these new positions ; it has not completed the expansion .

instead , the va's objective is to complete the expansion by 2025 .

the va , like other sources of gme support , tends to focus on hospital - based training that generally does not occur in rural areas .

the gao , among others , has raised a number of concerns about medical residency training , noting in particular that more training should occur in rural areas and outpatient settings .

hhs , through the teaching health center gme program , does fund training in outpatient settings , particularly at federally qualified health centers ( fqhcs ) , which are outpatient primary care based facilities that are required to be located in an underserved area or to serve an underserved population .

the teaching health center gme program is approximately 1% of federal gme funding .

the choice gme expansion did prioritize training rural or underserved areas , but it did not require that training be in outpatient settings .

under a pilot program in this title , the va is required to establish gme programs at community - based facilities , including those operated by an fqhc , ihs , or indian tribes , or at underserved va facilities .

under the program , the va would pay for costs associated with developing a program and would pay for residents' time when they are not in training at va facilities .

this title aims to address broad topics within the va .

it requires the secretary to submit an annual report on performance awards and bonuses awarded to certain high - level employees of the va , including regional office directors , vamc directors , visn directors , and other senior executives .

it also amends current law and authorizes podiatrists with a doctor of podiatric medicine qualification to be appointed to any supervisory position similar to a physician with a doctor of medicine qualification .

this title also requires the va to publicize staffing and vacancy information on its website .

it also amends current law and raises the dollar threshold for congressional authorization of a major medical facility project from $10 million to $20 million , and it authorizes the va to carry out major medical facility projects , including the east bay cboc and the central valley engineering and logistics support facility .

this title also establishes two pilot programs .

one of the pilot programs involves adding peer specialists onto patient - aligned care teams ( pacts ) within vamcs .

the other pilot program requires the secretary to increase the use of medical scribes at vamcs .

the title also includes provisions postponing the va home loan guarantee fee reductions on housing loans , thereby increasing some of the va home loan guarantee fees that va charges some veterans until 2028 .

it also extends until september 30 , 2028 , the $90 per month limit on a va pension for certain veterans covered by medicaid who receive nursing care in a medicaid - approved nursing facility .

these provisions are included as offsets for the costs of the va mission act .

lastly , it authorizes and appropriates $5.2 billion for vcf to continue vcp .

this section amends current law to add a new 38 u.s.c .

§726 that requires the secretary to submit an annual report to svac , hvac , sac , and hac on performance awards and bonuses awarded to certain high - level employees , including regional office directors , vamc directors , visn directors , and other senior executives .

the annual report must include , among other things , the amount of each award or bonus , the job title of the individual who obtained the award or bonus , and the location where the individual works .

this section amends current law to add a new 38 u.s.c .

§7413 that authorizes the secretary to appoint a podiatrist with a doctor of podiatric medicine ( dpm ) qualification to any supervisory position in the vha similar to allopathic physicians ( md's ) and osteopathic physicians ( do's ) appointed by the vha .

this section also requires the secretary to establish standards to ensure that specialists appointed to supervisory positions within the vha do not provide direct clinical oversight , such as peer review or practice evaluation , for providers of other clinical specialties .

lastly , this section amends current law ( 38 u.s.c .

§7404 ( b ) ) and includes podiatrists within the vha physician and dentist pay schedule .

this section amends current law 38 u.s.c .

§8101 ( 3 ) to define a major medical facility as any facility or part thereof which is , or will be , under the jurisdiction of the secretary , or as otherwise authorized by law , for the provision of health - care services ( including hospital , outpatient clinic , nursing home , or domiciliary care or medical services ) , including any necessary building and auxiliary structure , garage , parking facility , mechanical equipment , trackage facilities leading thereto , abutting sidewalks , accommodations for attending personnel , and recreation facilities associated therewith .

it also amends current law 38 u.s.c .

§8104 ( a ) to increase the dollar threshold for congressional authorization of major medical facility projects from $10 million to $20 million .

any major medical facility project involving construction , alteration , or acquisition of a medical facility where the total expenditure is more than $20 million will require congressional authorization prior to appropriation of funds .

this section authorizes the secretary to carry out the following major medical facility projects in livermore , ca .

these include the construction of the new east bay cboc and all associated site work , utilities , parking , and landscaping ; the construction of the central valley engineering / logistics support facility ; and enhanced flood plain mitigation at the central valley and east bay cbocs .

 ( central valley cboc was authorized and funded in fy2016. ) .

the secretary is required to submit a report listing information about facility projects , including expenditures related to construction management and future amounts budgeted for the above projects , and it is required to do so no later than 90 days after the enactment .

an amount not to exceed $117.3 million is authorized for these projects .

this section requires secretary to publish on the va website , no later than 90 days after enactment , the following information broken down by vamc: the number of actually occupied ( filled ) positions , the number of accessions and separation actions processed during the quarter , the number of vacancies by occupation , and the percentage of new hires who were hired within the time - to - hire target of the office of personnel management .

this information must be updated quarterly on the va's website .

this section stipulates that the secretary may withhold sensitive information , such as that relating to law enforcement and information security , among others .

in addition , the secretary is required to submit an annual report to congress on steps the va is taking to achieve full staffing capacity .

lastly , on a semiannual basis , the oig is required to review the website and provide recommendations .

this section requires the secretary to establish a program to assign not less than two peer specialists to patient - aligned care teams in the va .

the purpose of this program is to promote services in relation to mental health , substance use treatment , and behavioral health in a primary care setting .

the secretary is required to carry out this program in at least 15 vamcs no later than may 31 , 2019 , and by may 31 , 2020 , the peer specialist program is required to be established in at least 30 vamcs .

this section also specifies the selection criteria for selecting vamcs to establish the peer specialists program .

it stipulates that at least 5 of the locations chosen must be polytrauma centers , and at least 10 other locations can be nonpolytrauma centers .

in addition , the secretary must consider the feasibility and advisability of choosing medical centers in rural area , areas that are not in close proximity to an active military installation , and different geographical locations in terms of the census tracts developed by the census bureau .

it also specifies that female veterans' needs be taken into consideration and to make available female peer specialists .

this section also requires the secretary to submit a report to congress on the progress made in establishing the peer specialist program .

when the secretary has carried out the program at the final location , the final report on the program should include recommendations by the secretary in terms of the feasibility and advisability of expanding the program to additional locations .

this section requires the secretary to establish a two - year pilot program to increase the use of medical scribes .

the pilot program must be established in at least 10 vamcs .

four of the pilot sites must be located in rural areas , four must be in urban areas , and two must be in areas in need of increased access or efficiency .

the section also stipulates that the va must hire 20 new medical scribes and enter into contracts with appropriate entities for 20 additional medical scribes .

it also requires that medical scribes be assigned as follows: four medical scribes must be assigned to each of the 10 medical centers , and of those four , two scribes must be assigned to each of two physicians .

in addition , 30% of the medical scribes will be employed in emergency care , while 70% of the medical scribes will be employed in specialty care , specifically those with long patient wait times or low efficiency ratings .

this section also requires the secretary to submit a report on the pilot program to congress 180 days after enactment , and every 180 days thereafter .

the va is also required to conduct an analysis on medical scribes under a contract .

the analysis should include information on provider efficiency , patient satisfaction , average wait time , the number of patients seen per day by each physician or practitioner , and the amount of time required to hire and train an employee to perform medical scribe functions under the pilot program .

the information for the analysis should also include metrics and data for analyzing the effects of the pilot program , including an evaluation of the information above .

in addition , not later than 90 days after the termination of the pilot program , the gao is required to submit a report to congress on the pilot program , including comparisons with the private sector .

in this section , a medical scribe is defined as an unlicensed individual hired to enter information into the electronic health record or chart at the direction of a physician or licensed independent practitioner whose responsibilities include the following: ( a ) assisting the physician or practitioner in navigating the electronic health record ; ( b ) responding to various messages as directed by the physician or practitioner ; and ( c ) entering information into the electronic health record , as directed by the physician or practitioner .

this section extends the authorization period in which fees are charged from certain veterans for obtaining home - loan guarantees from the va .

this section extends the authorization period until september 30 , 2028 , that requires the va pension benefits for veterans and survivors who are residing in medicaid - approved nursing homes to be reduced to $90 per month to september 30 , 2028 .

this section authorizes and appropriates $5.2 billion for the vcf established by vacaa .

the funds would remain until expended without fiscal year limitation .

this section provides that the estimated budgetary effects of the va mission act are not entered on pay - as - you - go ( paygo ) scorecards , thus precluding any possible sequestration as a result of the enactment of this act .

the cbo estimated that the act would increase the deficit by $5.2 billion over six years ( fy2018-fy2023 ) and almost $4.5 billion over 11 years ( fy2018-fy2028 ) .

generally , paygo scorecards record the effects on the budget deficit resulting from legislative changes affecting mandatory spending and revenues .

in particular , a net increase in the deficit on the statutory paygo scorecards at the end of the year would require a sequestration ( i.e. , reduction ) of certain mandatory spending by an equivalent amount .

