historically located between empires , various georgian kingdoms and principalities were incorporated into the russian empire beginning in the early 19 th century .

georgia enjoyed a brief period of independence from 1918 until its forcible incorporation into the union of soviet socialist republics ( ussr , or soviet union ) in 1921-1922 .

georgia gained independence in 1991 with the collapse of the soviet union .

georgia is located in the south caucasus , a region between the black and caspian seas and separated from russia by the greater caucasus mountain range .

the south caucasus also borders iran and turkey ( see figure 1 ) .

georgia's south caucasus neighbors , armenia and azerbaijan , have been locked in territorial conflict for almost three decades over the predominantly armenian - populated region of nagorno - karabakh , formally part of azerbaijan .

georgia has its own unresolved conflicts with two russian - supported regions , abkhazia and south ossetia .

these regions , in addition to being settled by ethnic georgians , are home to ethnic groups that more closely identify with ethnic kin in russia's north caucasus , located across the caucasus mountain range .

after a short war with georgia in 2008 , russia unilaterally recognized the independence of these breakaway regions and stationed military forces on their territory .

georgians speak and write their own distinct caucasian language , with a written literary form that emerged at least as early as the fifth century .

the georgian orthodox church , to which most georgians belong , is autocephalous ( independent ) , with roots that date back to the fourth century .

today , many observers consider georgia to be one of the most democratic states among the ussr's successor states .

the u.s. - based nongovernmental organization ( ngo ) freedom house considers georgia to be the freest post - soviet state ( not including the baltic states ) , followed by ukraine , moldova , and armenia .

georgia has a parliamentary system of governance , resulting from constitutional reforms that came into effect in 2013 and 2018 .

the prime minister is the country's most powerful executive .

georgia's president is commander in chief of the armed forces and has the power to veto legislation and dissolve parliament under certain circumstances .

georgia's prime minister , mamuka bakhtadze ( aged 36 ) , assumed office in june 2018 .

bakhtadze was georgia's minister of finance from november 2017 to june 2018 ; he previously served as the head of georgian railways and the georgian international energy corporation .

georgia's president , elected in november 2018 , is salome zurabishvili ( aged 67 ) , a former member of parliament ( 2016-2018 ) and minister of foreign affairs ( 2004-2005 ) who was previously a french national and diplomat .

the parliamentary chairman is irakli kobakhidze ( aged 40 ) , a former professor of law and politics .

georgia has a unicameral legislature with 150 members elected for four - year terms by two methods: 77 by party list and 73 by majoritarian district .

the most recent parliamentary elections in 2016 resulted in a sizeable win for georgia's center - left ruling party , georgian dream - democratic georgia ( gd ) , which initially led a ruling coalition after coming to power in 2012 and now governs alone .

gd won 49% of the party list vote and nearly all majoritarian races , leading to control of more than 75% of parliamentary seats ( 116 of 150 deputies ) .

before losing this supermajority in february 2019 ( see " ruling party tensions " below ) , gd had enough votes to unilaterally enact changes to georgia's constitution .

this led many observers and opposition supporters to express concern that there were insufficient checks and balances against the ruling party .

gd's main competitor in 2016 was the center - right united national movement ( unm ) , the former ruling party previously led by ex - president mikheil saakashvili .

the unm received 27% of the party vote and 27 seats ( 18% ) .

after months of infighting , the unm fragmented in 2017 , and most of its deputies , including much of the party's senior leadership , formed a new opposition party called european georgia - movement for liberty .

a third electoral bloc , the nationalist - conservative alliance of patriots of georgia - united opposition , cleared the 5% threshold to enter parliament with six seats .

georgia's most recent local elections were in 2017 .

they provided a similar picture of ruling party dominance across the country .

in the party - list portion of the vote to local councils , gd won in all 73 districts , with a total of 56% of the vote .

the unm and european georgia won 27% of the vote ( 17% and 10% , respectively ) .

the nationalist - conservative alliance of patriots won 7% .

gd won more than 92% of majoritarian seats , giving it a total of 77% of seats in local councils nationwide .

gd also won mayoral elections in all but two districts .

for more than two decades , georgia has been recovering from the severe economic decline it experienced after the soviet union collapsed .

it remains a relatively poor country .

in 2018 , georgia's gdp was around $16.7 billion ( approximately 16 times less than that of connecticut , a u.s. state with a similar population size ) .

its per capita gdp ( $4,506 ) is midsized in comparison to russia and other post - soviet states .

in 2017-2018 , georgia's economy appeared to enter a period of relatively strong growth .

after average gdp growth of around 3% a year from 2013 to 2016 , georgia's gdp grew at 4.8% a year in 2017 and 2018 .

increased economic growth has been based on strengthening domestic consumption and external demand , as well as "generally strong policy efforts," according to the international monetary fund ( imf ) .

the imf forecasts a sustained rate of gdp growth of around 4.9% annually from 2019 to 2021 .

in february 2019 , the imf commended georgian authorities "for advancing structural reforms [but] stressed the need for continued efforts to promote inclusive growth and higher economic resilience to external shocks. .

poverty has declined in recent years , although it is still relatively high .

according to official data , 22% of the population lived in poverty in 2017 ( down from 39% a decade before ) .

in recent years , recorded unemployment has been around 14% ; some surveys suggest a higher rate of unemployment .

more than 40% of georgian laborers work in agriculture , a sector of the economy that accounts for less than 10% of gdp .

georgia's economy depends in part on remittances from labor migration .

from 2013 to 2017 , remittances made up around 11% of georgia's gdp .

in 2017 , russia was estimated to be the source of almost 60% of georgian remittances , followed by ukraine ( 8% ) , greece ( 5% ) , and armenia ( 4% ) .

in 2017 , the imf approved a three - year extended fund facility arrangement to provide georgia with around $285 million in loans to support economic reforms focusing , among other things , on financial stability and infrastructure investment .

the imf noted the need for georgia to increase its agricultural productivity , improve its business environment , and reform its education system .

georgia has suffered in the past from energy shortages and gas cutoffs , but it has improved its energy security in recent years .

georgia has rehabilitated hydropower plants and constructed new ones .

nearly all its natural gas supplies come from neighboring azerbaijan .

in 2018 , georgia's three largest merchandise trading partners were turkey ( $1.7 billion , or 14% of georgia's trade ) , russia ( $1.4 billion , 11% ) , azerbaijan ( $1.1 billion , 9% ) , and china ( $1.0 billion , 8% ) .

trade with the european union ( eu ) , as a whole georgia's largest trading partner , made up around 27% of total trade ( $3.4 billion ) .

more than half of georgia's merchandise exports ( 51% ) went to five countries: azerbaijan , russia , armenia , bulgaria , and turkey .

its main exports were copper ores , beverages ( wine , water , and spirits ) , motor vehicles , and iron and steel .

free trade agreements with the eu ( signed in 2014 ) and china ( signed in 2017 ) may improve georgia's prospects for export - led growth .

georgia is also exploring a trade agreement with india .

however , georgia's manufacturing sector is small , and its top exports include used foreign cars and scrap metal , which provide low added value .

the imf indicates that georgia could further diversify its agricultural exports but notes the need to improve quality and standards .

tourism to georgia has increased in recent years and annual tourism - related income has more than quadrupled since 2010 .

in 2018 , the number of international visitors who stayed in the country overnight was around 4.8 million , a 345% increase since 2010 .

most tourists are from neighboring countries: russia , azerbaijan , turkey , and armenia .

in recent years , foreign direct investment ( fdi ) appears to have exceeded the high levels georgia enjoyed in 2006 to 2008 , before the global financial crisis , when fdi averaged $1.5 billion a year .

from 2014 to 2018 , fdi averaged $1.64 billion a year .

more than 60% of the total amount came from azerbaijan , the netherlands , the united kingdom , and turkey .

during this period , most fdi was in transport and communications ( 28% ) ; other leading sectors were finance ( 13% ) , construction ( 13% ) , and energy ( 10% ) .

in 2017 , the imf noted that attracting fdi to sectors with high export potential , including tourism and agriculture , is "crucial to ensure growth in foreign markets. .

georgia aspires to be a key transit hub for the growing east - west overland trade route between china and europe .

in pursuit of this goal , a u.s. - georgian consortium is constructing a major new deepwater port and free industrial zone in anaklia , which is located on georgia's black sea coast and abuts the russian - occupied region of abkhazia .

the port , scheduled to begin operations in 2021 , is considered georgia's largest - ever infrastructure investment and is to be accompanied by major government investments in georgia's road and rail infrastructure .

the georgian government has long made closer integration with the eu and nato a priority .

according to recent polls , over 80% of the georgian population supports membership in the eu and over 75% supports membership in nato .

in 2014 , georgia concluded an association agreement with the eu that included a deep and comprehensive free trade area ( dcfta ) and encouraged harmonization with eu laws and regulations .

the eu granted georgia visa - free travel in 2017 .

the eu also is a major provider of foreign aid to georgia , providing on average over €120 million ( around $135 million ) a year in 2017 and 2018 .

as of 2018 , the benefits of the eu free - trade agreement for georgia remain unclear .

in 2018 , the total value of georgian exports to the eu was 17% greater than in 2014 .

exports to the eu as a share of georgia's total exports , however , were the same in 2018 as they were in 2014 ( 22% ) .

the eu asserts that georgia is "reaping the benefits of economic integration" with the eu but notes that "further efforts are needed to stimulate exports and improve the trade balance. .

georgia has close relations with nato , which considers georgia one of its "closest operational partners. .

a nato - georgia commission , established in 2008 , provides the framework for cooperation .

at its 2014 wales summit , nato leaders established a "substantial nato - georgia package" to help georgia bolster its defense capabilities , including capacity - building , training , exercises , and enhanced interoperability .

in 2015 , georgia joined the nato response force , a rapid reaction force .

georgia is one of the top troop contributors ( and the top non - nato contributor ) in the nato - led resolute support mission in afghanistan .

at its height , georgia's deployment to nato's previous international security assistance force ( isaf ) reached over 1,500 troops , who served with no operational caveats .

as of december 2018 , georgia is the fifth - largest contributor to the resolute support mission , with 870 troops .

georgia also contributed more than 2,250 troops to the nato - led kosovo force , or kfor , between 1999 and 2008 .

in 2015 , nato opened a joint training and evaluation center in georgia to provide training , evaluation , and certification opportunities to enhance interoperability and operational readiness .

the center hosted its second joint nato - georgia exercise in march 2019 ( the first one was held in 2016 ) .

some nato member states also participate in two sets of annual u.s. - georgia military exercises: agile spirit and noble partner ( see " security assistance since the august 2008 war ," below ) .

nato also has established a defense institution building school for professional development and training .

many observers consider that closer integration with the eu and nato has not enabled georgia to improve its near - term prospects for membership in these organizations .

the eu is unlikely to consider georgia a candidate for membership soon , given the eu's internal challenges and a lack of support for enlargement among many members .

in 2008 , nato members agreed that georgia and ukraine would become members of nato , but georgia has not been granted a nato membership action plan ( map ) or other clear path to membership .

many observers attribute georgia's lack of a clear path to nato membership to some members' concerns that georgia's membership could lead to a heightened risk of war with russia , which currently occupies around 18% of georgia's territory .

many believe that nato will not move forward with membership as long as russia occupies georgian territory and the conflict remains unresolved .

georgia's secessionist regions of abkhazia and south ossetia broke away from georgia in the early 1990s , during and after georgia's pursuit of independence from the ussr .

since then , georgia's relations with russia have been difficult , as tbilisi has blamed moscow for obstructing georgia's western leanings .

many observers believe that moscow supports abkhazia and south ossetia to prevent georgia from joining nato .

georgia's relations with russia worsened after ex - president saakashvili came to power in 2003 and sought to accelerate georgia's integration with the west .

after clashes increased between georgian and secessionist forces , russia invaded georgia in august 2008 to prevent georgia from reestablishing control over south ossetia .

russia subsequently recognized abkhazia and south ossetia as independent states .

over the last decade , russia has tightened control over abkhazia and south ossetia .

it has constructed border fencing and imposed transit restrictions across the administrative boundary lines dividing the two regions from the rest of georgia .

russia has established military bases that reportedly house around 3,500 personnel each , and it also stations border guards in the two regions .

in 2016 , russia finalized an agreement with the de facto authorities of abkhazia , establishing a combined group of military forces .

in 2017 , russia concluded an agreement with south ossetia to integrate the breakaway region's military forces with its own .

since coming to power in 2012 , the gd government has sought to improve relations with russia , particularly economic ties .

in 2013 , moscow lifted an embargo on popular georgian exports ( including wine and mineral water ) that had been in place since 2006 .

as a result , russia again became one of georgia's main trading partners .

the share of georgia's merchandise exports to russia as a percentage of its total exports rose from 2% in 2012 to 13% in 2018 .

improved economic relations with russia have not led to progress in resolving the conflicts over abkhazia and south ossetia .

the eu leads an unarmed civilian monitoring mission in georgia ( eumm ) that monitors compliance with the cease - fire agreements that ended the august 2008 war .

although the eumm's mandate covers all of georgia , local and russian authorities do not permit it to operate in abkhazia and south ossetia ; eumm representatives have been allowed to cross the boundary line on a few occasions to address specific issues .

all parties to the conflict , together with the united states , the eu , the united nations ( u.n. ) , and the organization for security and cooperation in europe ( osce ) , participate in the geneva international discussions , convened quarterly to address issues related to the conflict .

they also participate in joint incident prevention and response mechanisms ( iprm ) , together with the u.n. and osce , designed to address local security issues and build confidence .

abkhaz and south ossetian representatives periodically have suspended their participation in the iprm , however ; the iprm for abkhazia did not convene at all from 2012 to 2016 .

in general , efforts to rebuild ties across conflict lines or return internally displaced persons have made little progress .

in 2018 , the georgian government unveiled a peace initiative and enacted related legislative amendments to facilitate greater engagement with abkhazia and south ossetia in trade and educational affairs .

the united states and the eu have expressed support for this initiative .

whether russia and the two regions will accept any of the initiative's elements remains to be seen .

improved relations with russia do not appear to have led to greater public support in georgia for closer integration with russia .

several overtly pro - russian parties performed poorly in the 2016 parliamentary elections .

one electoral bloc critical of georgia's european integration , the nationalist - conservative alliance of patriots , cleared the 5% threshold to enter parliament , but even this bloc's leadership did not campaign for membership in the russia - led eurasian union .

in a 2018 survey , less than 30% of respondents expressed support for joining the eurasian union .

georgia is one of the united states' closest partners among the post - soviet states .

with a history of strong economic aid and security cooperation , the united states and georgia have deepened their strategic partnership since russia's 2008 invasion of georgia and 2014 invasion of ukraine .

a u.s. - georgia charter on strategic partnership , signed in 2009 , provides the framework for much of the two countries' bilateral engagement .

a strategic partnership commission convenes annual plenary sessions and working groups to address political , economic , security , and people - to - people issues .

before the 2008 war , the united states supported granting georgia a nato membership action plan and backed nato's april 2008 pledge that georgia eventually would become a member of nato .

in august 2017 , u.s. vice president michael pence said in tbilisi that the trump administration "stand[s] by the 2008 nato bucharest statement , which made it clear that georgia will one day become a member of nato. .

at a press conference after the july 2018 nato summit in brussels , president trump said that "at a certain point [georgia will] have a chance" to join nato , if "not right now. .

u.s. policy expressly supports georgia's sovereignty and territorial integrity .

in a visit to tbilisi in august 2017 , vice president michael pence said the united states "strongly condemns russia's occupation on georgia's soil. .

in january 2018 , the state department indicated that "the united states' position on abkhazia and south ossetia is unwavering: the united states fully supports georgia's territorial integrity within its internationally recognized borders. .

the united states supports a resolution to the conflict within these parameters .

the united states calls on russia to comply with the terms of the 2008 cease - fire agreement , including withdrawal of its forces to prewar positions , and to reverse its recognition of abkhazia and south ossetia as independent states .

the u.s. government has expressed support for georgia's "commitment to dialogue and a peaceful resolution to the conflict," and in 2018 the state department welcomed the new peace initiative that the government of georgia unveiled .

the state department regularly participates in the geneva international discussions .

congress also has expressed firm support for georgia's sovereignty and territorial integrity .

the countering russian influence in europe and eurasia act of 2017 ( p.l .

115-44 , title ii , §253 ) states that the united states "supports the policy known as the 'stimson doctrine' and thus does not recognize territorial changes effected by force , including the illegal invasions and occupations" of abkhazia and south ossetia , and other territories occupied by russia .

as with previous appropriations , fy2019 foreign operations appropriations prohibit foreign assistance to governments that recognize abkhazia or south ossetia and restrict funds from supporting russia's occupation of abkhazia and south ossetia ( p.l .

116-6 , §7047 ( c ) ) .

the 2014 ukraine freedom support act ( p.l .

113-272 ) provides for sanctions against russian entities that transfer weapons to georgian territory .

in february 2019 , the georgia support act ( h.r .

598 ) was reintroduced in the house .

the act originally passed the house by unanimous consent in december 2018 , during the 115 th congress .

the act would express support for georgia's sovereignty , independence , and territorial integrity , as well as for its democratic development , euro - atlantic and european integration , and peaceful conflict resolution .

the act would require the secretary of state to submit to congress reports on u.s. security assistance to georgia , u.s. - georgia cybersecurity cooperation , and a strategy to enhance georgia's capabilities to combat russian disinformation and propaganda .

the act also would require the president to impose sanctions on those responsible for serious human rights abuses in abkhazia and south ossetia .

many members of congress have expressed their support for georgia in house and senate resolutions .

in september 2016 , during the 114 th congress , the house of representatives passed h.res .

660 , which expressed support for georgia's territorial integrity , in a 410-6 vote .

the resolution condemned russia's military intervention and occupation , called upon russia to withdraw its recognition of abkhazia and south ossetia as independent states , and urged the u.s. government to declare unequivocally that the united states will not recognize russia's de jure or de facto sovereignty over any part of georgia under any circumstances .

in january 2019 , a resolution ( h.res .

93 ) was reintroduced in the house supporting georgia's territorial integrity and condemning a decision by the syrian government to recognize abkhazia and south ossetia as independent states .

the senate and house have passed other resolutions in support of georgian sovereignty and territorial integrity: in 2011-2012 ( s.res .

175 , h.res .

526 ) , in september 2008 ( s.res .

690 ) , and , before the conflict , in may - june 2008 ( h.res .

1166 , s.res .

550 ) and december 2007 ( s.res .

391 ) .

georgia has long been a leading recipient of u.s. foreign and military aid in europe and eurasia .

in the 1990s ( fy1992-fy2000 ) , the u.s. government provided over $860 million in total aid to georgia ( $96 million a year on average ) .

in the later part of the decade , the united states began to provide georgia with increased amounts of aid to improve border and maritime security and to combat transnational crime , including through the development of georgia's coast guard .

in the 2000s , georgia became the largest per capita recipient of u.s. aid in europe and eurasia .

from fy2001 to fy2007 , total aid to georgia amounted to over $945 million ( $135 million a year , on average ) .

in 2005 , georgia also was awarded an initial five - year ( 2006-2011 ) $295 million grant from the u.s. millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) for road , pipeline , and municipal infrastructure rehabilitation , as well as for agribusiness development .

the united states gave increased amounts of military aid to georgia after the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 .

at the time , the george w. bush administration considered georgia part of a "second stage" in the "war on terror," together with yemen and the philippines , and supported georgia with a two - year train and equip program .

this program was followed by a sustainment and stability operations program through 2007 that supported a georgian troop deployment to operation iraqi freedom .

after russia invaded georgia in august 2008 , the united states substantially increased its assistance to georgia .

the u.s. government immediately provided over $38 million in humanitarian aid and emergency relief , using u.s. aircraft and naval and coast guard ships .

in september 2008 , then - secretary of state condoleezza rice announced a total aid package worth at least $1 billion .

total u.s. assistance to georgia for fy2008-fy2009 amounted to $1.04 billion , which included $250 million in direct budgetary support and an additional $100 million in mcc funds ( taking the total amount of georgia's initial mcc grant to $395 million ) .

since the 2008 war , georgia has continued to be a major recipient of u.s. foreign aid in the europe and eurasia region .

nonmilitary aid totaled $60 million a year on average from fy2010 to fy2017 .

in addition , georgia was awarded a second five - year ( 2014-2019 ) mcc grant of $140 million to support educational infrastructure and training , and to improve the study of science and technology .

in fy2018 , u.s. nonmilitary aid to georgia totaled $70.8 million .

for fy2019 , congress appropriated $89.8 million in nonmilitary aid .

the president's fy2020 nonmilitary aid request for georgia is $42.4 million .

after the 2008 war , georgia continued to receive u.s. military assistance , including around $144 million in postwar security and stabilization assistance in fy2008-fy2009 .

since fy2010 , georgia has received further military assistance , primarily through foreign military financing ( fmf ) aid , coalition support funds , and train and equip and other capacity - building programs .

these funds have been used to support georgia's deployments to afghanistan in isaf and the follow - on resolute support mission , as well as for georgian border security , counterterrorism , and defense readiness .

u.s. military assistance to georgia in fy2010-fy2017 is estimated to have been around $74 million a year on average .

for fy2018 , military aid to georgia is estimated to have totaled $40.4 million .

this includes $35 million in fmf assistance , $2 million in international military education and training ( imet ) , and $3.4 million for counter - weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) capacity - building assistance .

for fy2019 , congress again appropriated $35 million in fmf and $2 million in imet funds .

additional defense funding includes $4.3 million in maritime capacity - building assistance and $2.5 million in counter - wmd capacity - building assistance .

outside of afghanistan , the united states has gradually deepened its postwar defense cooperation with georgia .

the obama administration refrained from approving defensive ( anti - tank and antiaircraft ) arms sales to georgia .

observers considered various reasons for this hesitation , including doubts regarding the deterrent effect of such weapons , concerns about encouraging potential georgian offensives to retake territory , and a desire to avoid worsening relations with russia as the administration embarked on a new "reset" policy with moscow .

in testimony to the senate foreign relations committee a year after russia's invasion , then - assistant secretary of defense alexander vershbow characterized u.s. defense cooperation with georgia as "a methodical , yet patient , strategic approach … [focused] on building defense institutions , assisting defense sector reform , and building the strategic and educational foundations" for training and reform .

he said the united states was "carefully examining each step [of its military assistance program] to ensure it would not be counterproductive to our goals of promoting peace and stability in the region. .

u.s. - georgia defense cooperation deepened over time .

in a 2012 visit to georgia , then - secretary of state hillary clinton said that increased cooperation would help improve georgia's self - defense capabilities , promote defense reform and modernization , and provide training and equipment to support georgia's isaf deployment and nato interoperability .

u.s. - georgia security cooperation expanded further in 2016 .

in july 2016 , then - u.s. secretary of state john kerry and then - georgian prime minister giorgi kvirikashvili signed a memorandum on deepening the defense and security relationship between the united states and georgia .

in december 2016 , the two countries concluded a three - year framework agreement on security cooperation that would focus on "improving georgia's defense capabilities , establishing [an] effective and sustainable system of defense , enhancing interoperability of the georgian armed forces with nato , and ensuring effective military management. .

the framework agreement led to the launching in february 2017 of a three - year , $35 million training initiative , the georgia defense readiness program .

this initiative seeks to build the capacity of georgia's armed forces "to generate , train and sustain forces in preparation for all national missions. .

unlike the obama administration , the trump administration approved the provision of major defensive lethal weaponry to georgia .

in november 2017 , the u.s. state department approved a foreign military sale of over 400 javelin portable anti - tank missiles , as well as launchers , associated equipment , and training , at a total estimated cost of $75 million .

the georgian ministry of defense confirmed that the "first stage" of two sales was complete as of january 2018 .

in june 2018 , then - u.s. assistant secretary of state for european and eurasian affairs wess mitchell said the united states seeks to "check russian aggression," including by "building up the means of self - defense for those states most directly threatened by russia militarily: ukraine and georgia. .

the united states and georgia have held annual joint military exercises in georgia since 2011 .

initial exercises , dubbed agile spirit , began as a counterinsurgency and peacekeeping operations training exercise and shifted to a "conventional warfare focus" in 2015 , the year after russia's invasion of ukraine .

that year , agile spirit began to include other nato partners .

a second bilateral exercise , noble partner , was launched in 2015 ; the department of defense characterized it as the "most robust" u.s. - georgia exercise ever , designed to support georgia's integration into the nato response force .

in 2018 , the united states was georgia's seventh - largest source of merchandise imports and eighth - largest destination for exports .

the value of georgia's merchandise imports from the united states — mainly vehicles , industrial machinery , and meat — was $360 million in 2018 .

the value of merchandise exports to the united states — mainly iron and steel and inorganic chemicals — was $160 million in 2018 .

since 2012 , the united states and georgia periodically have discussed the possibility of a free - trade agreement .

the two countries have signed a bilateral investment treaty and a trade and investment framework agreement .

they also have established a high - level dialogue on trade and investment .

during vice president michael pence's august 2017 visit to georgia , he expressed the united states' "keen interest in expanding our trade and investment relationship with georgia. .

