quite commonly , reports on elementary and secondary school teachers begin with the rather obvious notion that the quality of instruction is critical to student learning .

decades of federal policymaking have been built on the premise that good pre - service preparation is an effective route to quality teaching and , ultimately , improved educational outcomes .

current policy continues this approach through provisions in title ii , part a of the higher education act of 1965 ( hea , p.l .

89-329 , as amended ) .

hea title ii - a includes financial support and accountability provisions intended to improve programs that prepare teachers before they reach the classroom .

title ii - a consists of two major components: ( 1 ) a competitive grant program that supports certain reforms in a small number of programs that prepare prospective teachers , and ( 2 ) reporting and accountability provisions that require states to track and report on the quality of all teacher preparation programs within their jurisdiction .

the 115 th congress has already taken steps to consider a reauthorization of the hea .

one comprehensive reauthorization bill , h.r .

4508 , which was ordered reported by the house committee on education and the workforce on february 8 , 2018 , would repeal all provisions in title ii .

another comprehensive reauthorization bill introduced by the committee's ranking minority member ( h.r .

6543 ) would amend and extend title ii .

the authorization of appropriations for title ii - a expired at the end of fy2011 and were extended for an additional fiscal year under the general education provisions act .

along with many hea programs whose authorizations have lapsed , title ii - a authorities have continued to be funded under a variety of appropriations legislation and continuing resolutions ; most recently under p.l .

115-245 , which provides full - year fy2019 appropriations for the department of education ( ed ) , among other agencies .

congressional action to reauthorize the hea may continue going forward .

this report provides a description of current programs and provisions in title ii - a and identifies a number of the key issues that may be part of the debate over the reauthorization of the hea .

the report begins with a discussion of the broader context within which this conversation might occur .

historically , pre - service teacher preparation in the united states has mainly occurred at institutions of higher education ( ihes ) .

thus , the federal effort in supporting such preparation has largely focused on traditional programs and schools of education housed in ihes .

the recent rise of alternative approaches to traditional teacher preparation programs has presented new challenges to long - standing federal policy in this area , particularly where accountability for program quality is concerned .

title ii - a of the hea has two components: ( 1 ) a competitive grant program that provides funds to support the types of programs that congress has identified as models to be replicated , and ( 2 ) reporting and accountability provisions that require the reporting of data on program characteristics , state standards for teacher licensing and certification , and information on the quality of teacher preparation .

on february 8 , 2018 , the house committee on education and the workforce ordered reported the promoting real opportunity , success , and prosperity through education reform act ( h.r .

4508 ) .

approved on a party - line vote , h.r .

4508 would make numerous amendments to the hea , including the repeal of all current provisions in title ii .

the ranking member of the committee introduced the aim higher act ( h.r .

6543 ) on july 26 , 2018 .

h.r .

6543 is also a comprehensive hea reauthorization bill .

it would retain and make amendments to current title ii provisions .

these amendments include ( 1 ) changes to the tqp program ( eg , residencies would be for teachers or principals and grantees would be able to receive a second grant as long as the award's use does not mirror that of the first grant ) ; ( 2 ) expansion of accountability provisions for institutions ( eg , report cards would have to be submitted by any preparation entity ( not just ihes ) that receives any federal funds — not just hea funds ) ; ( 3 ) changes to accountability for states ( eg , criteria for designation of low - performing and at - risk programs would have to be developed with stakeholders ) ; and ( 4 ) expansion of accountability for states ( eg , report cards would have to be submitted by states in order to receive funds under hea and esea title ii ; current law only refers to hea funds ) .

during the 115 th congress , the senate committee on health , education , labor and pensions has held several hearings on hea reauthorization , but has yet to introduce a bill that would amend title ii .

on march 27 , 2017 , the president signed a resolution of congressional disapproval ( p.l .

115-14 ) nullifying regulations that had been issued in october 2016 .

the new regulations would have retained current reporting and accountability requirements and added three main elements: ( 1 ) clearer guidance on what constitutes a provider versus a program , ( 2 ) new post - program completion measures , and ( 3 ) additional penalties for poor performance .

congress may continue to consider legislation that would reauthorize the hea , including the provisions in title ii .

some of the issues that may receive consideration during this process include the following: the appropriate role for the federal government to play in supporting innovations and reforms for teacher preparation programs ; the optimal mix of tqp authorized activities such as support for clinical practice , induction , mentoring , and pre - service assessment ; and the extent to which current reporting and accountability provisions encourage program quality .

some argue that the current federal role in supporting teacher preparation is far too limited and that the current tqp program primarily amounts to supporting demonstration projects .

this perspective asserts that a lot is known about what good teacher preparation looks like and that the federal role should be greatly expanded to support quality programs broadly .

on the other hand , others argue that responsibility for teacher training should remain a state , local , and training institution endeavor and that the federal government should have no role in the support of standards for teacher preparation .

in between these views , there is debate over the optimal mix of activities currently supported under the tqp program .

those who favor traditional routes to teaching would often like to see greater support for enhancements to those programs , including support for supervised clinical practice and assessments that must be passed prior to becoming a teacher .

those favoring alternative routes often want fewer restrictions on tqp partners ( i.e. , allowing nonprofit organizations to serve as primary , not just supplemental , partners ) and want more emphasis placed in the tqp program on in - service supports such as induction and mentoring for teachers .

some argue for the expansion of federal policy around program quality and that current reporting and accountability provisions do not adequately hold teacher preparation programs to high standards .

they cite as evidence the fact that less than 3% of programs have been identified as being low - performing and that three - fifths of the states have never identified a program in this manner .

some of those in favor of greater accountability want to see program evaluations based on outcome measures that are ultimately tied to student performance .

on the other hand , others maintain that such accountability requirements should not be instituted at the federal level and that current reporting requirements already pose an unnecessary burden on state and local administrators .

