t he agriculture appropriations bill — formally called the agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies appropriations act — funds all of the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , excluding the u.s. forest service .

congress passed the fy2018 consolidated appropriations act on march 23 , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) .

fy2019 began with seven appropriations bills , including usda , unfinished .

the house and senate appropriations committees reported agriculture appropriations bills for fy2019 ( h.r .

5961 , s. 2976 ) , with the senate having amended and passed its version as division c of a four - bill minibus ( h.r .

6147 ) .

congress and the president approved continuing resolutions to fund the affected federal agencies through december 21 , 2018 , at the fy2018 level ( p.l .

115-245 and p.l .

115-298 ) .

after december 21 , 2018 , a partial shutdown of the government , including many agencies within usda , occurred .

one of the few exceptions was the natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) , which was able to operate on mandatory and carryover funds during the majority of the shutdown .

on january 25 , 2019 , an agreement was reached to continue funding for usda and other appropriations that had lapsed through february 15 , at the fy2018 level ( p.l .

116-5 ) .

the fy2019 consolidated appropriations act was signed into law on february 15 , 2019 , funding usda through the end of the fiscal year ( division b , p.l .

116-6 ) .

this report provides a brief overview of the conservation - related provisions in the fy2018 and fy2019 agriculture appropriations acts .

for a general analysis of the fy2018 appropriations for agriculture , see crs report r45128 , agriculture and related agencies: fy2018 appropriations , and for fy2019 , see crs report r45230 , agriculture and related agencies: fy2019 appropriations .

usda administers a number of agricultural conservation programs that assist private landowners with natural resource concerns .

these include working land programs , land retirement and easement programs , watershed programs , technical assistance , and other programs .

the two lead agricultural conservation agencies within usda are the natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) , which provides technical assistance and administers most conservation programs , and the farm service agency ( fsa ) , which administers the conservation reserve program ( crp ) .

most conservation program funding is mandatory , obtained through the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) and authorized in omnibus farm bills ( about $5.3 billion of ccc funds for conservation in fy2018 ) .

other conservation programs — mostly technical assistance — are discretionary spending and are funded through annual appropriations ( about $1 billion annually ) .

for the first time since fy2002 , the fy2018 agriculture appropriations act did not include reductions to mandatory conservation programs .

it did , however , include legislative changes that affect farm bill programs and watershed programs .

similarly , the fy2019 appropriations act did not include reductions to mandatory conservation programs ; however , the enacted 2018 farm bill ( agriculture improvement act , p.l .

115-334 ) reauthorized and amended funding for many of the mandatory conservation programs .

the fy2018 appropriations act included a slight increase from fy2017 levels for discretionary conservation programs .

the fy2019 appropriations act included a decrease from fy2018 levels for discretionary conservation programs and redirected funding to the new farm production and conservation business center ( see table 1 and figure 1 ) .

in fy2019 , a 34-day funding gap lasted from december 22 , 2018 , through january 25 , 2019 .

it affected agencies funded by 7 of the 12 appropriations bills , including agriculture appropriations .

in general , a shutdown results in the furlough of many personnel and curtailment of affected agency activities and services .

exceptions may allow certain activities to continue , such as for law enforcement , protection of human life or property , and activities funded by other means such as carryover funds or user fees .

agencies make their own determinations about activities and personnel that are "excepted" from furlough and publish their intentions in "contingency plans" that are supervised by the office of management and budget ( omb ) .

usda published contingency plans for each agency , including nrcs .

usda initially estimated on december 23 , 2018 , that 61% of its employees were excepted from furlough in the agencies that are funded by agriculture appropriations ( all of usda except the forest service ) , which amounts to 37,860 staff being excepted out of 62,288 .

the number of excepted and furloughed personnel varied by agency .

as previously discussed , nrcs funds technical assistance and related agency staff through both mandatory and discretionary accounts .

as such , nrcs was initially able to claim as excepted 100% of its 9,342 staff using mandatory conservation program funding authorized through the farm bill ( and therefore not affected by the lapse in discretionary appropriations ) , and discretionary carryover funding from prior fiscal years .

as the shutdown continued , however , nrcs announced its intention to furlough some employees beginning on february 3 , 2019 , to conserve carryover balances and focus excepted staff on mandatory farm bill conservation program implementation .

this plan was not implemented because the shutdown ended on january 25 , 2019 .

generally , congress employs two separate types of legislative measures — authorizations and appropriations .

authorization acts establish , continue , or modify agencies or programs .

appropriations acts generally provide discretionary funding for authorized agencies and programs .

while this practice is infrequent and subject to various procedural rules and limitations , the agriculture appropriations bill may serve as a vehicle for amendments to authorized programs that permanently alter or create programs .

these amendments generally have the force of law by amending the u.s. code or by creating a permanent authorization .

this is different from policy - related provisions ( discussed in the " policy - related provisions " section ) , which generally direct how the executive branch should carry out the appropriations and whose effect is typically limited to the current fiscal year .

in some cases , the 2018 farm bill further amended the conservation programs that were amended in the fy2018 appropriations act .

where relevant , these amendments are noted ; however , the focus is on amendments made in appropriations acts .

in addition to setting budgetary amounts , the agriculture appropriations bill may also include policy - related provisions that direct how the executive branch should carry out an appropriation .

these provisions may have the force of law if they are included in the text of an appropriations act , but their effect is generally limited to the current fiscal year ( see table 3 ) .

unlike the aforementioned authorization amendments that may be included in appropriations acts , policy - related provisions generally do not amend the u.s. code or have long - standing effects .

for example , the wfpo program has historically been called the "small watershed program," because no project may exceed 250,000 acres , and no structure may exceed more than 12,500 acre - feet of floodwater detention capacity or 25,000 acre - feet of total capacity .

the fy2018 and fy2019 enacted appropriations also include a policy provision that waives the 250,000-acre project limit when the project's primary purpose is something other than flood prevention .

this provision does not amend the wfpo authorization and therefore is effective only for the funds provided during the appropriation year .

table 3 compares some of the policy provisions that have been identified in the farm production and conservation programs ( title ii ) and general provisions ( title vii ) titles of the fy2018 and fy2019 agriculture appropriations bills related to conservation .

many of these provisions were also included in past years' appropriations laws .

the explanatory statement that accompanies the final appropriation — and the house and senate report language that accompanies the committee - reported bills — may also provide policy instructions .

these documents do not have the force of law but often explain congressional intent , which the agencies are expected to follow ( see table 4 ) .

the committee reports and explanatory statement may need to be read together to capture all of the congressional intent for a given fiscal year .

table 4 compares some of the policy provisions that have been identified in the fy2018 and fy2019 agriculture appropriations reported language related to conservation .

the fy2018 enacted report language column includes references to the house ( h ) and senate ( s ) report language , as well as the enacted ( e ) explanatory statement .

the fy2019 enacted report language column includes references to the house ( h ) and senate ( s ) report language , and the enacted ( e ) conference report .

the inclusion of all three reports better captures congressional intent for each fiscal year .

many of these provisions have been included in past years' appropriations laws .

some provisions in report language and bill text address conservation programs not authorized or funded within the annual appropriation ( i.e. , mandatory spending for farm - bill - authorized programs ) .

