the department of the interior ( doi ) is a federal executive department responsible for the conservation and use of roughly three - quarters of u.s. public lands .

doi defines its mission as to protect and manage the nation's natural resources and cultural heritage for the benefit of the american people ; to provide scientific and scholarly information about those resources and natural hazards ; and to exercise the country's trust responsibilities and special commitments to american indians , alaska natives , and island territories under u.s. administration .

initially conceived as a "home department" in 1849 to oversee a broad array of internal affairs , doi has evolved to become the nation's principal land management agency , charged with administering the use of more than 480 million acres of public lands , 700 million acres of subsurface minerals , and 1.7 billion acres of the outer continental shelf ( ocs ) .

as is the case for many federal departments , doi's organizational structure and functions are under continual congressional examination as part of congress's lawmaking and oversight functions .

similarly , doi's executive branch structure and operations are also the subject of administrative scrutiny .

over the course of the department's roughly 170-year history , doi has evolved in response to the needs of the nation and at the behest of congress and the president ( see figure 1 for a timeline of selected events that influenced the current structure of the department ) .

some of these changes have been relatively broad in nature , such as the creation of a new agency or regulatory body .

other shifts have been smaller in scope , such as modifications to interagency processes or reorganizations in how resources or responsibilities are distributed among offices or programs .

doi reorganization proposals put forth by the trump administration have renewed attention to the structural relationship between the department's various bureaus and their regulatory responsibilities .

in march 2017 , president trump signed an executive order calling on agency leaders to , "if appropriate," submit a proposed reorganization plan for their agencies to the director of the office of management and budget within 180 days .

in september 2017 , then - secretary of the interior ryan zinke issued a reorganization proposal for doi in response to this order .

in june 2018 , president trump issued a more expansive government - wide reorganization proposal , which included further recommendations and proposals affecting the structure of doi .

in addition to these broader proposals , smaller interagency administrative changes either took effect in fy2019 or are proposed for fy2019 implementation , including the transfer and consolidation of several department offices and programs .

this report is a primer to understanding the organizational framework under which doi operates , while providing context for how ongoing and proposed reorganizations might affect these operations .

the report provides a timeline of congressional and executive actions that have shaped the structure and function of doi since its establishment .

it also offers a brief summary of doi's history , mission , and current structure , as well as an overview of the primary functions of its multiple bureaus and offices as of december 2018 .

employment figures and corresponding maps illustrate the varying regional office structures among doi bureaus , as they exist currently .

in addition , the report includes an overview of the annual funding and appropriations process for the department .

although the report provides a broad summary of the proposed reorganization efforts under way or in effect as of december 2018 , it does not offer a detailed analysis of these plans or their potential impact on doi's structure and function .

a list of crs experts for the issue areas covered by doi and its bureaus is at the end of the report .

in general , this report contains the most recently available data and estimates as of december 2018 .

prior to the establishment of doi in 1849 , congress apportioned domestic affairs in the united states across the three original executive departments: department of state , department of war ( now department of defense ) , and department of the treasury .

the department of state housed the nation's patent office , and the department of war housed the office of indian affairs and the pension office , which at the time administered pensions solely for military personnel .

meanwhile , the general land office ( glo ) , which oversaw and disposed of the public domain , was placed by congress within the department of the treasury because of the revenue generated by the glo from land sales .

by the 1840s , the growing federal estate acquired through the louisiana purchase , the mexican - american war , and the newly negotiated oregon territory placed an increasing burden on the departments and their leadership .

in 1848 , then - secretary of the treasury robert j. walker submitted to congress a proposal that would bring together glo , the office of indian affairs , and several other disparate offices and functions under a single , separate executive department .

congress officially established the department of the interior on march 3 , 1849 .

in addition to absorbing the functions of the patent office , the office of indian affairs , pension office , and glo , the newly established doi assumed responsibility for a wide range of other domestic matters .

as part of doi's organic legislation , congress conferred on the secretary of the interior the "supervisory and appellate powers" held by the president over the commissioner of public buildings , as well as oversight responsibility for both the u.s. census and the penitentiary of the district of columbia .

over time , congress further expanded the department's functions to include the construction of the national capital's water system , the colonization of freed slaves in haiti , water pollution control , and the regulation of interstate commerce .

most of these early activities eventually were transferred from doi's charge as congress began to authorize and create new executive departments and independent agencies to handle this growing list of responsibilities .

now , doi has evolved to focus primarily on protecting and managing natural resources , conducting scientific research , and exercising the nation's trust responsibilities to american indians , alaska natives , and affiliated island communities .

as of june 2018 , the total number of employees working for doi was 69,563 , according to opm ( see table 1 ) .

the data reflect "on - board employment" figures , which calculate the number of employees in pay status at the end of the quarter .

data are published on a quarterly basis ( march , june , september , and december ) ; however , figures for september and december 2018 were not available prior to the publication of this report .

because opm data include full - time , part - time , and seasonal staff , employment totals tend to spike during the summer months , when agencies such as nps , blm , and fws increase their seasonal workforce .

opm figures differ from doi budget office data .

the doi budget office calculates employment by full - time equivalents ( ftes ) , defined as the total number of regular straight - time hours ( not including overtime or holiday hours ) worked by employees , divided by the number of compensable hours applicable to each fiscal year .

the opm fedscope data presented in table 1 are available by location of employment for each bureau and office reflected .

table 2 shows doi employment figures both within and outside the dc core - based statistical area ( cbsa ) .

opm defines a cbsa as "a geographic area having at least one urban area of population , plus adjacent territory that has a high degree of social and economic integration with the core as measured by commuting ties. .

cbsas differ from metropolitan statistical areas ( msas ) — a separate statistical definition also reported on by opm — which typically encompass a smaller geographic area than cbsas .

for example , the dc msa includes many but not all of the counties and surrounding cities covered under the dc cbsa .

for instance , the dc msa excludes reston , va , where the headquarters of usgs is located .

discretionary funding for doi is provided primarily through title i of the annual interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill .

the bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) and the central utah project are the exceptions , as they receive funding through the energy and water development appropriations bill .

several of the agencies that receive discretionary funds through these two appropriations bills also receive mandatory funding under various authorizing statutes .

executive branch reorganization efforts are an ongoing area of congressional interest and scrutiny as part of congress's lawmaking and oversight functions .

congress uses a variety of tools — including authorizing legislation , appropriations legislation , and oversight activities — to shape and organize the executive branch and its agencies .

several changes to doi and its organizational structure have taken effect starting in fy2019 .

congress previously authorized and approved some of these changes and proposals in the form of appropriations and / or authorizing legislation .

other changes — including broader reorganization proposals put forth by the trump administration — have been proposed for fy2019 but are not in effect .

the 115 th congress approved several internal office transfers and realignments .

for instance , congress transferred appropriations for the office of natural resources revenue ( onrr ) from doi's office of the secretary to department - wide programs for fy2018 .

meanwhile , the 2019 interior budget in brief reflects the transfer of both doi's oceans program and the office of international affairs from the office of the assistant secretary , policy , management and budget to the office of the assistant secretary , insular and international affairs .

the 114 th congress passed legislation authorizing the reorganization of the office of the special trustee for american indians ( ost ) .

in 2016 , itara directed the secretary to — among other things — "ensure that appraisals and valuations of indian trust property are administered by a single bureau , agency , or other administrative entity within the department" not later than 18 months after enactment .

to comply with this requirement , the fy2019 budget request reflects the approved transfer of the office of appraisal services within ost to the office of the secretary's appraisal and valuation services office , thereby consolidating all appraisal activities within a single entity .

this change is in addition to a proposed shift in the reporting relationship of ost also included in the fy2019 request .

under this proposal , starting in fy2019 , ost would report through the office of the assistant secretary of indian affairs rather than directly to the office of the secretary ( see figure 2 ) .

as noted in the " introduction " to this report , the trump administration also proposed additional , broader doi reorganizational plans for consideration .

on march 13 , 2017 , president trump issued executive order 13781 to "improve the efficiency , effectiveness , and accountability of the executive branch. .

the order required executive agency heads to , "if appropriate," submit a proposed reorganization plan for their agencies to the director of the office of management and budget within 180 days .

then - secretary of the interior zinke subsequently submitted a proposal for reorganization aimed at — among other goals — improving agency coordination and service to the public .

included in this proposal is a plan to consolidate the various agency - specific regional boundaries ( as seen in the "at a glance" boxes included in each bureau summary ) into 12 unified regional boundaries .

in addition , the plan looks to shift some resources and authority "to the field," potentially in the form of staff , budget , and / or facilities .

president trump issued a separate set of reorganization recommendations in june 2018 as part of the delivering government solutions in the 21 st century report .

two proposals in particular would affect doi and its structure .

the first would consolidate most of the u.s. army corps of engineers' ( usace's ) civil works division within doi , including usace's activities related to flood and storm damage reduction and aquatic ecosystem restoration .

the second recommendation would transfer noaa's national marine fisheries service from the department of commerce to doi and merge it with the fws .

this proposal would consolidate administration of the esa and other wildlife laws under one agency .

the transfers and reorganization proposals discussed here illustrate the potential changes in the structure of doi and its operations .

they also provide insight into areas of possible congressional and executive branch interest moving forward .

the 116 th congress may consider additional oversight of these proposals and / or propose new initiatives and plans for the organization and administration of doi and its bureaus .

