members of congress may address numerous ongoing and new policy issues in the 116 th congress .

the changing dynamics and composition of international trade and finance can affect the overall health of the u.s. economy , the success of u.s. businesses and workers , and the u.s. standard of living .

they also have implications for u.s. geopolitical interests .

conversely , geopolitical tensions , risks , and opportunities can have major impacts on international trade and finance .

these issues are complex and at times controversial , and developments in the global economy often make policymaking more challenging .

congress is in a unique position to address these and other issues given its constitutional authority for legislating and overseeing international commerce .

the major focus of the 115 th congress was overseeing the trump administration's evolving trade policy .

the trump administration's approach to international trade arguably represents a significant shift from the approaches of prior administrations , in that it questions the benefits of u.s. leadership in the rules - based global trading system and expresses concern over the potential limits that this system may place on u.s. sovereignty .

as such , the administration's withdrawal from the proposed trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) , imposition of unilateral trade restrictions on various u.s. imports , renegotiation of the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , modification of certain provisions in the u.s. - south korea ( korus ) free trade agreement ( fta ) , and launch of an extensive review of u.s. participation in the world trade organization ( wto ) were among the most notable developments in u.s. trade policy in the past two years .

other issues before congress included approving legislation to ( 1 ) strengthen the process used to review the national security implications of foreign direct investment transactions in the united states ; ( 2 ) modernize u.s. development finance tools to help advance u.s. national security and economic interests and global influence ; and ( 3 ) provide temporary tariff suspensions and reductions — through miscellaneous tariff bills — on certain products not available domestically .

continued focus on economic sanctions against russia , north korea , iran , cuba , and other countries were also of interest to many in congress .

the trump administration has displayed a more critical view than past administrations of u.s. trade agreements , made greater use of various u.s. trade laws with the potential to restrict u.s. imports , and focused on bilateral trade balances as a key metric of the health of u.s. trading relationships .

as part of this shift in focus , the administration has placed a greater emphasis on "fair" and "reciprocal" trade .

china has also been a center of attention as the administration has sought to address longstanding concerns over its policies on intellectual property ( ip ) , forced technology transfer , and innovation .

citing these concerns and others , the president has unilaterally imposed trade restrictions on a number of u.s. imports under u.s. laws and authorities — most of which have been used infrequently since the establishment of the wto in 1995 .

during the 115 th congress' second session , many members weighed in on the president's actions .

while some supported his use of unilateral trade measures , others raised concerns about potential negative economic implications of these actions and the risks they pose to the rules - based international trading system .

several members introduced bills to amend some of the president's trade authorities — for example , to require congressional consultation or approval before imposing new trade barriers .

the implications of changes in the u.s. trade landscape for the 116 th congress will depend on a number of factors , including the impact of the administration's trade actions — particularly increased tariffs — on u.s. industries , firms , workers , and supply chains ; the reaction of u.s. trading partners ; and the extent to which future actions are in line with core u.s. commitments and obligations under the wto and other trade agreements .

the u.s. - china trade and economic relationship is complex and wide - ranging , and it will likely entail continued close examination by congress .

in addition to specific trade practices of concern , congress scrutinize the economic and geopolitical implications of china's belt and road initiative , which finances and develops infrastructure projects across a number of countries and regions .

congress may also examine the economic implications of china's industrial policies in high technology sectors , which could potentially challenge u.s. firms and disrupt global markets .

how these issues play out , combined with the evolving global economic landscape , raise potentially significant legislative and policy questions for congress .

the 116 th congress may consider ( 1 ) legislation to implement the u.s. - mexico - canada agreement ; ( 2 ) measures to reassert its constitutional authority over tariffs and other trade restrictions or to narrow the scope of how the president can use delegated authorities to impose such restrictions ; ( 3 ) the extent to which past u.s. ftas should be modernized or revised and , if so , in what manner ; ( 4 ) what priority should be given to negotiating new u.s. ftas with the european union , the united kingdom , japan , and other trading partners , as well as the scope of negotiations ; and ( 5 ) the impact of ftas excluding the united states on u.s. economic and broader interests , and the appropriate u.s. response to the proliferation of such agreements .

another major issue is the role of the united states in the multilateral , rules - based trading system underpinned by the wto .

historically , u.s. leadership in the global trading system has enabled the united states to shape the international trade agenda in ways that both advance and defend u.s. interests .

the growing debate over the role and future direction of the wto may raise important issues for congress , such as how current and future wto agreements affect the u.s. economy , the value of u.s. membership and leadership in the wto , and the need to update or adapt wto rules to reflect 21 st century realities .

such updates might address the proliferation of global supply chains , advances in technology , new forms of trade barriers , and market - distorting government policies .

this report provides a broad overview of select topics in international trade and finance .

it is not an exhaustive look at all issues , nor is it a detailed examination of any one issue .

rather , it provides concise background information of certain prominent issues that have been the subject of recent discussion and debate , and that may come before the 116 th congress .

however , it does include references to more in - depth crs products on the issues .

the united states has been a driving force in breaking down trade and investment barriers across the globe and constructing an open and rules - based global trading system through a wide range of international institutions and agreements .

since 1934 , u.s. policymakers across political parties have recognized the importance of pursuing trade policies that promote more open , rules - based , and reciprocal international commerce , while being cognizant of potential costs to specific segments of the population , particularly through greater competition .

although there is a general consensus that , in the aggregate , the overall economic benefits of reducing barriers to trade and investment outweigh the costs , the processes of trade and financial liberalization , and of globalization more broadly , have presented both opportunities and challenges for the united states .

many u.s. consumers , workers , firms , and industries have benefited from increased trade .

on the consumption side , u.s. households have enjoyed lower product prices and a broader variety of goods and services — some of which the united states does not produce in large quantities .

on the production side , stronger linkages to the global economy force u.s. industries and firms to focus on areas in which they have a comparative advantage , provide them with export and import opportunities , enable them to realize economies of scale , and encourage them to innovate .

at the same time , some stakeholders argue that globalization is not inclusive , benefiting some more than others .

they point to job losses , stagnant wages , and rising income inequality among some groups — as well as to environmental degradation — as indicators of the negative impact of globalization on the u.s. economy , although the causes of these trends are highly contested .

some policymakers also perceive growing bilateral u.s. trade deficits as evidence that u.s. trade with other nations is "uneven" or that foreign countries engage in "unfair" trade practices .

others view many of the existing global trade rules as outdated , since they do not reflect the realities of the 21 st century — particularly when it comes to technological advances , new forms of trade ( such as digital trade ) , and threats that international trade may pose to u.s. national security .

finally , some experts argue that the 2008-2009 financial crisis caused painful adjustment and costs for some segments of the population , which have exacerbated concerns related to u.s. trade policy and have led to increased domestic nationalism .

a longstanding objective of some members of congress and administrations has been to achieve a "level playing field" for u.s. industries , firms , and workers , and to preserve the united states' high standard of living — all while remaining innovative , productive , and internationally competitive , as well as safeguarding those stakeholders who otherwise may be left behind in a fast - changing global economy .

given congress' constitutional authority over u.s. trade policy , members are in a unique to position to influence , legislate , and oversee responses that support these goals and that reduce or soften the hardships and costs from international trade .

policy debates during the 116 th congress may include the use and impact of unilateral tariffs imposed by the trump administration under various u.s. trade laws , as well as potential legislation that alters the authority granted by congress to the president to do so ; u.s. - china trade relations ; legislation to implement the proposed united states - mexico - canada trade agreement ( usmca ) ; and the administration's launch of bilateral trade negotiations with the european union , japan , and the united kingdom , among many others .

the following section provides a broad overview of the potentially more prominent issues in international trade and finance that the 116 th congress may consider .

members of congress exert significant influence over u.s. economic and trade policy and its implementation through their legislative , appropriations , and oversight roles .

given current debates , fundamental questions about the future direction of trade and international economic issues may be key areas of interest for the 116 th congress .

in engaging on these issues , congress may evaluate the impact of section 301 , 232 , and 201 tariffs on u.s. workers and firms , and consider legislation that alters the authority granted by congress to the president to impose unilateral tariffs ; consider implementing legislation for the usmca , and conduct oversight of new bilateral trade negotiations with the eu , japan , and uk ; conduct oversight of the trump administration's policies at the wto , including reform efforts ; conduct oversight and take possible legislative action concerning a range of other trade issues , including u.s. trade relations with china and other major economies , as well as u.s. export and import policies and programs ; consider legislation to reauthorize the u.s. export - import bank , which expires on september 30 , 2019 ; evaluate the implementation of major legislation passed during the 115 th congress , including cfius and export control reforms , as well as the creation of a new u.s. international development finance corporation as a successor to opic ; examine u.s. leadership in discussions over international economic policy coordination at the g - 7 and the g - 20 ; consider legislation to adjust u.s. funding to the world bank ; and monitor major developments in financial markets , including the impact of other countries' exchange rate polices on the u.s. economy , high levels of debt in emerging markets , and the role of the u.s. dollar .

u.s. trade and economic policy affects the interest of all members of congress and their constituents .

congressional actions on these issues can impact the health of the u.s. economy , the success of u.s. businesses and their workers , the standard of living of americans , and u.s. geopolitical interests .

some of these issues may be highly contested , as members of congress and affected stakeholders have differing views on the benefits , costs , and role of u.s. trade policy .

the dynamic nature of the global economy — including the increasingly interconnected nature of the global market , the growing influence of emerging markets , and the growing role of digital trade , among other factors — as well as the trump administration's reassessment of u.s. policies provide the backdrop for a potential robust and complex debate in the 116 th congress over a range of trade and finance issues .

