review of clean air act regulations issued under the obama administration , with the possibility of their modification or repeal , has been a major focus of the trump administration since it took office in 2017 .

the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) has conducted these reviews as part of the trump administration's "regulatory reform" initiative under which the administration has directed federal agencies to evaluate existing regulations and identify those that should be considered for replacement , repeal , or modification .

in addition , executive order ( e.o. ) .

13783 has directed epa and other federal agencies to review existing regulations and policies that "potentially burden the development or use of domestically produced energy resources" for consistency with policies that the e.o .

enumerates , and as soon as practicable , to "suspend , revise , or rescind the guidance , or publish for notice and comment proposed rules suspending , revising , or rescinding those rules. .

epa rules to regulate greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions from power plants , cars and trucks , and the oil and gas sector have been of particular interest .

epas regulatory actions to limit ghg emissions have relied on authority that congress granted the agency in the clean air act ( caa ) amendments of 1970 .

since 2007 , the supreme court has ruled on two separate occasions that the caa , as amended , authorizes epa to set standards for ghg emissions .

in the first case , massachusetts v. epa , the court held that ghgs are air pollutants within the caa's definition of that term and that epa must regulate their emissions from motor vehicles if the agency finds that such emissions cause or contribute to air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare .

following the court's decision , in 2009 , the agency made an endangerment finding .

in the second case , american electric power , inc. v. connecticut , the court held that corporations cannot be sued for ghg emissions under federal common law , because the caa delegates the management of carbon dioxide and other ghg emissions to epa: "... congress delegated to epa the decision whether and how to regulate carbon - dioxide emissions from power plants ; the delegation is what displaces federal common law. .

epa's ghg regulations have focused on six gases or groups of gases that multiple scientific studies have linked to climate change .

of the six gases , carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) , which is produced by combustion of fossil fuels and is the most prevalent , accounts for about 80% of annual emissions of the combined group when measured as co 2 equivalents .

of the ghg emission standards promulgated by epa , four sets of standards , which have had the broadest impacts , are discussed below: those for power plants , the oil and gas industry , trucks , and light - duty vehicles ( the latter two topics are combined under the heading " standards for motor vehicles " ) .

epa finalized ghg standards for power plants in august 2015 ; set ghg emission standards for oil and gas industry sources in june 2016 ; finalized a second round of ghg standards for trucks in august 2016 ; and completed a mid - term evaluation ( mte ) of the already promulgated ghg standards for model years 2022-2025 light - duty vehicles ( cars and light trucks ) in january 2017 .

most of these rules are under review at epa ; the agency has proposed repeal or modification in several cases .

other issues are likely to arise as epa continues to review caa regulations .

the agency is reviewing additional regulations , among them air toxics rules applicable to power plants , brick and ceramic kilns , and industrial sources of ethylene oxide as well as nsps rules applicable to particulate matter from wood heaters .

in addition , the renewable fuel standard program may be of interest to congress , in particular renewable fuel standard management , the potential impacts such management could have on the associated stakeholders , and related biofuel matters .

the caa directs epa to promulgate emission standards for sources of the 187 hazardous air pollutants , informally referred as "air toxics," that are listed in section 112 ( b ) .

in general , these standards , known as national emission standards for hazardous air pollutants ( neshaps ) , require major sources to meet numeric emission limits that have been achieved in practice by the best performing similar sources .

these standards are generally referred to as maximum achievable control technology ( mact ) standards .

epa is to "review , and revise as necessary" the emission standards promulgated under section 112 ( d ) at least every eight years .

the remainder of this section highlights some of the air toxic standards that have garnered interest in the 116 th congress .

epa promulgated mact standards for brick , structural clay , and ceramic clay kilns in 2015 that may garner interest in the 116 th congress .

the 2015 rulemaking established emission standards for mercury , particulate matter , acid gases , dioxins , and furans .

epa estimated the cost of the rule at $25 million annually , with monetized co - benefits three to eight times the cost .

the brick industry association called the proposal "a much more reasonable rule than the one epa first envisioned several years ago," but they and others have continued to express concerns regarding the cost and achievability of the standards .

environmental groups and an association of state air pollution officials are concerned for different reasons: in their view , epa improperly set standards under a section of the caa that allows an alternative to the mact requirement that generally applies to hazardous air pollutant standards .

after reviewing petitions filed by industry groups and environmental groups , the d.c .

circuit in 2018 ordered epa to revise the 2015 standards but did not vacate them .

epa's most recent national air toxics assessment ( nata ) — published in august 2018 — concluded that ethylene oxide is carcinogenic to humans and that it "significantly contributes to potential elevated cancer risks" in some areas of the country .

epa subsequently announced it is "addressing ethylene oxide" based on the nata results .

epa has begun to review the neshap for miscellaneous organic chemical manufacturing ( "mon" ) , an industrial source category that includes facilities emitting ethylene oxide .

epa is under a court order to complete the mon neshap review by march 2020 .

additional neshap regulations apply to sources of ethylene oxide .

epa has stated that it will "take a closer look" at these nehsaps , starting with the commercial sterilizers source category. .

epa reported that it anticipates proposing any necessary revisions for the commercial sterilizer neshap in mid - 2019 and that it will publish schedules for other rules as they are determined .

regardless of the nata findings on ethylene oxide , the caa requires epa to "review , and revise as necessary" the neshaps promulgated under caa 112 ( d ) at least every eight years .

epa has not met the statutory deadline for periodic reviews of various neshaps , including the mon neshap and the commercial sterilization neshap , which were both due in 2014 .

legislative proposals introduced in the 116 th congress would require epa to update neshaps applicable to ethylene oxide .

for example , s. 458 would , among other things , direct epa to update the mon and commercial sterilization neshaps within 180 days .

similarly , h.r .

1152 would , among other things , require epa to revise the mon and commercial sterilization neshaps within 180 days , and to base the revision on an epa report , "evaluation of the inhalation carcinogenicity of ethylene oxide. .

epa is reviewing the benefit - cost analysis it prepared in 2011 for the mercury and air toxics ( mats ) rule , raising questions about whether the agency will take additional action on the rulemaking in 2019 .

promulgated in february 2012 , the mats rule established mact standards under section 112 of the caa to reduce mercury and acid gases from most existing coal - and oil - fired power plants .

epa's 2011 analysis estimated that the annual benefits of the mats rule , including the avoidance of up to 11,000 premature deaths annually , would be between $37 billion and $90 billion .

virtually all of the avoided deaths and monetized benefits come from the rule's effect on emissions of particulates , rather than from identified effects of reducing mercury and air toxics exposure .

numerous parties petitioned the courts for review of the rule , contending in part that epa had failed to conduct a benefit - cost analysis in its initial determination that control of air toxics from electric power plants was "appropriate and necessary. .

in june 2015 , the supreme court agreed with the petitioners , remanding the rule to the d.c .

circuit for further consideration .

epa prepared a supplemental "appropriate and necessary" finding based on the agency's review of the 2012 rule's estimated costs in 2016 .

the 2016 supplemental finding concluded that it is appropriate and necessary to regulate air toxics , including mercury , from power plants after including a consideration of the costs .

as of this writing , the mats rule remains in effect and litigation remains on hold , at the agency's request .

in late 2018 , however , epa proposed to reverse the 2016 finding that it is appropriate and necessary to regulate air toxics under section 112 ( "2018 a&n proposal" ) .

the proposal , even when finalized , would not revoke the mercury and acid gas emissions limits established in the 2012 mats rule .

that would require a separate regulatory action , which epa has not proposed .

some members of congress and various stakeholder groups have raised concerns about the 2018 a&n proposal and advised against further actions that would revoke the mats standards .

for example , a bipartisan group of u.s .

senators wrote to epa to "strongly oppose any action that could lead to the undoing" of the 2012 mats rule and requested the agency withdraw the 2018 a&n proposal .

a group of power sector trade organizations — representing all u.s. investor - owned electric companies , over 2,000 community - owned , not - for - profit electric utilities , over 900 not - for - profit electric utilities , and others — wrote to "urge that epa leave the underlying mats rule in place and effective" and "take no action that would jeopardize" the industry's estimated $18 billion investment in the mats rule .

not all stakeholders have disagreed with the 2018 a&n proposal , however .

murray energy corporation , which describes itself as the largest privately owned u.s. coal company , testified that "mats should never have been adopted" and "urge[d] epa to take the only reasonable action flowing from its repudiation of the legal basis for mats , and rescind the [2012 mats] rule immediately. .

while it is unclear whether epa will take additional action on the mats standards , the 2018 a&n proposal reveals changes in epa's interpretation of the caa and use of benefit - cost analysis .

epa's analysis for the 2018 a&n proposal excludes co - benefits — the human health benefits from reductions in pollutants not targeted by mats — from its consideration of whether mats is "appropriate and necessary" under caa section 112 ( n ) .

with this exclusion , the 2018 analysis finds that monetized costs outweigh monetized benefit estimates by several orders of magnitude .

 ( for additional discussion , see crs in focus if11078 , epa reconsiders basis for mercury and air toxics standards , by kate c .

shouse. ) .

in 2015 , epa published final emission standards for new residential wood heaters , including wood stoves , pellet stoves , hydronic heaters , and forced air furnaces .

the 2015 wood heater regulations generated a substantial amount of interest , particularly in areas where wood is used as a heating fuel .

house and senate hearings in the 115 th congress highlighted concerns about inadequate time to demonstrate compliance with emission standards by the 2020 deadline .

others have expressed concerns about the air quality impacts of delaying the 2020 deadline .

on march 7 , 2018 , the house passed h.r .

1917 , which would have delayed implementation of the standards for three years .

more recently , epa proposed to add a two - year "sell - through" period for new hydronic heaters and forced - air furnaces .

specifically , epa's proposal would allow all affected new hydronic heaters and forced - air furnaces that are manufactured or imported before the may 2020 deadline to be sold at retail through may 2022 .

in addition , epa published an advance notice of proposed rulemaking ( anpr ) in late 2018 on new residential wood heaters , new residential hydronic heaters , and new residential air furnaces .

the 2018 anpr does not propose specific changes to the standards , but it requests comments on various regulatory issues "in order to inform future rulemaking to improve these standards and related test methods. .

citing stakeholder feedback about ways to improve implementation of the 2015 nsps , epa requested comment on 10 topics , including the cost and feasibility of meeting the emission limits that become effective in 2020 , the timing of the 2020 compliance date , and test methods used for certification .

 ( for additional information on the wood heater rule , see crs report r43489 , epa's wood stove / wood heater regulations: frequently asked questions , by james e. mccarthy and kate c .

shouse. ) .

the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) is a mandate that requires u.s. transportation fuel to contain a minimum volume of renewable fuel .

the rfs is an amendment of the caa , having been established by the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ; epact05 ) and expanded in 2007 by the energy independence and security act ( p.l .

110-140 ; eisa ) .

it is a volume mandate that increases annually , starting with 4 billion gallons in 2006 and ascending to 36 billion gallons in 2022 , with the epa determining the volume amounts post - 2022 .

renewable fuels that may be applied toward the mandate include transportation fuel , jet fuel , and heating oil .

to be eligible as a renewable fuel under the rfs , fuels must meet certain environmental and biomass feedstock criteria .

thus far , the predominant fuel used to meet the mandate has been corn starch ethanol .

at issue for congress are rfs management , the potential impacts such management could have on the associated stakeholders , and related biofuel matters .

the topics of interest include small refinery exemptions under the rfs , the year - round sale of e15 , rfs compliance and compliance costs , the rfs "reset," and approval of advanced biofuel pathways for the rfs ( eg , renewable electricity ) .

the associated stakeholders include renewable fuel producers , agricultural producers , the petroleum industry , and environmental organizations , among others .

one legislative proposal specific to the rfs has been introduced in the 116 th congress — h.r .

104 , the leave ethanol volumes at existing levels act or level act — which would decrease the amount of biofuel that must be contained in gasoline and would eliminate the advanced biofuel portion of the mandate .

other legislation was introduced in the 115 th congress and may be reintroduced in the 116 th congress .

 ( for further information , contact kelsi bracmort , specialist in natural resources and energy policy , and see crs report r43325 , the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) : an overview , by kelsi bracmort. ) .

