on october 24 , 2018 , president trump signed into law h.r .

6 , the substance use - disorder prevention that promotes opioid recovery and treatment for patients and communities act ( p.l .

115-271 ; the support for patients and communities act , or the support act ) .

the final agreement on the bill was approved by the house 393-8 on s eptember 28 , 2018 , and cleared the senate by 98-1 on october 3 , 2018 .

over the past several years , there has been growing concern among the public and lawmakers in the united states about rising drug overdose deaths .

opioid overdose deaths , in particular , have increased significantly in the past 15 years .

in 2015 , an estimated 33,091 americans died of opioid - related overdoses , almost three times as many as in 2002 around the beginning of the epidemic .

in 2016 , that number increased to 42,249 .

in october 2017 , president trump declared the opioid epidemic a national public health emergency .

the support act is a sweeping measure designed to address widespread overprescribing and abuse of opioids in the united states .

the act includes provisions involving law enforcement , public health , and health care financing and coverage .

broadly , the legislation imposes tighter oversight of opioid production and distribution ; imposes additional reporting and safeguards to address fraud ; and limits coverage of prescription opioids , while expanding coverage of and access to opioid addiction treatment services .

the bill also authorizes a number of programs that seek to expand consumer education on opioid use and train additional providers to treat individuals with opioid use disorders .

fda , pursuant to its authority under the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) , is responsible for ensuring the safety and effectiveness of prescription and nonprescription drugs sold in the united states , regardless of whether they are controlled substances .

fda regulates the full life - cycle of a drug product , starting with drug development , through the approval process , and then for as long as the product remains on the market .

subtitle a addresses fda medical product regulation and includes provisions that , among other things , facilitate the development of new medical products for treatment of pain ; provide for special packaging and disposal mechanisms for opioids ; and amend postmarket study and labeling requirements .

the dea , under the controlled substances act ( csa ) , has primary responsibility for regulating the use of controlled substances for legitimate medical , scientific , research , and industrial purposes , and for preventing these substances from being diverted for illegal purposes .

while the ffdca requires that certain drugs be dispensed only pursuant to a prescription from a health care provider , the csa sets forth requirements for dispensing controlled substances specifically .

subtitle b addresses dea regulation of controlled substances and includes provisions that , among other things , provide additional flexibility with respect to medication - assisted treatment ( mat ) for opioid use disorders ; modify controlled substances disposal requirements at qualified hospice programs ; and authorize grants to states to increase participation of eligible collectors in drug - disposal programs .

the drug price competition and patent term restoration act of 1984 ( hatch - waxman act ; p.l .

98-417 ) created an abbreviated pathway for generic drugs , allowing a generic drug manufacturer to submit to fda an abbreviated nda ( i.e. , an anda ) , rather than a full nda , demonstrating that the generic product is the same as the brand drug ( i.e. , the rld ) .

by relying on fda's previous determination that the rld is safe and effective , the generic drug company can avoid replicating the expensive clinical trials already conducted by the brand company .

the generic drug applicant must , among other things , submit either a section viii statement or one of four certifications for every patent listed in the orange book with respect to the rld referenced in the anda: the brand company has not filed any patent information with respect to the rld ; the patent has expired ; the date on which the patent will expire ; or the patent is invalid or will not be infringed by the drug for which the anda is submitted , as specified .

these are referred to as paragraph i , ii , iii , and iv certifications , respectively .

the first generic drug company that files an anda with a paragraph iv certification is eligible to receive a 180-day period of exclusivity , which precludes fda from approving another anda for the same product during that period of time .

since enactment of hatch - waxman , certain practices have emerged that may disrupt the law's intended balance between innovation and competition in the pharmaceutical industry .

one such practice involves pay - for - delay settlements pursuant to which a generic drug company agrees to neither challenge a brand company's patents nor sell a generic version of a patented rld for a certain period of time in exchange for payment from the brand company .

title xi of the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ( mma ; p.l .

108-173 ) required drug companies to file such agreements with the federal trade commission ( ftc ) and doj .

more specifically , under mma section 1112 ( a ) , a generic drug company that submits an anda containing a paragraph iv certification and a brand drug company that enter into an agreement must each file the agreement with ftc and doj .

covered agreements are those regarding the manufacture , marketing , or sale of the rld that is listed in the anda or the generic drug for which the anda was submitted , as well as agreements regarding the 180-day exclusivity period as it applies to the anda or to any other anda based on the same rld .

additionally , under mma section 1112 ( b ) , if two generic drug applicants each have submitted an anda containing a paragraph iv certification for the same rld , and they have entered into an agreement regarding the 180-day exclusivity period , each applicant is required to file the agreement with ftc and doj .

mma section 1112 ( c ) requires drug companies also to file agreements not described in subsections ( a ) and ( b ) of section 1112 if they are contingent upon , provide a contingent condition for , or are otherwise related to ( a ) or ( b ) agreements .

the patient right to know drug prices act ( p.l .

115-263 ) amended mma title xi , expanding these reporting requirements to include agreements between biosimilar product applicants and brand companies , as well as agreements between two biosimilar product applicants .

section 4004 amends mma title xi , further expanding reporting requirements to include agreements between two or more generic drug applicants and between two or more biosimilar product applicants , as well as other agreements not described under subsections ( a ) and ( b ) of mma section 1112 , but that were entered into within 30 days of ( a ) or ( b ) agreements .

section 4004 also makes numerous technical changes to mma title xi , as amended by p.l .

115-263 .

this section applies to taxable years beginning after december 31 , 2018 .

the cbo estimates that this provision would decrease direct spending outlays by $41 million from fy2019 through fy2028 .

the table below includes relevant provisions that include a required report , guidance , or other action , listed in order of section number .

