economic growth and expanded global trade have led to substantial increases in goods movement over the past few decades .

the growth in freight transportation demand , along with growing passenger demand , has caused congestion in parts of the transportation system , making freight movements slower and less reliable .

because the condition and performance of freight infrastructure play a considerable role in the efficiency of the freight system , federal support of freight infrastructure investment is likely to be of significant congressional concern in the reauthorization of the surface transportation program .

the program is currently authorized by the fixing america's surface transportation act ( fast act ; p.l .

114-94 ) , which is scheduled to expire on september 30 , 2020 .

congress has begun to place greater emphasis on freight over the course of recent reauthorizations , but national policy is still vague or silent on a number of issues .

there are ongoing disagreements about the best way to accomplish improvements in freight system infrastructure — notably , how to raise new funds for investment , the magnitude of the amounts required , which projects to prioritize , and the role of the federal government in the planning process .

meanwhile , technological advances in mobility have prompted new questions about how best to accomplish the efficient movement of people and goods in a multimodal transportation system .

autonomous vehicle technology could have potential applications in the trucking industry , as could greater deployment of automation in the rail and port industries .

while the fast act concerns many aspects of surface transportation funding and safety policy , the focus of this report is on truck freight and that portion of the rail and port industries that transports truck trailers and containers ( intermodal freight ) .

this report does not address operational issues that also may be of interest during reauthorization , such as hours of service and hazardous material transport safety .

moreover , this report does not contain in - depth discussion of environmental issues associated with freight movements , such as carbon emissions and climate change , or air and noise pollution , though these issues may be germane to the topics of funding and project selection .

the freight transportation system is a complex network of different types of transportation , known as modes , that carries everything from coal to small packages .

it handles domestic shipments of a few miles as well as international shipments of thousands of miles .

often , a shipment of cargo will move across multiple modes before reaching its destination , using road , rail , air , pipeline , and / or maritime infrastructure in the process ; when freight changes modes in this way , it is referred to as multimodal .

freight moved in stackable containers is easier to move among ships , trains , and trucks ; this is referred to as intermodal freight .

rail alone carries the second - largest share of domestic freight measured in ton - miles , but only a small proportion by value ( table 1 ) , reflecting the fact that major rail cargos such as coal and grain have low ratios of value to weight .

trucks carry by far the most freight by value but a smaller proportion of ton - miles , as the average truck shipment travels a much shorter distance than the average rail shipment .

air transportation is a relatively minor mode for domestic shipments because it is expensive to ship goods by air .

the proportions for international shipments to and from the united states are quite different from those for domestic shipments , with about three - quarters of goods , measured by weight , arriving or departing by ship .

measured by value , nearly one - fourth of u.s. international freight moves by air .

trucks operate over a four - million - mile system of public access highways and streets .

of this , approximately 209,000 miles has been designated by the federal highway administration ( fhwa ) as the "national truck network," a network of highways able to accommodate large trucks .

this network includes the interstate highway system , which extends approximately 47,000 miles , plus principal arterial highways designated by the states .

trucks account for about 9% of vehicle miles traveled on the entire u.s. road system , but 15% of vehicle miles on interstates and 24% on rural interstates .

the railroad sector is dominated by seven large railroads , or class i carriers , that generally focus on long - distance moves .

the class i railroads are complemented by more than 500 short line and regional railroads ( class ii and class iii , respectively ) that tend to haul freight shorter distances , provide connections between the class i networks , or connect the class i networks and ports .

for the most part , railroad infrastructure , including track and associated structures and the land they occupy , is owned by the carriers themselves .

the u.s. railroad network consists of approximately 140,000 miles of railroad , of which approximately 94,000 miles could be considered transcontinental or mainline railroad and 46,000 miles could be considered regional or local railroad .

in some places , freight trains share space with intercity and commuter passenger trains .

until recently , there was no separate federal freight transportation program , but instead a relatively loose collection of freight - related programs that were embedded in a larger surface transportation program aimed at supporting both passenger and freight mobility .

historically , most highway funding has been distributed to the states via several large "core" formula programs , leaving states to decide how to use their allocated funds .

other , smaller programs provide grant awards for more targeted projects .

the safe , accountable , flexible , efficient transportation equity act: a legacy for users ( safetea ; p.l .

109-59 ) , which was enacted in 2005 and expired in 2012 after a series of extensions , funded over 70 highway programs .

almost all of these have now been combined into a handful of formula programs with broader objectives .

core surface transportation program funds are distributed to states by formula , but freight transportation is often interstate in nature .

the funds received by a single state may not be sufficient to construct the infrastructure necessary to relieve congestion at freight bottlenecks whose effects are felt several states away .

recognizing this , congress created the projects of national and regional significance program within safetea as a way of directing federal funds to large projects with wide - ranging benefits .

all funds made available through the program were earmarked in the legislation and were not available for other projects .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) created a discretionary grant program for transportation infrastructure investments , originally known as the transportation investment generating economic recovery ( tiger ) program and now called the better utilizing investments to leverage development ( build ) program .

build grants are distributed at the discretion of the secretary of transportation , subject to a set - aside for rural areas and limits on maximum and minimum grant size .

the program is not authorized in law , but has received funding in appropriations bills every year since its introduction in fy2009 through fy2018 .

since its inception , roughly one - quarter of grants have gone to freight - specific projects , and almost half to road projects that could benefit freight as well as passengers ( see table 2 ) .

in reauthorizing federal surface transportation programs , the primary freight - related issues before congress are likely to be setting funding levels and , if necessary , raising revenue .

key questions include whether there should be a dedicated revenue stream for freight - related purposes and whether additional federal funding should be dedicated to freight projects selected by dot rather than distributed by formula for spending at the discretion of the states .

one idea that has come before congress is the creation of a new dedicated revenue stream for freight infrastructure , funded not by the motor fuels taxes that fund most federal surface transportation spending , but by a charge on goods movement .

under one such proposal , which was introduced in the 113 th , 114 th , and 115 th congresses but not passed , a 1% tax would be assessed on the cost of freight shipments , with the revenue deposited in a new trust fund .

a national freight program would then distribute these funds to states by formula for exclusive use for freight projects .

a similar proposal would reserve 5% of the import duties collected by customs and border patrol for freight purposes , directing the money into a freight trust fund .

proposals for taxes and fees on freight traffic have been raised before , including taxes based on trucking charges , a combined weight - distance or ton - mile tax such as those assessed already by certain states , and a tax on every maritime container imported and exported .

some proponents have advocated such fees specifically to raise money for freight - related projects , while others see them as a means of raising additional sums for general surface transportation use .

existing law generally permits tolling of existing federal - aid highways only when they are rebuilt or replaced .

in the case of interstate highways , the existing non - tolled lane count must be maintained , even if the facility is reconstructed ( with exceptions for some toll roads that predate the interstate system ) .

in 1998 , congress created the interstate system reconstruction and rehabilitation pilot program , allowing up to three states to toll interstate segments in order to repair or rehabilitate them .

one of the states accepted into the pilot program , missouri , considered reconstructing 200 miles of interstate 70 to include two truck - only lanes in each direction , with the entire project to be funded by tolls .

the proposal encountered strong resistance in the state and is no longer being pursued .

the other states participating in the pilot program , virginia and north carolina , also did not undertake proposed projects .

the only other way an existing toll - free federal - aid highway ( including non - tolled existing interstate highway lanes ) may be converted is under the value pricing pilot program , a separate program established in 1991 that is designed primarily to mitigate congestion .

congress has no direct control over the decision to impose highway tolls , which is up to the state or local entity that owns the infrastructure .

it could , however , widen the circumstances under which states are permitted to toll interstate highways .

tolls could provide a source of funding for freight - related projects .

trucking interests generally oppose additional tolling , especially truck - only tolling , largely out of concern that political considerations will make it easier to raise tolls on trucks than on cars , and prefer higher motor fuels taxes to fund highway improvements .

studies have concluded that funding highways with motor fuels taxes provides trucks a cross - subsidy from automobile users' gas tax payments , due to the fact that the wear and tear caused by a heavy truck is much greater than that caused by a light vehicle .

growth in freight and passenger transportation demand has brought an increase in truck and rail congestion .

this congestion is particularly pronounced in major urban areas that contain important freight hubs such as ports , airports , border crossings , and rail yards .

many of the trucks delayed may be simply passing through the region rather than serving local shippers .

as identified by dot , the 25 most congested segments for trucks are generally urban interstate highway interchanges .

the most recent rankings published by dot are based on 2014 data , so the impact of fast act programs on alleviating freight bottlenecks has not yet been assessed .

however , a number of metropolitan areas have been at or near the top of the congestion list for several consecutive years .

five of the 25 most congested segments are in houston and two are in each of chicago , atlanta , los angeles , seattle , and cincinnati .

while the rankings of individual cities can fluctuate , 13 interchanges have been listed among the top 20 most congested for at least the last five years .

the interchange of i - 290 and i - 90 / 94 in chicago has ranked no better than second - worst since 2010 , and the interchange of i - 95 and sr 4 in fort lee , nj , just outside new york city , has ranked no better than fourth - worst .

a trucking industry study estimates that 86% of the total costs of congestion for trucks are concentrated on 17% of interstate highway mileage .

similarly , the projected increase in highway freight traffic over the coming decades is not likely to be uniformly distributed across the nation's highways .

segments of the interstate highway system that are projected to see an increase of more than 10,000 trucks per day are spread out over parts of 15 states ( see figure 2 ) .

this is roughly equivalent to an additional truck traveling on a segment every 8.6 seconds .

at the same time , many interstate highway segments are projected to have only small increases in truck traffic through 2045 .

the formula used to distribute most federal surface transportation funds to the states , including formula grants under the national highway freight program , does not incorporate anticipated increases in truck traffic volume , meaning that the states expected to face the largest increases in truck traffic are not entitled to greater federal funding to address capacity constraints .

as figure 2 indicates , the largest increases in truck traffic are expected to occur where interstates intersect , but also along stretches of highway that connect busy nodes to each other .

for example , a stretch of i - 40 in arkansas , connecting little rock to memphis , tn , is one such segment .

the nature of interstate commerce means that much of the truck traffic using this highway may simply be crossing arkansas rather than moving freight to or from businesses in arkansas .

although only arkansas can use its federal highway funds to increase the capacity of the road , much of the benefit from such a project would likely accrue to other states , potentially limiting arkansas's incentive to undertake the work .

one way for congress to address this situation would be to adjust the methodology for calculating each state's apportionment of funds distributed under the national highway freight program to consider freight - related metrics .

the nhfp currently takes into account each state's share of national highway freight network miles .

the dedicated freight funding proposals introduced in the 113 th , 114 th , and 115 th congresses , discussed above , would have incorporated several other measures intended to reflect a state's importance to the national freight system into the distribution formula .

these would have included each state's share of the nation's ports , miles of freight rail track , cargo - handling airports , freight tonnage , and freight value relative to the national total .

instead of adjusting formula programs to reflect freight - related needs , congress has provided dot with discretionary funds it can distribute for freight and other purposes through the infra and build grant programs .

these programs have proven to be popular and routinely receive applications for more funding than they can make available , but they have also been criticized for lacking transparent processes for project selection and for funding projects that may not have the highest estimated benefit / cost ratios .

a 2017 government accountability office report concluded that the infra ( then known as fastlane ) application review process allowed for broad discretion during certain team reviews , and that certain large projects were forwarded to the secretary of transportation for approval even if they did not initially meet certain statutory requirements .

a third approach would be to direct spending congressionally .

from the start of the 112 th congress in 2011 until the end of the 115 th congress in january 2019 , the house and senate observed a ban on congressionally directed spending , also known as earmarking .

the earmark ban effectively blocked members of congress from inserting language in authorization or appropriations bills to designate funds for specific freight - related projects , as frequently occurred prior to 2011 .

the ban was established through rules adopted by the house republican conference , the senate republican conference , and the senate appropriations committee .

the democratic party majority that has controlled the house since january 2019 has not adopted similar language , and it is unclear whether earmarks are permitted in proposed legislation in that chamber .

because freight infrastructure decisions are often made at the state or local level , it would be helpful for transportation planners to know the characteristics of the trucks traveling particular highway segments .

information about the industries served , the origin and destination of the shipments , and daily or seasonal variations in volume could help planners identify freight users that share an economic interest in mitigating a bottleneck or determine the feasibility of moving some of the traffic to off - peak hours or to other modes .

dot's bureau of transportation statistics and the census bureau conduct a survey of shippers every five years ( the commodity flow survey cited in table 1 ) that provides information on outbound shipments .

however , the sample size is not sufficient to provide reliable data for any specific urban area .

the survey does not record through traffic , does not distinguish between imports and domestic freight , and occurs too infrequently to identify trends in freight patterns .

the survey was designed more to provide a national picture of freight transport than to meet local or regional needs .

in the fast act , congress requested dot to "... consider any improvements to existing freight flow data collection efforts that could reduce identified freight data gaps and deficiencies...." a policy decision for congress is whether the federal government should be responsible for providing adequate freight data for state and local transportation planners .

autonomous vehicle technology has potential applications in the freight sector .

autonomous trucks potentially offer significant freight transportation savings , as driver compensation represents either the largest or second - largest cost component for truck carriers , depending on the price of fuel .

fuel and driver compensation typically each account for about one - third of total operating costs .

a truck driver may not drive for more than 11 hours per day under federal regulations , so it is difficult for carriers to improve labor productivity except by using larger trucks .

because driver error is the overwhelming cause of vehicle accidents , automation that reduces accident rates could improve public safety .

also , long - distance truck carriers experience exceptionally high driver turnover , and automation may reduce the need for drivers .

despite the economic motivation , many in the trucking industry doubt whether driverless trucks are feasible in the foreseeable future given the current horizon of autonomous technology .

an alternative scenario , at least for the next decade or two , is that truck driver jobs may come to resemble those of airline pilots in that drivers would spend part of their time monitoring an autonomous driving system rather than directly controlling the vehicle at all times .

the skills of truck drivers when backing up an 18-wheeler to a warehouse or driving on local roads may be irreplaceable .

in addition , some carriers may not be eager to forgo personal contact between drivers and customers , which may create sales opportunities .

the 115 th congress debated federal policy regarding autonomous vehicle technology at length .

h.r .

3388 , passed by the house , sought to establish new rules for testing and adoption of autonomous technology for cars and light trucks , but had no provisions pertaining to commercial vehicles .

in the senate , s. 1885 would have subjected commercial vehicles to the same safety evaluation requirements as private vehicles .

neither measure was enacted , but in debating these bills , congress evaluated to what extent federal policy should assist autonomous vehicle technology by granting exemptions to certain federal requirements that otherwise would impede testing and demonstrations of these vehicles .

congress also considered preempting states from issuing certain regulations that are contrary to federal regulations or contrary to other states' regulations in order to avoid differing state requirements .

these provisions were relevant to a technology being tested in the trucking industry known as "platooning. .

in a platoon , trucks follow each other closely enough to save fuel by reducing drag at high speeds ( around 10% for a following truck and 5% for the lead truck ) .

all the trucks in a platoon have drivers , but only the driver of the lead truck is in full control of the vehicles .

the drivers in the following trucks steer their vehicles , but their feet are off the accelerator and brake because truck speed is controlled by wireless communication from the lead truck .

this communication reduces the braking response times of the following trucks and therefore allows trucks to follow closely enough to significantly reduce wind resistance .

absent federal legislation , it is possible that states would enact conflicting limits on platooning , reducing its utility in interstate commerce .

congress may also be asked to support a technology known as hyperloop , which proposes the use of pods or sleds to transport containers in vacuum - sealed tubes at high speed .

while this technology has gone through some testing , it has not yet been commercially deployed .

hyperloop projects are not currently eligible for funding under surface transportation formula grant programs or any of dot's discretionary grant programs , which are limited to road , rail , and some port projects .

there is no federal program dedicated solely to research and development of freight - specific technology .

the federal government supports research and development of some surface transportation technologies through the highway research and development program ( 23 u.s.c .

§503 ( b ) ) and the technology and innovation deployment program ( 23 u.s.c .

§503 ( c ) ) .

the fast act currently authorizes $250 million and $135 million , respectively , for these programs through fy2020 .

