t he unemployment insurance ( ui ) system has two primary objectives: ( 1 ) to provide temporary , partial wage replacement for involuntarily unemployed workers and ( 2 ) to stabilize the economy during recessions .

in support of these goals , several ui programs provide benefits for eligible unemployed workers .

in general , when eligible workers lose their jobs , the joint federal - state unemployment compensation ( uc ) program may provide up to 26 weeks of income support through regular uc benefit payments .

uc benefits may be extended for up to 13 weeks or 20 weeks by the extended benefit ( eb ) program if certain economic situations exist within the state .

as of the date of this publication , although both the uc and eb programs are authorized , no state is in an active eb period .

for an overview of eb , see the appendix .

the sequester order required by the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) and implemented on march 1 , 2013 ( after being delayed by p.l .

112-240 ) , affected some but not all types of ui expenditures .

regular uc , ucx , and ucfe payments are not subject to the sequester reductions .

eb and most forms of administrative funding are subject to the sequester reductions .

the lapse in federal appropriations that occurred from december 22 , 2018 , until january 25 , 2019 , caused a partial government shutdown .

as a result , during this lapse in appropriations , agencies without funding furloughed federal employees , and many federal employees excepted from furlough were working without pay .

furloughed federal employees may be eligible for ucfe benefits .

states are required to operate the ucfe program under the same terms and conditions that apply to regular state uc .

therefore , ucfe eligibility is determined under the laws of the state in which an individual's official duty station in federal civilian service is located .

federal employees who are in furlough status on account of a government shutdown are generally treated by state law as laid off with an expectation of recall .

depending on state laws and regulations , the state may have an option to not require federal employees to search for work given an expected recall .

however , according to guidance from u.s. department of labor ( dol ) , excepted federal employees who are performing services ( but working without pay ) would generally be ineligible for ucfe benefits based on states' definitions of "unemployment. .

private - sector workers who are furloughed or laid off due to the partial government shutdown because they were employed by government contractors or other businesses may be eligible for regular uc benefits .

uc eligibility for these workers would be based on the requirements set out under the state laws in the state where they had worked .

in this climate , there has been congressional interest in assisting furloughed and excepted federal employees through the ui system .

for example , as described below in the section on " unemployment compensation for excepted federal employees during a government shutdown ," there are proposals to provide new authority to pay ucfe benefits to excepted federal workers who are working without pay .

the most recent lapse in federal appropriations began december 22 , 2018 , and ended on january 25 , 2019 , with the enactment of h.j.res .

28 .

because retroactive pay for furloughed and excepted federal employees was authorized under s. 24 , the government employee fair treatment act of 2019 ( enacted january 16 , 2019 ) , ucfe payments made to federal employee claimants during this lapse in appropriations may be deemed an overpayment , subject to state uc laws regarding overpayment recovery .

according to guidance from the office of personnel management on this issue the state ui agency will determine whether or not an overpayment exists and , generally , the recovery of the ucfe overpayment is a matter for state action under its law ; however , some state ui laws require the employer to recover such overpayment by collecting the overpayment amount from the employee .

the federal and state agencies will need to coordinate to determine the required action in accordance with the individual state ui law .

federal agencies are encouraged to develop lists or spreadsheets that can be provided to the state ( s ) containing the employees' names , social security numbers , and the amounts and periods of time covered by the retroactive payment .

if a recession is deep enough and if state unemployment tax ( suta ) revenue is inadequate for long periods of time , states may have insufficient funds to pay for uc benefits .

federal law , which requires states to pay these benefits , provides a loan mechanism within the utf framework that an insolvent state may use to meet its uc benefit payment obligations .

states must pay back these loans .

if the loans are not paid back quickly ( depending on the timing of the beginning of the loan period ) , states may face interest charges , and states' employers may face increased net futa rates until the loans are repaid .

the u.s. virgin islands is the only jurisdiction with an outstanding loan .

as of january 18 , 2019 , it had an outstanding loan of $68.4 million from the federal accounts within the utf .

at the end of 2017 , fewer than half of states ( 24 ) had accrued enough funds in their accounts to meet or exceed the minimally solvent standard of an average high cost multiple ( ahcm ) of 1.0 in order to be prepared for a recession .

beginning in fy2015 , dol funded state efforts "addressing individual reemployment needs of ui claimants , and working to prevent and detect ui overpayments" through the voluntary reemployment services and eligibility assessment ( resea ) program .

resea provides funding to states to conduct in - person interviews with selected ui claimants to ( 1 ) assure that claimants are complying with the eligibility rules , ( 2 ) determine if reemployment services are needed for the claimant to secure future employment , ( 3 ) refer the individual to reemployment services as necessary , and ( 4 ) provide labor market information that addresses the claimant's specific needs .

section 30206 of p.l .

115-123 codified the authority for dol to administer a resea program .

it also set out various requirements for states to use certain types of evidence - based interventions for ui claimants under resea and allocated discretionary funding for resea across three categories ( base funding , outcome payments , and research and technical assistance ) .

state resea programs must include reasonable notice and accommodations to participating ui beneficiaries .

on april 4 , 2019 , dol published a proposed methodology to allocate base resea funds and outcome payments .

dol requested state and public comments on this proposal by may 6 , 2019 .

the president's budget for fy2020 proposes changes to several aspects of the ui system .

it would create a new required standard for state account balances within the utf and a new benefit entitlement for paid parental leave financed through state unemployment taxes .

the president's fy2020 budget also proposes a set of additional integrity measures , including the required use of certain databases to confirm uc eligibility and requiring social security disability insurance ( ssdi ) benefits offset ui benefits .

section 2105 of the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-96 ; february 22 , 2012 ) amended federal law to allow states to conduct two types of drug testing .

first , it expanded the long - standing state option to disqualify uc applicants who were discharged from employment with their most recent employer ( as defined under state law ) for unlawful drug use by allowing states to drug test these applicants to determine uc benefit eligibility or disqualification .

second , it allowed states to drug test uc applicants for whom suitable work ( as defined under state law ) is available only in an occupation that regularly conducts drug testing , to be determined under new regulations issued by the secretary of labor .

as required by  p.l .

112-96 , on august 1 , 2016 , dol promulgated  20 c.f.r .

part 620 ,  a new rule to implement the provisions of the law relating to the drug testing of uc applicants for whom suitable work ( as defined under state law ) is available only in an occupation that regularly conducts drug testing .

amid concerns voiced by stakeholders about the 2016 dol rule , congress repealed this uc drug testing rule using the congressional review act ( cra ) via h.j.res .

42 / p.l .

115-17 .

on november 5 , 2018 , dol published a notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm )  to reissue the rule identifying occupations that regularly conduct drug testing for purposes of section 2105 of  p.l .

112-96 .

the cra prohibits an agency from reissuing the rule in "substantially the same form" or issuing a "new rule that is substantially the same" as the disapproved rule , "unless the reissued or new rule is specifically authorized by a law enacted after the date of the joint resolution disapproving the original rule. .

notably , this is the first time an agency has proposed to reissue a rule after the original version was disapproved under the cra .

according to the 2018 nprm , dol has addressed the reissue requirements of the cra by proposing a substantially different and more flexible approach to the statutory requirements than the 2016 rule , enabling states to enact legislation to require drug testing for a far larger group of uc applicants than the previous rule permitted .

this flexibility is intended to respect the diversity of states' economies and the different roles played by employment drug testing in those economies .

comments on the proposed 2018 rule were required to be submitted by january 4 , 2019 .

on january 16 , 2019 , senator richard blumenthal introduced s. 165 , the federal unemployment compensation equity act of 2019 .

this proposal would amend ucfe law and create a new permanent ucfe eligibility category for excepted federal employees who are unpaid but required to work during a government shutdown due to a lapse in appropriations .

during any shutdown beginning on or after december 22 , 2018 , all excepted federal workers would be deemed eligible for ucfe benefits .

additionally , these employees would not be subject to a one - week waiting period ( otherwise often required under state laws ) before ucfe benefits were to be paid .

on january 23 , 2019 , representative debbie dingell introduced h.r .

725 , the pay federal workers act .

this proposal would also provide ucfe benefits in a similar manner to s. 165 , including permanently amending 5 u.s.c .

chapter 85 to provide federal authority for these benefits .

on january 23 , 2019 , representative anthony brown introduced h.r .

720 .

this proposal would deem excepted federal employees during a government shutdown to be eligible for ucfe during fy2019 .

the authority to provide ucfe to these excepted workers would expire at the end of fy2019 .

on february 8 , 2019 , representative katie hill introduced h.r .

1117 , the shutdown fairness act of 2019 .

this proposal would deem excepted federal employees and unpaid military servicemembers during a government shutdown to be eligible for ucfe or ucx during fy2019 .

the authority to provide ucfe to these excepted workers would expire at the end of fy2019 .

on january 15 , 2019 , senator ron wyden and representative danny davis introduced s. 136 and h.r .

556 , the economic ladders to end volatility and advance training and employment act of 2019 ( the elevate act ) .

among other provisions , this proposal would establish new self - employment and relocation assistance benefits for unemployed workers to be administered by the social security administration , in consultation with dol .

the self - employment assistance benefits would provide weekly income replacement ( half of prior earnings up to the maximum weekly benefit amount in the state ) for up to of 26 weeks to individuals .

they would be available to individuals who are ( 1 ) eligible for any type of ui benefit ; or ineligible for any type of ui benefit , but became involuntarily unemployed over the previous 12 weeks ; or were previously self - employed , but lost a hiring contract , and ( 2 ) have a viable business plan approved by their state department of labor , workforce board , or the small business administration .

additionally , section 3 of s. 136 and h.r .

556 would provide up to $2,000 ( or more , depending on family size ) to fund to up to 90% of certain relocation expenses for eligible individuals and their families .

in order to be eligible for this relocation assistance , an individual must be a ( 1 )  dislocated worker , ( 2 ) long - term unemployed individual , or ( 3 ) underemployed individual and also have filed a claim for relocation assistance and obtained suitable work with an expectation of obtaining such work in a new geographic region .

on march 7 , 2019 , representative karen bass introduced h.r .

1585 , the violence against women reauthorization act of 2019 .

among many other provisions , section 703 of h.r .

1585 would require states to consider an individual who quit employment because of sexual harassment , domestic violence , sexual assault , or stalking to be eligible for uc benefits .

the house passed h.r .

1585 on april 4 , 2019 .

on march 14 , 2019 , representative stephanie murphy introduced h.r .

1759 , the building on reemployment improvements to deliver good employment ( bridge ) for workers act .

this proposal would extend eligibility to any claimant of unemployment benefits , including those profiled as likely to exhaust benefits ( rather than limiting eligibility to those who were profiled as likely to exhaust benefits ) .

the house passed h.r .

1759 on april 9 , 2019 .

the extended benefit ( eb ) program was established by the federal - state extended unemployment compensation act of 1970 ( euca ; p.l .

91-373 ) ( 26 u.s.c .

§3304 , note ) .

euca may extend receipt of unemployment benefits ( extended benefits ) at the state level if certain economic conditions exist within the state .

as of the date of this publication , eb is not active in any state .

extended benefit triggers the eb program is triggered when a state's insured unemployment rate ( iur ) or total unemployment rate ( tur ) reaches certain levels .

all states must pay up to 13 weeks of eb if the iur for the previous 13 weeks is at least 5% and is 120% of the average of the rates for the same 13-week period in each of the two previous years .

states may choose to enact two other optional thresholds .

 ( states may choose one , two , or none. ) .

if the state has chosen one or more of the eb trigger options , it would provide the following: option 1 — up to an additional 13 weeks of benefits if the state's iur is at least 6% , regardless of previous years' averages .

option 2 — up to an additional 13 weeks of benefits if the state's tur is at least 6.5% and is at least 110% of the state's average tur for the same 13 weeks in either of the previous two years ; up to an additional 20 weeks of benefits if the state's tur is at least 8% and is at least 110% of the state's average tur for the same 13 weeks in either of the previous two years .

eb benefits are not "grandfathered" ( phased out ) when a state triggers "off" the program .

when a state triggers "off" of an eb period , all eb benefit payments in the state cease immediately regardless of individual entitlement .

the eb benefit amount is equal to the eligible individual's weekly regular uc benefits .

under permanent law , futa finances half ( 50% ) of the eb payments and 100% of eb administrative costs .

states fund the other half ( 50% ) of eb benefit costs through their suta .

on march 7 , 2019 , representative karen bass introduced h.r .

1585 , the violence against women reauthorization act of 2019 .

among many other provisions , section 703 of h.r .

1585 would require states to consider an individual who quit employment because of sexual harassment , domestic violence , sexual assault , or stalking to be eligible for uc benefits .

the house passed h.r .

1585 on april 4 , 2019 .

on march 14 , 2019 , representative stephanie murphy introduced h.r .

1759 , the building on reemployment improvements to deliver good employment ( bridge ) for workers act .

this proposal would extend eligibility to any claimant of unemployment benefits , including those profiled as likely to exhaust benefits ( rather than limiting eligibility to those who were profiled as likely to exhaust benefits ) .

the house passed h.r .

1759 on april 9 , 2019 .

