the carl d. perkins career and technical education act ( perkins act ) is the primary federal law aimed at developing and supporting career and technical education ( cte ) programs at the secondary and postsecondary educational levels .

prior to the 115 th congress , the perkins act had most recently been reauthorized in 2006 by the carl d. perkins career and technical education act of 2006 ( perkins iv ; p.l .

109-270 ) .

on july 31 , 2018 , president trump signed into law the strengthening career and technical education for the 21 st century act ( perkins v ; p.l .

115-224 ) , which comprehensively reauthorized the perkins act .

perkins v is the most recent in a series of acts that have reauthorized the main federal law authorizing support for the development of cte programs aimed at students in secondary and postsecondary education .

the provisions of perkins v go into effect on july 1 , 2019 .

the first year of implementation will be considered a transition year and states will be able to submit transition plans to cover requirements for the july 2019-june 2020 program year .

perkins v authorizes appropriations for cte programs for fy2019 through fy2024 .

following the transition plan , or in lieu of the transition plan , each state must submit a state plan for the period of authorization .

the reauthorization of the perkins act in the 115 th congress began in the house , which passed its version of the strengthening career and technical education for the 21 st century act ( h.r .

2353 ) by voice vote on june 22 , 2017 .

the senate passed its own version of the bill by voice vote on july 23 , 2018 .

the house agreed to the senate version of h.r .

2353 two days later , and the bill was signed into law by the president as p.l .

115-224 .

this report does not attempt to provide a comprehensive analysis of perkins v. rather , it provides an overview of the primary differences between provisions in place under perkins iv and those enacted in perkins v. table 1 compares provisions in perkins iv with new or revised provisions in perkins v. it also contains a section that highlights selected definitions that are significantly revised or are introduced in perkins v. table a - 1 depicts the authorizations of appropriations for programs authorized under the perkins act as amended by perkins v .

 table 1 highlights the differences between provisions under perkins iv and perkins v as signed into law on july 31 , 2018 .

the table is organized topically , focusing on the areas that will see the most significant changes under perkins v. these areas include the following: overall structure and authorized funding levels , state and local funding formula provisions , state and local plan provisions , accountability and improvement plan provisions , state and local uses of funds , national activities , general provisions , selected revised definitions , and selected new definitions .

