congress enacted the coastal zone management act ( czma ; p.l .

92-583 , 16 u.s.c .

§§1451-1466 ) in 1972 and has amended the act 11 times , most recently in 2009 .

congress deliberated and passed the act at a time when concern about environmental degradation spurred passage of many of the nation's environmental statutes .

czma sets up a national framework for states and territories to consider and manage coastal resources .

if a state or territory chooses to develop a coastal management program and the program is approved , the state or territory ( 1 ) becomes eligible for several federal grants and ( 2 ) can perform reviews of federal agency actions in coastal areas ( known as federal consistency determination reviews ) .

since 1972 , many of the trends that called congressional attention to coastal management have continued .

over a third of the u.s. population lived in shoreline counties in 2010 , with more expected by 2020 as people continue to migrate to coastal areas to take advantage of economic opportunities , retire , and pursue recreational interests .

coastal areas are also home to economic sectors such as fishing , transportation , defense , offshore energy , and tourism and to natural resources such as estuaries , beach systems , and wetlands .

the shoreline likely will continue to be affected by pressures to develop and preserve areas , large - scale events ( eg , hurricanes and tsunamis ) , and long - term changes ( eg , relative sea level , changes in rainfall , wetland loss , and increased temperatures ) .

in addition to responding to these pressures , congress may continue to consider whether czma is being effectively implemented and whether changes should be made to czma grant programs .

this report provides a review of czma with a specific focus on the national coastal zone management program ( nczmp ) .

the report discusses how and why states and territories may choose to participate in the national program ( namely to access federal grant programs and undertake federal consistency determination reviews ) and recent issues for congress .

the appendixes include information about amendments to czma over time and section - by - section summaries of current czma provisions .

congress enacted czma "to establish a national policy and develop a national program for the management , beneficial use , protection , and development of the land and water resources of the nation's coastal zones. .

although czma has been amended 11 times ( appendix a ) , the national policies as declared by congress have stayed relatively consistent over time .

they currently include the following six policies: 1. to preserve , protect , develop , and , if possible , restore or enhance coastal resources ; 2. to encourage and assist states and territories to effectively exercise their development and management responsibilities in the coastal zone , giving full consideration to ecological , cultural , historic , and aesthetic values as well as the needs for compatible economic development ; 3. to encourage the preparation of special area management plans to protect significant natural resources , support reasonable coastal - dependent economic growth , and improve protection of life and property ; 4. to encourage the participation and cooperation of the public , state and local governments , interstate and other regional agencies , and federal agencies to carry out czma ; 5. to encourage coordination and cooperation with and among appropriate federal , state , and local agencies , and international organizations , in collection , analysis , and dissemination of coastal management information and research ; and 6. to respond to changing circumstances affecting the coastal environment and resources and their management by encouraging states and territories to consider ocean uses that may affect the coastal zone .

under czma , each level of government plays a role in coastal management .

at the federal level , the national oceanic and atmospheric administration's ( noaa's ) office for coastal management ( ocm ) in the department of commerce ( doc ) implements czma's national policies and provisions .

to participate in the nczmp , states must adhere to guidelines as set in statute and related regulations .

states and territories , however , determine the details of their coastal management programs ( cmps ) , including the boundaries of their coastal zones , issues of most interest to the state , and policies to address these issues , among other factors .

local governments implement the approved cmps , often through land use regulations .

ocm administers czma provisions under four national programs: nczmp , national estuarine research reserve system ( nerrs ) , and digital coast .

this report focuses on the nczmp .

the nczmp encourages interested coastal states and territories ( hereinafter referred to as states ) to work with noaa to develop and implement coastal zone management programs .

to join , states must develop cmps pursuant to czma and federal regulations .

states that join the nczmp are eligible for several federal grants and have the right to review federal actions for consistency with state coastal policies .

congress may continue to consider the effects of natural and man - made changes on the coast , the effectiveness of czma implementation , and the expired czma grant program authorizations of appropriations .

these concerns have been considered in previous congresses and / or have been recently raised by government agencies and various coastal stakeholders .

congress may continue to examine czma in light of continued population and infrastructure growth along the coast , as well as coastal hazards such as flooding and erosion .

according to the 2010 census , coastal shoreline counties were home to over 123 million people ( 39% of the u.s. population ) , and were expected to grow by another 10 million people by 2020 .

the ocean and great lakes economy accounted for 2.3% of total employment and contributed $320 billion to the total u.s. gross domestic product in 2015 .

much of the population and infrastructure growth has occurred in shoreline communities amid ecosystems such as beaches , reefs , sea grasses , wetlands , estuaries , and deltas .

the combination of built and natural systems has been and likely will continue to be affected by changes in sea level ( and its impacts , such as higher tides , greater storm surge , saltwater intrusion , erosion , etc .

 ) , local rainfall , increasing water and air temperatures , and ocean acidification , among other factors .

several bills to amend czma would have addressed some of these changes .

in the 115 th congress , members proposed bills focused on climate change preparedness or adaptation ( eg , h.r .

3533 and h.r .

4426 ) and "working waterfronts" ( eg , h.r .

1176 ) .

other proposals would have expanded czma grant programs to locations ( the district of columbia , eg , s. 3146 and h.r .

2540 ) and groups ( indian tribes , eg , h.r .

2607 ) currently not eligible to apply to the grant programs .

in previous congresses , other bills proposed additional grant programs related to offshore activities , such as renewable energy siting surveys ( eg , h.r .

1690 , 111 th congress ) , responses to oil spills and other disasters related to outer continental shelf energy activity ( eg , h.r .

3757 , 112 th congress ) , aquaculture siting ( eg , h.r .

2046 , 104 th congress ) , harmful algal blooms ( eg , h.r .

4235 , 105 th congress ) , and great lakes restoration ( eg , s. 2337 , 108 th congress ) .

some scholars have argued for substantial revision or improvements to czma to account for changes along the coast .

congress may examine how noaa has implemented czma and whether changes to the agency , the law , or the law's implementation are necessary .

the effectiveness of czma implementation , specifically the nczmp , has been evaluated since the law's enactment by a variety of entities , including the department of commerce inspector general , the office of management and budget , the government accountability office ( gao ) , and scholars .

evaluations have noted a range of issues , from monitoring and measuring the success of the program as a whole to issues concerning specific grant programs .

gao reported several issues with noaa's implementation of czma and program evaluation in a 2014 report , including limitations to the coastal zone management performance measurement system , weaknesses in noaa's method for selecting stakeholders for state program evaluations , and the agency's limited use of collected performance data .

noaa agreed with the recommendations .

it is unclear whether noaa has completed changes to address gao's recommendations fully .

in a separate 2016 study , gao surveyed state coastal zone managers about the actions noaa was taking under czma to support state efforts to make marine coastal ecosystems more resilient to climate change .

gao found that state coastal zone managers "generally had positive views of the actions noaa [was] taking. .

some have argued that the implementation of some czma programs has been inadequate .

for example , some have questioned whether section 6217 provisions have been properly implemented .

section 6217 of the coastal zone reauthorization amendments act ( p.l .

101-508 ) amended czma to establish the coastal nonpoint pollution control program ( cnpcp ) .

the cnpcp requires coastal states with approved cmps to reduce polluted runoff to coastal waters through coastal nonpoint pollution control programs that include specific land - based measures .

noaa and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) jointly administer the cnpcp .

under section 6217 ( c ) ( 3 ) , participants that fail to submit "approvable programs" lose a portion of their allotted funding under czma section 306 .

most participants received conditional approval between 1997 and 1998 , and the majority have since received final approval .

several states have yet to receive final approval , including alabama , hawaii , illinois , indiana , louisiana , michigan , mississippi , ohio , oregon , texas , and washington .

in 2009 and 2016 , a private organization sued noaa and epa for continuing to grant funds to oregon and washington , respectively .

according to noaa , the agency and epa currently are working with the conditionally approved states to address the programs' remaining conditions .

although congress has continued to appropriate funding for czma grant programs , the program's authorizations of appropriations have expired .

current czma coastal zone management grant programs were last authorized for appropriations in the following years: section 306 ( administrative grants ) : fy1999 ; section 306a ( coastal resource improvement grants ) : fy1999 ; section 307a ( coastal and estuarine land conservation program ) : fy2013 ; section 309 ( coastal zone enhancement grants ) : fy1999 ; and section 6217 ( coastal nonpoint pollution control program ) : fy1995 .

since 1995 , two pieces of legislation have been enacted to reauthorize appropriations for a czma grant program ( p.l .

104-150 in 1996 , which reauthorized appropriations for sections 306 , 306a , and 309 grant programs , and p.l .

111-11 in 2009 , which established and authorized appropriations for the section 307a grant program ) .

introduced pieces of legislation have proposed to reauthorize and increase appropriations for sections 306 , 306a , and 309 grant programs ( eg , s. 1142 in the 104 th congress and s. 3038 in the 114 th congress ) or add additional authorizations for new grant programs ( eg , h.r .

3533 in the 115 th congress and h.r .

1690 in the 111 th congress ) .

congress appropriated $75 million to the nczmp for "coastal zone management grants" in fy2018 , despite the expired authorizations of appropriations .

in fy2019 , as in fy2018 , noaa has proposed to eliminate all coastal management grants .

according to the fy2019 budget proposal , noaa would "continue to support states' participation in the national czm program by reviewing and supporting implementation of states' management plans , supporting federal consistency reviews , and providing technical assistance services. .

some stakeholders have contended that financial assistance to states from the nczmp is important and more funding is necessary .

for example , in a 2016 gao survey , state coastal zone managers stated that "financial assistance provided by noaa [was] critical" and that "the amount of financial assistance available [was] insufficient to address states' needs in implementing projects. .

noaa officials also have stated that financial assistance for coastal zone management is in high demand .

for example , the noaa regional coastal resilience grant program , administered under section 310 , received 132 applications requesting $105 million in fy2015 ; $4.5 million was available for grants .

others argue that funding should not be appropriated to the grant programs , as noted above , making the authorizations for appropriations no longer necessary .

appendix a. coastal zone management act of 1972 ( czma ) and its amendments appendix b. section - by - section summarie .

