the disaster relief fund ( drf ) is one of the most - tracked single accounts funded by congress each year .

managed by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , it is the primary source of funding for the federal government's domestic general disaster relief programs .

these programs , authorized under the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act , as amended ( 42 u.s.c .

5121 et seq .

 ) , outline the federal role in supporting state , local , tribal , and territorial governments as they respond to and recover from a variety of incidents .

they take effect in the event that nonfederal levels of government find their own capacity to deal with an incident is overwhelmed .

the current emergency management policy environment assumes this federal role in domestic disaster relief as the default position and the availability of resources through the drf a necessary requirement .

however , this was not always the case .

the concept of general disaster relief from the federal government predates both fema and the stafford act , but federal involvement in relief after natural and man - made disasters was very rare before the civil war , and was at times considered unconstitutional .

domestic disaster relief efforts became more common after the civil war , but were not seen as a necessary obligation of the federal government .

standing federal domestic disaster relief programs and a pool of resources to fund them only emerged after the second world war .

prior to the development of these programs , domestic disaster relief and recovery was a matter for private nongovernmental organizations and state and local governments .

once established , the federal role in domestic disaster response and recovery grew , proving politically popular and resilient despite periodic concerns about management , execution , and budgetary impacts .

as the drf is the source of funding for most general disaster relief programs , it is an indicator of the scope of those programs and the volume of taxpayer - funded aid they provide .

understanding the trends in the growth of the federal government's role in general disaster relief and recovery , and the associated costs of that role , may be useful as congress considers changes in both emergency management and budgetary policies .

this report introduces the drf and outlines how its resources are made available through a series of simple questions , presents a brief history of the federal government's involvement in domestic disaster relief , describes how the request for general disaster relief funding has been formulated over time , and examines the congressional response to those requests .

it also provides the funding history for the drf , and discusses several issues before congress connected to the fund and the general disaster relief programs it supports .

disaster relief has not always been a part of the mission of the federal government .

for nearly 80 years , federal domestic disaster relief was minimal , extremely narrow in scope , and largely ignored the humanitarian side of the relief equation , leaving that to private organizations and local levels of government .

even as the country emerged from the civil war with more of a national identity and a sense that the federal government could act to provide relief in some circumstances , disaster aid remained limited , responding only after the fact on a case - by - case basis .

only after world war ii did the concept emerge of a federal role in responding to disasters broadly defined , led by the president and funded in advance , as opposed to case - by - case responses to needs in the wake of the most severe events led by ad hoc congressional action .

over the ensuing years , the general disaster relief program and its funding grew , adopting concepts of assistance that had been reserved for catastrophic events .

in the 1970s , the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) was established , institutionalizing the federal role in disaster response , recovery , mitigation , and preparedness — the role we recognize today .

at the heart of that role is the set of relief programs that have evolved since the 1940s , known collectively as the stafford act , which are funded by the disaster relief fund appropriation .

the federal government has defined a role for itself in emergency management and disaster recovery , as a backstop for state , local , territorial , and tribal governments , with roles in providing limited relief for individuals and support for mitigation efforts .

fema's drf appropriation funds a great deal of the federal effort .

as the drf appropriation is simply an amount of budget authority provided to support a role in disasters that is defined through separately crafted laws and policies , many of the issues related to the drf are less about the appropriation than they are about that separately defined federal role .

despite the magnitude of funding provided through the drf for a range of activities and programs , other appropriations support disaster - related activities in other departments and agencies .

as noted earlier , hud , usda , dot , dod , and sba all fund various disaster relief and recovery programs .

at various times in the past , efforts have been made to fund activities through the drf that are not part of the current portfolio of stafford act programs .

the stafford act already encompasses a wide range of emergency management , disaster relief , and disaster response activities .

making non - stafford programs eligible for drf funding is something congress could choose to do , but it would not provide any obvious policy or budgetary advantage .

existing non - stafford programs have their own funding streams , management , and oversight .

providing their resources through a new appropriation could complicate their funding stream and congressional oversight .

while making the programs eligible for funding from the drf could make additional budget authority available , it would be more transparent and direct for congress to simply fund the program through its existing appropriation .

there is no special budgetary treatment for appropriations for the drf — only for appropriations which are designated for the costs of major disasters under the bca .

shifting discretionary spending out of one appropriations subcommittee's jurisdiction into another provides no overall budgetary benefit — the total amount of spending remains the same .

subcommittee allocations are set and reset every year ( sometimes multiple times each year ) at the discretion of the house and senate appropriations committees , so such a move could well result in no net impact on available resources .

the concept of a broader funding stream providing discretionary resources for drf , sba , and usda disaster relief programs has also been considered before .

such an idea , floated by a previous administration but rejected by congress , might have made more resources available in the immediate aftermath of a disaster , but it is not clear that reorganizing funding would make the programs subject to more thorough oversight or make them more effective .

it could limit the ability of congress to provide specific oversight or direction through appropriations to the separate programs .

congress could also break up the drf into appropriations for the individual stafford act programs or groups of programs .

this might allow for additional specific congressional oversight and direction , but it could reduce the flexibility that exists within the drf to shift its resources to meet unanticipated disaster needs by segmenting the available resources .

appropriations are frequently provided on the basis of what can be spent on a project in a given fiscal year .

this thinking informs part of the funding request , as it includes a basis of spending on open disasters , where recovery is ongoing .

a 10-year average informs the portion of the drf budget request that pays for response and recovery from disasters that cost less than $500 million .

previous and current administrations have sought additional reserve funds over and above those projected needs to pay for potential "no notice" events .

on the other hand , from fy2014 to fy2017 , almost $2.5 billion in funding was rescinded from unobligated balances in the drf .

in the present constrained budget environment , congress continues to weigh the proper level of reserves for fema to keep on hand in the drf .

while disaster relief is a relatively small part of the discretionary budget , and an even smaller part of the overall federal budget , disaster relief spending is anticipated to continue growing in the coming years .

in modern history , congress has been generally willing to provide resources for major disasters on an as - needed basis .

however , discussions of deficit and debt continue in congress , and may increase in frequency and volume as the budget control act nears expiration in fy2021 .

the central question is this: does disaster relief represent enough of a priority for the federal government to maintain the status quo notwithstanding potential increasing costs ? .

when budget controls were put in place in the 1980s , 1990s , and 2010s , exceptions were provided to help ensure relief and recovery efforts would continue to be funded .

with the expiration of the budget control act statutory caps on discretionary spending , one limitation on disaster relief spending — albeit one with a limited practical effect , as noted above — will go away .

the allowable adjustment for disaster relief will expire as well , which may have more of an impact , as congress has used it to move disaster relief spending more fully into the annual appropriations process .

the adjustment has effectively allowed most of the annual drf appropriation to be provided without competing against other homeland security priorities for the discretionary funding provided under the homeland security appropriations subcommittee's allocation .

congress may consider whether they want that process to continue .

congress may also debate whether to try to limit disaster relief spending .

the most direct means of doing this would not be to change the drf appropriation , but by changing the underlying laws that authorize the programs it funds .

implementing relief limits or deductibles for states or smaller jurisdictions , larger nonfederal cost shares , or changes in the declaration process may prove unpopular , and having to vote for them once in more durable authorizing legislation may be more practical than doing so annually in appropriations legislation , which expires .

