house and senate rules define the term ea rmark slightly differently ( table 1 ) but generally emphasize that an y congressionally directed spending , tax benefit , or tariff benefit be considered an earmark if it would benefit a specific entity or state , locality , or congressional district other than through a statutory or administrative formula or competitive award process .

for the purposes of this report , from this point forward the term ea rmark includes any congressionally directed spending , limited tax benefit , or limited tariff benefit .

in the 112 th congress ( 2011-2012 ) , the house and senate began observing what has been referred to as an earmark moratorium or earmark ban .

the moratorium does not exist in house or senate rules , however , and therefore is not enforced by points of order .

instead , the moratorium has been established by party rules and committee protocols and is enforced by chamber and committee leadership through their agenda - setting power .

for example , the rules of the house republican conference for the 112 th congress ( 2011-2012 ) included a standing order labeled earmark moratorium that stated , "it is the policy of the house republican conference that no member shall request a congressional earmark , limited tax benefit , or limited tariff benefit , as such terms have been described in the rules of the house. .

this language has been included in orders adopted by the conference in the 113 th , 114 th and 115 th congresses ( 2013-2018 ) .

likewise , in early 2011 , the senate appropriations committee issued a press release stating that it would implement a two - year moratorium on earmarks ( which was later extended ) .

additionally , the senate republican conference adopted a resolution on november 14 , 2012 , that included an earmark moratorium .

it stated "resolved , that it is the policy of the [senate] republican conference that no member shall request a congressionally directed spending item , limited tax benefit , or limited tariff benefit , as such terms are used in rule xliv of the standing rules of the senate for the 113 th congress. .

this same rule has been adopted by senate republicans in each congress through the 115 th congress ( 2017-2018 ) .

as noted above , the earmark moratorium is not codified in house or senate rules .

therefore , lifting the earmark moratorium would not require an amendment to either chamber's rules .

since the moratorium has been established through republican party rules and committee protocols and has been enforced by chamber and committee leadership through their agenda - setting power , presumably the moratorium might be "lifted" simply by either or both chambers permitting the development and consideration of legislation that includes earmarks .

the house and senate continue to have formal earmark disclosure requirements in their standing rules that were first established in the 110 th congress ( 2007-2008 ) with the stated intention of bringing more transparency to earmarking .

a summary of those requirements is presented below .

for additional information , see crs report rs22866 , earmark disclosure rules in the house: member and committee requirements , by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report rs22867 , earmark disclosure rules in the senate: member and committee requirements , by [author name scrubbed] .

the 116 th congress may examine what changes , if any , are needed in the area of earmark policy .

congress may choose to keep the earmark moratorium in place but insert it into formal chamber rules .

alternatively , congress might choose to lift the earmark moratorium but institute any number of policies or restrictions to govern the use of congressional earmarks .

just as in the past , these policies or restrictions might be instituted through formal amendments to house and senate standing rules or by enacting new provisions in law .

restrictions could also be instituted through party rules , leadership and committee practices and protocols , or standing order .

such policies or restrictions could seek to accomplish a number of goals .

for example , some policies could seek to add additional transparency to the earmarking process .

in the past the house and senate appropriations committees have required members requesting earmarks to post information regarding earmarks on their personal websites , including the purpose of the earmark and why it was a valuable use of taxpayer funds .

in 2010 , the house appropriations committee stated that it would "establish a 'one - stop' online link to all house members' appropriations earmark requests to enable the public to easily view them. .

congress could also restrict the purposes for which an earmark might be used or prohibit certain entities from receiving earmarks entirely .

for example , according to press reports , the house appropriations committee adopted a policy prohibiting earmarks for projects named after the member of congress requesting the earmark .

in march 2010 , the house appropriations committee announced that it would no longer consider earmarks directed to for - profit entities .

congress could also limit the amount that might be spent on an earmark .

such a limit could apply to each specific earmark or to the total cost of all earmarks .

for example , in january 2009 , the house appropriations committee articulated a policy of limiting "total funding for non - project based earmarks" to 50% of the 2006 levels and no more than 1% of the total discretionary budget .

congress could also choose to institute new policies or restrictions that would involve the executive branch .

this could allow the executive branch to affect the earmarking process by , for example , advising committees on whether a potential earmark constitutes a suitable use of funds .

congress could also involve the executive branch by requiring agency inspectors general to audit spending for earmarked projects in order to ensure that the funds are being used for their intended purpose .

congress could also choose to conduct further research into the practice of earmarking generally .

this might involve asking crs or the government accountability office to perform research or creating a select committee to study earmarks and recommend new policies or restrictions .

