as the trials of sheldon silver and dean skelos illustrate , corruption among high - profile public officials continues to be a concern in the united states .

likewise , recent examples abound of powerful executives in the private sector abusing positions of trust for personal gain .

faced with this reality , congress has shown consistent interest in policing public - and private - sector corruption , enacting a number of criminal provisions aimed at holding corrupt officials accountable for their actions under federal law .

however , one of federal prosecutors' most potent existing tools for combating such corruption — 18 u.s.c .

§ 1346 , which defines the crimes of mail and wire fraud as including so - called "honest services" fraud — has been a source of contention between the courts and congress for years .

while congress has manifested its intent that the mail and wire fraud statutes should broadly cover the self - interested actions of federal , state , local , and private - sector officials , the supreme court and lower federal courts have repeatedly limited the scope of 18 u.s.c .

§ 1346 out of concern that a broad construction would render the statute unconstitutionally vague ( and , with respect to state and local officials , potentially raise federalism concerns ) .

this report thus provides an overview of the still - developing federal crime of honest services fraud and highlights certain legal issues that congress may consider if it seeks to address the scope of the crime legislatively .

chapter 63 of title 18 of the u.s. code broadly criminalizes the use of the mails or wires in furtherance of "any scheme or artifice to defraud," or "for obtaining money or property by means of false or fraudulent pretenses , representations , or promises. .

a core category of conduct reached by these mail and wire fraud statutes concerns misrepresentations or omissions that would deprive a victim of his or her money or property .

in such cases , "the victim's loss of money or property supplie[s] the defendant's gain , with one the mirror image of the other. .

a straightforward example is the filing of an insurance claim for a car accident that never happened in order to obtain a payout from the insurance company .

yet 18 u.s.c .

§ 1346 establishes that the term "scheme or artifice to defraud" as used in chapter 63 also "includes a scheme or artifice to deprive another of the intangible right of honest services. .

this provision was enacted in the late 1980s , in response to the u.s. supreme court's holding in mcnally v. united states that the mail fraud statute was "limited in scope" to only "the protection of property rights. .

section 1346 abrogates mcnally 's holding , codifying the understanding of some of the lower federal courts that the mail and wire fraud statutes extend to conduct that deprives a person or group of the right to have another act in accordance with some externally imposed duty or obligation , regardless of whether the victim so deprived has suffered or would suffer a pecuniary harm .

recognizing that this lower court understanding in fact evinced "considerable disarray" as to the kinds of schemes that would qualify as "honest services" fraud , however , the supreme court subsequently read a limiting principle into section 1346 in skilling v. united states in order to avoid invalidating the statute as unconstitutionally vague .

after skilling , mail and wire fraud prosecutions under an honest services theory may extend only to "offenders who , in violation of a fiduciary duty , participate[] in bribery or kickback schemes. .

the conversation between the court and congress regarding the scope of honest services fraud and its culmination in skilling have presented more questions that lower courts have been tasked with answering , including the sources of fiduciary duties and the types of conduct that qualify as bribery and kickback schemes .

this report provides an overview of the mail and wire fraud statutes and the pre - skilling development of the "honest services" theory of fraud .

the report then examines the theory's codification in 18 u.s.c .

§ 1346 and subsequent limitation in skilling , and surveys post - skilling judicial elaboration of the requirements for honest services fraud .

finally , this report briefly addresses some issues congress may consider if it seeks to alter the scope of honest services fraud through legislation .

18 u.s.c .

§ 1341 prohibits use of the mails ( including the united states postal service and "any private or commercial interstate carrier" ) for the purpose of executing "any scheme or artifice to defraud , or for obtaining money or property by means of false or fraudulent pretenses , representations , or promises. .

18 u.s.c .

§ 1343 likewise prohibits transmissions "by means of wire , radio , or television communication in interstate or foreign commerce" for the purpose of executing such schemes or artifices .

these federal crimes , commonly known as "mail fraud" and "wire fraud," encompass multiple forms of fraudulent conduct using jurisdictional hooks that reach practically all forms of communication .

because the two statutes ( save for the medium used in connection with the offense ) essentially mirror each other , interpretations and analyses of one statute will typically apply to the other .

to secure a mail or wire fraud conviction , the government must prove beyond a reasonable doubt four elements , each of which is discussed in more detail below: 1. a scheme to defraud involving a material deception ; 2. foreseeable use of the mail , a private commercial carrier , or a wire or radio communication in furtherance of said scheme ; and 3. intent to defraud another of 4. money , property , or honest services .

the supreme court's decision in skilling makes clear that honest services mail or wire fraud must involve "offenders who , in violation of a fiduciary duty , participate[] in bribery or kickback schemes. .

in light of that holding , lower courts in recent years have had to reconsider the ( 1 )  vitality of the "limiting principles" they adopted prior to skilling , ( 2 ) source and scope of fiduciary duties , and ( 3 ) definition and application of the terms "bribery" and "kickbacks. .

on more than one occasion since 2010 , congress has considered legislation that would expand honest services fraud to include certain categories of conduct that 18 u.s.c .

§ 1346 no longer encompasses under the supreme court's interpretations of the statute .

for instance , the senate and house considered bills in the 112th congress that would have restored undisclosed self - dealing as a basis for honest services fraud prosecution in public - , but not private - sector , cases .

the legislation would have expanded the definition of "scheme to defraud" to include a scheme by a "public official" — meaning a federal , state , or local officer , employee , or agent — to ( 1 ) perform an official act that , at least in material part , furthers his own or certain relatives' or associates' financial interests ; and ( 2 ) conceal or knowingly fail to disclose "material information" about the interest required to be disclosed "by any federal , state , or local statute , rule , regulation , or charter applicable to the public official. .

in short , it appears that the legislation would have expanded the scope of honest services fraud liability in public - sector cases , beyond the bribery and kickback schemes contemplated in skilling , to include one additional category of conduct: failure to disclose a material financial conflict of interest .

additionally , though the bills were considered prior to the supreme court's decision in mcdonnell , it appears that at least one version would have established a slightly broader definition of an "official act" than the one the court subsequently announced .

ultimately , the bills introduced in the 112th congress did not become law , nor has any other legislation purporting to reexpand the scope of honest services fraud become law as of this writing .

nevertheless , some commentators have continued to lament what they view as the supreme court's blunting of a previously sharp weapon to combat public corruption , arguing that the decisions in skilling and mcdonnell placed too little weight on "the interests of citizens in honest government" and urging congress to find a legislative fix .

other observers , however , have suggested that the deleterious impact of the decisions is overstated , pointing out that federal prosecutors still have multiple legal avenues through which to combat corruption in the public sphere .

in any event , should congress revisit and reconsider the scope of 18 u.s.c .

§ 1346 , understanding the vagueness and federalism concerns that have animated the supreme court's repeated limiting constructions of the statute may be beneficial to preventing further judicial limitations .

one place to start would be the skilling court's identification of some questions that must be answered if congress seeks to "take up the enterprise of criminalizing undisclosed self - dealing  .

 .

 .

. .

these questions include ( 1 ) how "direct or significant" a conflicting financial interest must be ; ( 2 ) the extent to which an "official" act or action must further the conflicting financial interest in order to constitute fraud ; and ( 3 ) to whom a disclosure must be made , and what information it must contain , for a conflicted official to avoid criminal liability .

answering these questions in any proposed legislation may go a long way toward achieving the "definiteness and specificity" needed to potentially avoid the vagueness and federalism concerns that the court has repeatedly articulated .

