four major principles currently underlie u.s. policy for admitting lawful permanent residents ( lprs ) : reunifying families , admitting individuals with needed skills , providing humanitarian assistance , and diversifying immigrant flows by country of origin .

these principles are expressed in the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , which contains a pathway for acquiring lpr status for each principle .

family reunification occurs primarily through family - sponsored immigration .

admitting individuals with needed skills occurs through employment - based immigration .

humanitarian assistance occurs primarily through the u.s. refugee and asylum programs .

origin - country diversity occurs primarily through the diversity immigrant visa .

this report focuses on the second lpr pathway noted above , employment - based immigration .

employment - based immigrants enter the united states through one of five preference categories , each with its own eligibility requirements and numerical limitations and , in some cases , different application processes .

in addition to the numerical limits imposed upon each preference category , employment - based immigrants face a per - country ceiling , or "cap," that limits the number of immigrants from any single country of origin to 7% of the annual limit for each of the five preference categories .

this limitation was imposed to prevent any one country or handful of countries from dominating the flow of employment - based immigration to the united states .

the numerical limits imposed upon each preference category , combined with the per - country ceiling , mean that employment - based immigrants from certain countries can face considerable waits before they can acquire lpr status .

in recent years , some members of congress have shown interest in reassessing the 7% per - country ceiling for employment - based immigration .

some assert that the current numerical limits on employment - based lprs are not working in the national economic interest and potentially lead to exploitation of foreign workers who are waiting to acquire lpr status .

others argue that such limits prevent a few countries from dominating employment - based immigration .

the report opens with explanations of the employment - based preference categories and the per - country ceiling governing annual permanent immigration .

it then presents trend data on employment - based immigration .

focusing primarily on the five major employment - based preference categories , the report continues by analyzing pending queues of six distinct pools of petitions and applications found across the administrative process of acquiring employment - based lpr status .

the report then presents arguments for and against removing the per - country ceiling on employment - based lprs .

it discusses recent congressional proposals to alter the per - country ceiling , and considers possible outcomes that might occur as a result of eliminating it .

the ina limits worldwide permanent immigration to 675,000 persons annually: 480,000 family - sponsored immigrants , made up of family - sponsored immediate relatives of u.s. citizens ( immediate relatives ) , and a set of four ordered family - sponsored preference immigrant categories ( "preference immigrants" ) ; 140,000 e mployment - based immigrants comprised of a set of five preference immigrant categories and 55,000 diversity visa immigrants .

this worldwide limit , however , is referred to as a "permeable cap" because immediate relatives are exempt from numerical limits placed on family - sponsored immigration and thereby represent the flexible component of the 675,000 worldwide limit .

consequently , the actual total of foreign nationals receiving lpr status each year ( including immigrants , refugees , and asylees ) has averaged roughly 1 million persons during the past decade .

the ina outlines five distinct employment - based preference categories and their individual numerical limits within the overall worldwide total of lawful permanent residents .

how prospective immigrants apply for employment - based lpr status depends on where they reside .

they may apply directly from abroad as new immigrant arrivals or from within the united states as "status adjusters. .

adjusting status refers to the process of changing from a temporary ( nonimmigrant ) status ( eg , f - 1 student visa , h - 1b skilled temporary worker visa ) to lpr status .

in either case , petitioning and application involve multiple steps and federal agencies .

while some prospective employment - based immigrants can self - petition , most require u.s. employers to petition on their behalf .

dos and the department of homeland security ( dhs ) each play key roles in administering the law and policies on immigrant admission .

in addition , petitioners for 2 nd and 3 rd preference category immigrants must apply for labor certification ( described below ) from the department of labor ( dol ) .

once any required labor certification is approved , dhs's u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) must adjudicate an immigrant petition .

if the prospective immigrant resides in the united states , uscis also processes the application to adjust to lpr status ( discussed below ) .

in contrast , if the prospective immigrant resides abroad , they must subsequently apply to dos's bureau of consular affairs for a visa to travel to the united states .

dos is also responsible for the allocation , enumeration , and assignment of all numerically limited "visa numbers" or slots , regardless of where prospective immigrants reside .

among prospective immigrants , the ina distinguishes between principal prospective immigrants ( principals ) who meet the qualifications of the employment - based preference category , and derivative prospective immigrants ( derivatives ) who include the principals' spouses and children .

derivatives appear on the same petition as principals and are entitled to the same status and order of consideration as long as they are "accompanying" or "following to join" principal immigrants .

 figure 1 presents the trends in the admission of employment - based immigrants from 1997 to 2017 by preference category .

over this period , the total number of employment - based immigrants fluctuated from a low of 56,817 ( in 1999 ) to a peak of 246,877 ( in 2005 ) .

in fy2017 , these 137,855 employment - based immigrants represented 12% of the 1,127,167 foreign nationals who received lpr status .

the data illustrate that , as noted in table 1 above , the ina allocates most employment - based lprs to the 1 st , 2 nd , and 3 rd preference categories .

the 2003 dip and the 2005 spike in employment - based lprs resulted from disruptions caused by the transfer of immigration functions from the legacy immigration and naturalization service in the department of justice to the new uscis in the newly created department of homeland security in 2003 .

the 2005 increase in employment - based lprs resulted from a provision in the real id act of 2005 , which provided for the "recapture" or re - use of past unused employment - based visa numbers .

within the total number of employment - based immigrants , the annual number of employment - based preference lprs have fluctuated substantially over the two decades .

in contrast with all other employment - based preference immigrants , the number of 5 th preference immigrants increased tenfold between fy1997 and fy2017 ( from 936 to 9,863 ) , largely from the popularity of the uscis eb - 5 regional center program .

as noted above , acquiring lpr status through the ina's employment - based immigration provisions requires a series of administrative steps performed by various federal agencies involving labor certifications , immigration petitions , and visa applications .

the following section isolates and describes six distinct groups of lpr petitions and applications in order of administrative processing: pending labor certification applications at dol , pending immigrant petitions at uscis , pending approved visa applications at dos , pending approved adjustment of status petitions at uscis , visa applications submitted to dos , and adjustment of status applications submitted to uscis .

because each step in the process involves some form of review or adjudication , a certain number of petitions or applications in each pool are denied and do not advance to the next step .

as such , foreign nationals at the early stages of the employment - based immigration process face a lower likelihood of ultimately obtaining lpr status compared with those near the end of the process .

while the six distinct groups of petitions and applications discussed here illustrate the pools of prospective employment - based immigrants at different stages of administrative processing , only two pools represent applicants who are limited from advancing because of the ina's numerical limits .

those two pools ( the third and the fourth ) include those with approved employment - based immigrant petitions who are either waiting overseas to obtain a visa or waiting in the united states to adjust their status .

as such , those two pools represent the employment - based immigration queue .

employment - based immigrant petitions are submitted not only on behalf of principal immigrants who meet the qualifications of the applicable preference category but also on behalf of derivative immigrants ( i.e. , the spouses and children accompanying or following to join the principal prospective immigrants ) who are included in the same petition .

in the discussion below of the fourth pool of prospective immigrants waiting to adjust status with uscis , the number of derivative immigrants is estimated using uscis data ( see " pending approved adjustment of status petitions at uscis " ) .

proposals to adjust or eliminate the per - country ceiling on employment - based immigration have appeared in legislative proposals in recent congresses .

for example , the border security , economic opportunity , and immigration modernization act ( s. 744 ) , a comprehensive immigration reform bill which passed the senate in the 113 th congress , would have eliminated the per - country ceiling for employment - based immigration and raised it for family - based immigration from 7% to 15% .

an identical provision was introduced in the 115 th congress with h.r .

392 ( i.e. , the "yoder amendment" to the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2019 ( h.r .

6776 ) ) .

those who favor raising or eliminating the employment - based per - country ceiling argue that the current employment - based immigration system makes prospective employment - based immigrants wait for excessively long periods to acquire lpr status .

during these waits , such foreign workers are generally unable to reunite with spouses and children who reside overseas .

others who favor eliminating the per - country ceiling contend that the current system discriminates against some foreign workers based on their country of origin , a characteristic they contend has little bearing on workers' labor market contributions .

such proponents argue that the current system effectively ties immigrant workers to the employers that sponsor them for extended periods and invites potential exploitation .

according to this perspective , employers who petition on behalf of prospective employment - based immigrants have disproportionate power over them .

because such employers can withdraw their petitions at will , they discourage foreign workers from negotiating for higher wages and / or improved working conditions .

all else being equal , rational employers therefore benefit financially by sponsoring such workers who remain relatively immobile during their extensive waits to receive lpr status .

prospective immigrants who consider leaving their employers face the prospect of effectively forfeiting their pending employment - based immigrant petitions .

if they cannot utilize another immigration pathway to remain in the united states , they must return to their home countries .

in particular , indian ( and to a lesser extent chinese and filipino ) nationals sit in much longer queues of pending employment - based petitions submitted to uscis and visa applications to dos than their counterparts from other countries .

they consequently must wait the longest to obtain lpr status .

those who favor eliminating the per - country cap contend that such circumstances effectively encourage employers to sponsor prospective employment - based immigrants primarily from india .

according to this perspective , de facto discrimination results on the basis of origin country , fostered partly by u.s. laws which otherwise prohibit most forms of labor market discrimination .

the more that employers follow this hiring approach , the greater the queue of indian prospective immigrants and the longer the waiting times for acquiring lpr status , creating a self - reinforcing cycle that may limit hiring of prospective employment - based immigrants from other countries .

proponents argue , therefore , that removing the per - country ceiling from employment - based immigrants would "level the playing field" by making immigrants from all countries more equally attractive to employers .

if the per - country ceiling is eliminated and the current queue of pending petitions and visas is processed , proponents argue , employers would have no incentive to sponsor employment - based immigrants from any one country over others except based on conventional labor market criteria .

as a result , waiting times for prospective employment - based immigrants to receive lpr status would ultimately equalize across countries of origin .

from a national interest perspective , many have argued that current circumstances discourage skilled foreign workers from countries such as india from seeking employment and immigration sponsorship in the united states .

prospective immigrants , aware that they could wait for substantial periods of time before actually receiving lpr status , may decide to start their careers and conduct entrepreneurial activities in other countries where the equivalent of lpr status is more quickly obtained .

consequently , firms who wish to attract highly skilled foreign workers may face competitive disadvantages compared to firms based in countries that provide permanent legal status more easily .

some empirical research suggests that long waits for lpr status affects the number of highly trained students in science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) programs who remain in the united states to work after completing their studies .

opponents of removing the per - country ceiling contend that doing so would substantially reduce country - of - origin diversity and potentially allow a few countries to dominate all permanent employment - based immigration to the united states .

they contend that removing the per - country ceiling would advantage indian and chinese prospective immigrants who would move more quickly to the head of the queue at the expense of those from all other countries .

arguments against lifting the per - country ceiling often point to the h - 1b visa for temporary "professional specialty workers," an employment category generally associated with stem fields .

the h - 1b visa represents a frequently used pathway for skilled nonimmigrant ( temporary ) workers to become employment - based immigrants .

some observers criticize the h - 1b visa as exploitative of foreign workers , mostly from india , because once sponsored for employment - based lpr status , workers are unable to change employers , leaving them vulnerable to exploitative practices .

they note that indian nationals dominate h - 1b visa recipients with almost three fourths of the total .

many observers are interested in how revising the per - country ceiling would affect future flows of employment - based immigrants .

estimating such impacts are challenging for a number of reasons , including the complex accounting among the six pools of petitions and applications .

if congress eliminated the per - country ceiling for employment - based immigrants , many expect that indian and chinese nationals would dominate the flow of new employment - based lprs for as many years as needed to clear out the accumulated queue of prospective immigrants from those countries .

this queue would include those with approved employment - based immigrant petitions who are waiting to file either a visa application with dos or an adjustment of status application with uscis ( i.e. , the third and fourth pools discussed above in " pools of prospective employment - based lprs ." ) .

as noted above , the "yoder amendment," which was introduced during the 115 th congress and would eliminate the per - country ceiling for all employment - based preference categories , illustrates what kind of impacts might be expected .

the amendment would phase out the ceiling over four years .

in the first year , a single country could use 85% of all visa numbers in a preference category with the remaining 15% still subject to the 7% per - country ceiling .

thus for the 1 st , 2 nd , and 3 rd preference categories , each of which account for 40,040 visa numbers under the current system , this would amount to 34,034 visa numbers ( 40,040 x 0.85 ) for each of the first three preference categories in the first year after enactment .

that percentage would increase to 90% for the second and third years ( 36,036 visa numbers ) , and reach 100% in the fourth and subsequent years .

to illustrate this further , consider the 3 rd employment - based preference category .

data presented above for the third and fourth pools in " pools of prospective employment - based lprs " yield an estimated 170,000 principal and derivative immigrants from india , china , and the philippines who were waiting for lpr status in 2018 .

given the parameters of the yoder amendment , one could estimate that roughly four to five years would be required to eliminate this queue of prospective 3 rd preference employment - based immigrants .

other outcomes may also result from eliminating the per - country ceiling , apart from reducing certain queues of prospective immigrants more quickly , and removing the perceived employer incentive to choose nationals from these countries over other countries .

for example , shorter wait times for lpr status might actually incentivize greater numbers of nationals from india , china , and the philippines to seek employment - based lpr status .

if that were to occur , the reduction in the number of approved petitions pending might be short - lived .

in addition , absent a per - country ceiling , a handful of countries could conceivably dominate employment - based immigration , possibly benefitting certain industries that employ foreign workers from those countries , at the expense of foreign workers from other countries and other industries that might employ them .

in addition , because the ina grants lprs the ability to sponsor family members through its family - sponsorship provisions , removing the per - country ceiling would alter , to an unknown extent , the country - of - origin composition of subsequent family - based immigrants acquiring lpr status each year .

