t he federal government collects various fees and other charges from businesses and households .

choosing to raise public funds via user fees , as opposed to other means such as taxes , has important administrative and economic consequences .

many fees stem from "business - like activities," in which the government provides a service or benefit in return for payment .

for example , many n ational p arks charge entry fees , which then help fund maintenance projects .

some fees are closely tied to regulatory or judicial activities , such as filing or inspection fees , which stem from the federal government's sovereign powers .

other federal fees or charges are intragovernmental transactions that do not involve the public .

for example , the office of personnel management ( opm ) charges other federal agencies fees to cover the cost of background investigations .

for many federal agencies , fees or user charges amount to a minimal portion of budgetary resources .

other regulatory agencies , such as the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) , the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) , the patent and trademark office ( pto ) , and the federal trade commission ( ftc ) , are wholly or partially funded by user fees and other nontax receipts .

user fees from the public accounted for $331 billion in fy2017 , about a tenth of total federal receipts ( $3.32 trillion ) .

fees and charges generally result from voluntary choices , such as entering a national park .

by contrast , the collection of taxes ultimately relies on the government's sovereign power to compel payments .

fees may not be compulsory , but not paying them may make it impossible to carry out many activities legally .

for instance , without paying passport application fees and obtaining a passport , people cannot fly to other countries .

nor can businesses issue securities without paying federal filing fees .

the statutory basis for each particular fee or user charge varies in specificity and in the degree of discretion granted to the executive branch .

for example , authorizing legislation might specify in detail how certain fees are imposed and how proceeds are used .

in other cases , federal agencies rely on broader authorities to impose user fees .

user fees have several advantages as a means of financing public activities .

they are voluntary , they connect the burden of financing activities to those who directly benefit from them , and they can help decentralize decisionmaking by bypassing centralized allocation of resources .

at times , proposals to raise fees may encounter less political resistance than proposals to raise an equivalent sum via taxes .

on the other hand , the flow of user fees and charges may reflect fluctuations in economic conditions , which may complicate the financing of government operations .

some are also concerned that funding arrangements may bypass regular congressional scrutiny and dilute congress's power of the purse .

the government accountability office ( gao ) defines a user fee as a fee assessed to users for goods or services provided by the federal government .

user fees generally apply to federal programs or activities that provide special benefits to identifiable recipients above and beyond what is normally available to the public .

the office of management and budget ( omb ) defines the term user charge to include transactions not normally considered fees , such as land or asset sales .

omb's budget preparation documents state that user charges include not only proceeds from selling postage stamps , electricity , and medicare part b premiums , but also sales of assets and natural resources , among other categories .

the federal government , which operates on a modified cash accounting basis , does not recognize in its budgetary accounts the loss of asset values when it sells assets or natural resources , as a private firm would using typical business accounting methods .

for instance , if the government were to sell oil at a price of $60 per barrel that it bought at $120 per barrel , only the current revenues would be reflected in budget accounts .

a private firm would normally adjust its balance sheet to reflect a loss .

omb designates whether each account receives collections associated with user charges , and that information is contained within omb's max budget data system .

omb has not released data on those designations .

the budget appendix that omb issues annually , while not including information on that designation , does present detailed subaccount - level data that often indicate whether a federal program's budgetary resources rely on fee income .

the format of the budget appendix , however , makes it an impractical source of data for government - wide research .

as far as crs can determine , a comprehensive and authoritative list of federal fees is not publicly available .

budget and financial documents from omb and the u.s. treasury , however , do provide detailed information on offsetting collections and offsetting receipts — the budget categories that typically contain user fees and other charges — as well as information on budgetary accounts .

in some cases , account descriptions clearly indicate an association with one or more fees .

in other cases , however , whether or not an account receives fees is unclear .

for example , an account might be labeled as miscellaneous receipts , or as fines , fees , and penalties .

user fees , as noted above , can tie benefits enjoyed by households or firms — such as passports , access to national parks , or approvals to raise investment funds from the public — to payments that can help defray public costs of providing them .

an economist's rule of thumb known as the benefit principle , which suggests linking the fiscal burden of publicly provided benefits to those who enjoy those benefits , can promote fairness and efficiency .

for example , many would contend that those with the opportunity to travel abroad should shoulder more of the costs of reviewing passport applications and issuing documents than those who do not .

moreover , if fees are set at levels that match the incremental cost of providing benefits , then when an agency is called to expand its work — such as an uptick in demand for passports , park visits , or company registrations — then those fees could fund the needed extra resources .

matching fees to incremental costs , however , is difficult where demand is irregular or unpredictable .

omb guidelines on user fees outline aims similar to the benefit principle , mandating that federal agencies ensure that each service , sale , or use of government goods or resources provided by an agency to specific recipients be self - sustaining ; promote efficient allocation of the nation's resources by establishing charges for special benefits provided to the recipient that are at least as great as costs to the government of providing the special benefits ; and allow the private sector to compete with the government without disadvantage in supplying comparable services , resources , or goods where appropriate .

omb mandates that agencies review user fees every other year .

omb also encourages agencies seeking new authority to assess fees to "seek to remove restraints on user charges. .

in some cases , federal agencies and regulated industries negotiate over user fee levels and the improvements in federal regulatory operations supported in large part by those fees .

for instance , pharmaceutical companies negotiate with the food and drug administration ( fda ) over fees charged to review drug applications .

over time , the scope of fda activities supported in part by fees has expanded .

some contend that the fda's increasing reliance on user fees has tilted the agency's priorities toward industry interests and away from consumer protection responsibilities .

one 2005 analysis of the fda drug review process found that approval times decreased after legislation expanded the agency's reliance on user fees , while it found no statistically significant evidence of a decrease in one proxy measure of drug safety .

federal agencies such as the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) and the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) are largely supported from amounts paid by covered industries .

conflicts between executive branch agencies , which often have sought greater flexibility to use funds to respond to public priorities as they see them , and congress , which has sought to defend its fiscal prerogatives and ability to set federal policy priorities , are long - standing .

congress could constrain agency discretion by requiring more user fee proceeds be either subject to annual appropriations or deposited in the u.s. treasury general fund , although that may limit agencies' capacity to respond to new public demands and other changing conditions , as the government accountability office ( gao ) has noted .

some inspectors general and congressional committees have also called for tighter , more efficient , and more consistent financial management of user fee funds .

during the mid - 1980s , congress , with gao support , conducted a comprehensive review of so - called "backdoor spending" — an informal term for budget authority provided in laws other than appropriations acts — including spending supported by user fees , which was updated in 1996 .

a narrower follow - up in 2017 covering five agencies concluded that "all entities gao examined have policies and procedures to manage and report on their permanent funding authorities," but that "some , however , could improve practices to manage funds and report information that facilitates oversight. .

sweeping changes to the budgetary treatment of user fees , however , could add new pressures on the congressional appropriations process .

proposals to require that most fees be collected into the treasury general fund and that activities previously supported by those fees be funded by annual appropriations could create new demands on appropriations committees .

such proposals could also affect the division of responsibilities among authorizing committees and appropriations committees .

statutory texts governing many fees , including those noted above , have evolved over many years and involve substantive policy decisions , often related to industry or programmatic concerns .

congress may also enhance its oversight of agencies reliant on user fees by requiring more timely and detailed financial reports as well as more precise and systematic explanations of linkages between those fees and associated programs .

omb and treasury issue extensive information on user fees and charges .

nonetheless , the format and level of detail of published data make it difficult to address some government - wide policy questions regarding user fees and charges .

congress could modify laws governing the president's budget submission ( 31 u.s.c .

1105 ) to require omb to release data that it collects on which budget accounts receive material amounts of user fee and user charge revenues .

that could allow congress to track and analyze user fees and charges more easily .

in particular , it would also provide a means to distinguish discretionary and mandatory fees and charges , which could be useful in understanding the effects or constraints imposed by budget enforcement measures .

that might provide congress with a clearer view of its fiscal options when considering budgetary measures .

mandating that omb or other agencies provide more data would probably require additional budgetary resources to cover costs of new personnel and capabilities .

congress can promote economic efficiency and an equitable sharing of public burdens by choosing appropriate means of financing federal operations .

user fees and charges , as noted above , can help tie the costs of supporting specific federal operations with those who benefit from them .

even if closely regulated industries may find federal requirements , inspections , or approval processes burdensome , they also presumably benefit from the increased demand for their products that carry the imprimatur of explicit or implicit federal approval .

federal regulation and inspection operations , however , also serve broader interests of consumers , taxpayers , and related industries .

to the extent that inherently governmental responsibilities motivate federal operations , the argument for using general revenues may be stronger .

if benefits of federal actions are more narrowly distributed , the case for financing operations with user fees or charges may become stronger .

of course , the structure and administration of federal inspection and regulation plays a central role in enhancing efficiency and minimizing burdens borne relative to benefits enjoyed .

