this report provides a review of congressional oversight of the intelligence community ( ic ) since establishment of the senate select committee on intelligence ( ssci ) and the house permanent select committee on intelligence ( hpsci ) , particularly since the 9-11 commission published its recommendations in its 2004 report .

it also explores selected options for further reform , and offers questions that congress may consider to assess the effectiveness of its oversight .

in legislating , confirming appointees , authorizing programs and appropriating funds , congress enables the ic , a community of seventeen discrete intelligence elements , to conduct the business of intelligence in support of united states national security .

in addition , congress has perspective that few others outside of the ic have .

oversight of the ic enables congress to determine whether classified intelligence programs that are restricted from public disclosure are legal , ethical , and respectful of civil liberties .

when there have been perceived abuses , congress has often intervened to conduct hearings and legislate changes in intelligence process or organization .

several competing , sometimes overlapping , perspectives exist on the purpose for conducting congressional oversight of the ic: some have argued that the primary responsibility of the intelligence committees is to provide the authority and strategic direction to enable continual improvement in the performance of intelligence programs in support of the most pressing national security challenges .

others have pointed to the role of the congressional intelligence committees in counterbalancing the power of the executive branch .

this could result either through monitoring the ic as it implements programs and activities that support the executive's national security policies , or through ensuring that the ic is able to function independently of occasional instances of officials in the executive branch ( including the president ) choosing to politicize intelligence , or influence intelligence deliverables to support assumptions underlying policy decisions .

this perspective holds that the ic must be able to exercise independence to be able to speak truth to power without abusing the power that that independence implies .

another perspective of the role of congressional oversight of the ic is that it serves as an external check on the power of the ic apart from the executive branch .

this perspective draws from a perception of deep - seated biases inside the ic that proponents believe may be unethical , illegal , or resistant to executive policy .

each perspective may animate the thinking of various members of the congressional intelligence committees at any given time .

to the extent that members share a perspective on oversight of the ic , they may be more likely to share views on the ways to conduct the oversight .

significant differences of opinion among members on the purpose for conducting intelligence oversight , however , may signal a discordant tone in congress's relations with the ic and hamper oversight efforts .

some believe that the intelligence committees' perceived tradition of bipartisanship and objectivity is of particular importance for effective oversight and a constructive relationship with the ic .

others , both within and outside of congress , focus on what they perceive as weaknesses in the structure and authority of the congressional intelligence committees .

while the ic has experienced significant reform over the past forty years since the establishment of the hpsci and the ssci , some have contended that congress could do more to change the rules governing the committee structure and authority for conducting intelligence oversight .

they note , for example , the number of committees that claim jurisdiction over intelligence matters dilutes the authority of the hpsci and ssci .

critics also note that despite to the diffusion of responsibility for oversight of intelligence in congress , the growth of the ic — in the size and number of its subordinate elements , as well as its budget — has outstripped congress's ability to provide adequate checks on the power of the executive or to develop the expertise and dedicate the time to strategically influence intelligence programs and policy .

the report of the 9 / 11 commission provides a rubric for assessing the progress of congressional oversight of intelligence , and the report's recommendations have helped frame discussions of further reform .

as the commission noted , oversight reform would not be easy: "of all our recommendations , strengthening congressional oversight may be among the most difficult and important .

so long as oversight is governed by current congressional rules and resolutions , we believe the american people will not get the security they want and need….having interviewed numerous members of congress from both parties , as well as congressional staff members , we found that dissatisfaction with congressional oversight remains widespread….when their unfamiliarity with the subject is combined with the need to preserve security , a mandate emerges for substantial change….tinkering with the existing structure is not sufficient. .

some , while acknowledging the commission's assessment of congress's oversight of intelligence as "dysfunctional," have suggested many of its recommendations would be very difficult to implement from a political standpoint .

ultimately , however , the commission's recommendations provoked considerable debate and led to changes in congress's role in ensuring the ic has the resources , organization , systems , and processes to support national security more effectively .

a number of the commission's recommendations for the senate , for example , have been implemented .

nevertheless , many have suggested more needs to be done and continue to cite the commission's recommendations as a frame of reference for further reform .

the commission recommended replacing the hpsci and ssci with a joint committee on intelligence .

it also suggested this joint committee should include a subcommittee on oversight to provide the necessary focus on programs and activities that might otherwise be overlooked .

as an alternative to a joint committee , the commission recommended consolidating authorizations and appropriations in the hpsci and ssci , a reform measure that would be a direct challenge to the authority of the appropriations committees .

the commission also recommended separating the national intelligence program ( nip ) appropriation from the defense appropriation , and , to promote bipartisanship , changing committee rules to ensure the majority never exceed minority representation by more than one .

finally , the commission recommended abolishing term limits in order to promote depth and experience among committee members .

following is an examination of selected oversight reform proposals that could be considered in developing a framework for discussion .

the 9 / 11 commission recommended most of them in its report , though some , such as the idea to establish a joint committee on intelligence , have a much longer history .

there are two main , discernible perspectives on whether reform of congressional oversight of the ic is necessary .

the first emphasizes the importance of the tradition of bipartisanship among members of the congressional intelligence committees as the single greatest determinant of effective oversight .

therefore the selection of intelligence committee members and the issues that drive their agendas influence the tone and the effectiveness of the committees' relationship with the ic .

the second perspective places greater emphasis upon the organization and jurisdiction of pertinent committees — the intelligence , armed services , and appropriations committees in particular — and their established relationships with each other .

one scholar observed that change to congressional oversight of intelligence is especially difficult due to inertia ( the resistance within organizations to change ) , turf ( the unwillingness of congressional committees to surrender jurisdiction or reorganize ) , and politics ( partisanship that makes more difficult efforts to establish common ground ) .

she further noted that "history does suggest that there are game - changing junctures…and in those game - changing junctures , what makes the difference is leadership of individuals , either members of congress or the president , and engaging with a public to force change on a change - resistant system. .

another observer noted a historical , oscillating pattern that …is rather desultory police patrolling by members of congress for most of the time…not as energetic as one would like , until there is what i call 'a shock to the system,' and by that i mean a scandal of some kind…or a terrible intelligence failure such as what preceded the 9 / 11 events .

and when you have this 'shock,' then suddenly lawmakers become very energetic…they go and conduct the investigation ; and this has happened five times: it happened with the church committee ; it happened with the iran / contra scandal ; it happened with the aldrich ames counterintelligence case ; it happened with the 9 / 11 mistakes that occurred ; it happened with the wrong hypothesis about the wmds in iraq…what concerns me is what happens in between these fires , and how we can avoid these fires in the first place .

critics characterize this change as "tinkering , " an approach against which the 9 / 11 commission warned .

others view the cumulative change as enabling — eventually — functional , and politically pragmatic oversight of intelligence .

aside from what more might be done , a potential overarching question for congress to frame the discussion is: could additional changes to the rules governing congressional oversight of intelligence enable congress to more effectively fund programs , influence policy , and legislate improvements in intelligence standards , organization , and process that would make the country safer ? .

is current congressional oversight of the ic "dysfunctional" as the 9 / 11 commission alleged in 2004 ? .

what criteria would so indicate ? .

could oversight of intelligence be further improved such that the ic would , as a result , be more effective in support of national security ? .

would enhancements in oversight enable congress to measure the ic's effectiveness more effectively ? .

to what extent have oversight reform measures been effective in promoting ( 1 ) an apolitical ic ; ( 2 ) committee experience ; ( 3 ) committee capacity to handle workload ; and / or ( 4 ) relations with the ic ? .

is the jcae model an appropriate analogy for consideration of a joint congressional intelligence committee as some have maintained ? .

should congress hire additional professional staff to serve on the select intelligence committees ? .

would parallel intelligence structures in each chamber be conducive to improved oversight ? .

should the hpsci abolish term limits and adopt the model of ensuring the majority party not exceed the minority party's representation by more than one ? .

would a consolidation of authorizations and appropriations authority in the congressional intelligence committees consolidate too much authority or enhance congressional oversight ? .

