a ll states make supplemental payments , which are medicaid payments to providers that are separate from and in addition to medicaid payments for services .

these payments are made to many different medicaid providers , including hospitals , nursing facilities , physicians , and mental health facilities .

disproportionate share hospital ( dsh ) payments are one type of medicaid supplemental payment that states are required to make to hospitals serving low - income patients .

states are permitted to make other non - dsh fee - for - service ( ffs ) supplemental payments , managed care pass - through payments , and waiver supplemental payments .

in fy2017 , supplemental payments accounted for at least 7% of total medicaid spending on benefits , which is $40 billion .

however , data on medicaid supplemental payments are limited .

for example , data are not available at the individual provider level , and some providers may receive supplemental payments that exceed their medicaid costs .

this report provides an overview of supplemental medicaid payments to providers .

the report begins with a background of medicaid that includes a summary of medicaid payments for services and medicaid supplemental payments .

the report breaks down supplemental payments into ffs payments , managed care pass - through payments , and medicaid waiver supplemental payments .

the report also presents data on medicaid ffs supplemental payment expenditures by state and by provider type .

medicaid is a joint federal - state program that provides primary and acute medical services , as well as long - term services and supports , to a diverse low - income population .

this population includes children , pregnant women , adults , individuals with disabilities , and people aged 65 and older .

state participation in medicaid is voluntary , although all states , the district of columbia , and the territories participate .

states are responsible for administering their medicaid programs .

states must follow broad federal rules to receive federal funds , but they have flexibility to design their own versions of medicaid within the federal statute's basic framework .

this flexibility results in variability across state medicaid programs .

in addition , several waiver and demonstration authorities ( eg , section 1115 of the social security act ) allow states to operate their medicaid programs outside of federal rules .

medicaid enrollees generally receive benefits through either a ffs or managed care service delivery system .

under ffs , state medicaid programs pay health care providers for each service provided to a medicaid enrollee .

under managed care , medicaid enrollees receive most or all of their services through a managed care organization ( mco ) under contract with the state , and the mco is primarily paid on a capitated basis ( i.e. , a set amount per enrollee regardless of the services used ) .

states traditionally have used ffs for medicaid .

however , since the 1990s , the share of medicaid enrollees covered by managed care has increased , as states transition portions of their medicaid programs to managed care .

as of july 2016 , about 81% of medicaid enrollees were covered by some form of managed care .

most states have both ffs and managed care enrollees .

medicaid is financed jointly by the federal government and the states .

federal medicaid funding is an open - ended entitlement to states , which means there is no upper limit or cap on the amount of federal medicaid funds a state may receive .

the federal government reimburses states for a share of each dollar spent in accordance with states' federally approved medicaid state plans .

the federal government's share of most medicaid service costs is determined by the federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) rate , which varies by state and is determined by a formula set in statute based on per capita income .

in fy2019 , fmap rates range from 50% ( 14 states ) to 76.4% ( mississippi ) .

states incur medicaid costs by making payments to service providers ( eg , for beneficiaries' doctor visits ) and performing administrative activities ( eg , making eligibility determinations ) .

in addition to the medicaid payments for services provided to enrollees , states may make supplemental payments , which are medicaid payments to providers that are separate from and in addition to medicaid payments for services .

all states make supplemental payments under ffs , and different federal regulations and requirements apply depending on the type of payment and the type of provider .

this section will discuss two types of ffs supplemental payments: dsh payments and non - dsh supplemental payments .

as states move medicaid enrollees from ffs to managed care , the total ffs payments decrease , which in turn may lower the upls for supplemental payments .

therefore , moving from ffs to managed care lessens states' ability to make or maintain prior ffs supplemental payments to providers , and both states and providers may face funding losses from the transition to managed care .

under managed care , states have been making pass - through payments , which are similar to ffs supplemental payments .

these pass - through payments are included in the payments states make to the mcos ( i.e. , capitation rates ) , and the mcos in turn make the payments to hospitals , physicians , or nursing facilities , as directed by the state .

pass - through payments are similar to ffs supplemental payments because they are not tied to any specific services for medicaid enrollees .

states have used pass - through payments to support safety - net providers that provide care for medicaid managed care enrollees , among other reasons .

in recent years , there has been a great deal of regulatory activity regarding pass - through payments .

through several regulations , cms is phasing down states' use of pass - through payments in managed care .

the following is a summary of the recent regulatory activity regarding pass - through payments .

in 2016 , cms issued a managed care regulation that included a limit on the use of existing and future pass - through payments .

the regulation required states to phase out pass - through payments to physicians and nursing facilities over a 5-year period and to phase out pass - through payments to hospitals over a 10-year period , beginning july 1 , 2017 .

cms noted that hospitals received a longer phasedown schedule because the pass - through payments from states to hospitals are "significantly larger" than the pass - through payments to physicians and nursing facilities .

the regulation permitted states to eliminate or phase down pass - through payments before the end of the transition period .

in response to the 2016 final rule , states attempted to increase existing or implement new pass - through payments .

in a final rule published in january 2017 , cms clarified that the intention of the 2016 final rule was to maintain existing pass - through payments at current levels and prohibit states from implementing new pass - through payments .

therefore , the rule established an aggregate limit on pass - through payments to physicians and nursing facilities ; the limit was the amounts in place in managed care contracts and rate certifications as of the effective date of july 5 , 2016 .

the january 2017 final rule also limited the amount of pass - through payments to hospitals to the lower of a certain percentage of a "base amount," according to a specified phasedown schedule over the 10-year period , or the total aggregate dollar amount identified by the state in managed care contracts and rate certifications as of july 5 , 2016 .

the base amount is essentially the amount of inpatient and outpatient hospital services used by eligible populations , which cms considers equivalent to the upl calculations under ffs .

cms explained that the transition periods for pass - through payments are intended to allow states to integrate existing pass - through payments to mcos through delivery system and payment models that are tied to outcomes and quality .

cms clarified that examples of permissible payment structures include value - based purchasing models , delivery system reform efforts , and specific types of provider payments .

the regulation permitted states to direct existing pass - through payments to mcos during the transition period if states also meet several other requirements , including achieving at least one of the goals or objectives within the state's managed care quality strategy and developing an evaluation plan to assess the directed payments' outcomes .

cms has reported that , as an example of a permissible directed payment , one state is directing managed care plans to make quality incentive payments to in - network hospitals to reduce potentially avoidable hospital readmissions for medicaid enrollees .

after july 1 , 2022 , for physicians and nursing facilities and after july 1 , 2027 , for hospitals , any payments that states direct mcos to make to providers must be integrated into value - based purchasing models , delivery system reform or performance improvement efforts , and specific types of provider payments , such as fee schedules or uniform dollar or percentage increases .

on november 8 , 2018 , cms published a proposed rule designed to offer additional flexibilities from the requirements of the 2016 and 2017 rules .

although the 2018 rule would not change the prohibition on states increasing existing pass - through payments , it would allow states to make new pass - through payments under certain circumstances .

the proposed rule would allow states that are transitioning new services or populations from ffs to managed care to make new pass - through payments to hospitals , nursing facilities , or physicians , as long as the state had previously been making ffs supplemental payments for those services and the aggregate payment amount is less than or equal to the previous ffs supplemental payments .

there are no national data publicly available regarding the amount of pass - through payments .

states report only the aggregate amount of payments to managed care plans in the cms - 64 form , not the amounts to specific providers or a breakout by payment type .

as of may 6 , 2016 , cms estimated that at least 8 states were making a total of $105 million in pass - through payments to physicians annually ; 3 states were making a total $50 million in pass - through payments to nursing facilities annually ; and 16 states were making a total of $3.3 billion in pass - through payments to hospitals annually .

cms noted that these estimates of pass - through payments likely did not represent the full amounts because no reporting requirements were in place prior to the final rule .

states also may receive section 1115 waiver authority to make supplemental payments to certain providers that they otherwise are not permitted to make .

data on the amount of supplemental payments through these waivers are limited .

the medicaid and chip payment and access commission ( macpac ) estimated that supplemental payments to hospitals through section 1115 waiver authority totaled $15 billion , or nearly 17% of total ffs medicaid payments to hospitals ( including federal and state expenditures ) in fy2017 .

because states also may have waivers that allow supplemental payments to other providers , this estimate likely understates the full scope of section 1115 waiver authority supplemental payments .

this section discusses the two main types of section 1115 waiver authority supplemental payments: uncompensated care pools and delivery system reform incentive payment ( dsrip ) programs .

uncompensated care pools are dedicated pools of funding that provide payments to health care providers ( usually hospitals ) to defray the cost of providing uncompensated care ( i.e. , the costs of services rendered that providers do not receive a payment for ) .

some of the main reasons for uncompensated care include ( 1 ) providers not receiving payment for services provided to uninsured patients and ( 2 ) low medicaid provider payment rates that may not cover the cost of providing care .

states obtain the authority for these uncompensated care pools through section 1115 waiver authority granted by cms .

currently , seven states report having waiver authority for an uncompensated care pool: california , florida , kansas , massachusetts , new mexico , tennessee , and texas .

uncompensated care pool arrangements were first awarded under the george w. bush administration through the approval of section 1115 waivers in certain states , including california , florida , and massachusetts .

during the obama administration , cms identified these financing arrangements as a policy that would be reviewed as a part of waiver renewals .

in negotiating the terms of certain state waivers , cms identified concerns with a "lack of transparency" and "encouragement of overreliance on supplemental payments. .

cms stated that it would work with states that had existing uncompensated care pools to ensure medicaid payments would support services provided to medicaid enrollees and uninsured individuals .

under the trump administration , cms has renewed several section 1115 waivers that include uncompensated care pools .

cms has not issued any public statements regarding new principles for uncompensated care pools ; however , since 2017 , cms has approved uncompensated care pools in florida , massachusetts , and texas .

since 2010 , states have received approval for dsrip programs , a type of supplemental payment program authorized under section 1115 authority that is tied specifically to delivery system transformation efforts .

similar to other medicaid supplemental payments , dsrip payments are not tied to services provided .

however , unlike uncompensated care pools or dsh payments , these payments are not tied to hospital uncompensated care .

early dsrip programs evolved out of states' desires to maintain supplemental payments that supported public hospitals or that would have been eliminated in the transition from ffs to managed care .

states expressed that maintaining ffs supplemental payments was a "critical driver in most states' decisions to implement a dsrip. .

in 2010 , california was the first state to receive approval for a dsrip , and cms required the dsrip supplemental payments to the state's public hospitals to be consistent with cms's goals of improved care , better health , and lower costs .

cms worked with early dsrip states to connect the supplemental payments with improvements in care and lower costs .

over time , dsrip programs have become less tied to the preservation of prior ffs supplemental payments ; they are now primarily focused on implementing payment and delivery system reforms linked to meeting performance metrics and other milestones .

cms has not issued formal guidance outlining the definition of a dsrip , but special terms and conditions in states' waivers establish the connection between the dsrip payments and improved health outcomes .

thirteen states reported having a dsrip or dsrip - like program in place as of march 2018: alabama , arizona , california , kansas , massachusetts , new hampshire , new jersey , new mexico , new york , oregon , rhode island , texas , and washington .

as of june 2017 , the aggregate total approved federal and state funding across all years ( i.e. , 2010 through 2017 ) and states was $48.6 billion .

in general , providers receive dsrip supplemental payments for meeting certain milestones .

these milestones initially are tied to reporting or process implementation ; they then transition to outcomes - based milestones , such as improving care and lowering costs .

for example , california's dsrip program is assisting providers to better integrate physical and behavioral health and to improve care management for high - risk or high - cost populations .

in new jersey , each of the participating hospitals is focused on improving care for one chronic condition , including asthma , obesity , and diabetes .

cms has noted that dsrip programs are intended to be time - limited .

in 2017 , cms approved renewals of texas's and massachusetts's dsrip programs , with phasedowns to zero or limited funding in the last year of the demonstration and the agreement that the states would need to find sustainable funding sources to continue dsrip activities .

