u.s. industry has always been involved in spaceflight .

contractors for the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) built the spacecraft that took astronauts to the moon .

contractors build reconnaissance satellites for the department of defense ( dod ) and weather satellites for the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) .

increasingly , though , space is becoming commercial .

a majority of u.s. satellites are now commercially owned , providing commercial services , and launched by commercial launch providers .

congressional and public interest in space is also becoming more focused on commercial activities , such as companies developing reusable rockets or collecting business data with fleets of small earth - imaging satellites .

multiple federal agencies regulate the commercial space industry , based on statutory authorities that were enacted separately and have evolved over time .

the federal aviation administration ( faa ) licenses commercial launch and reentry vehicles ( i.e. , rockets and spaceplanes ) as well as commercial spaceports .

noaa licenses commercial earth remote sensing satellites .

the federal communications commission ( fcc ) licenses commercial satellite communications .

the departments of commerce and state license exports of space technology .

in response to industry concerns about the complexity of this regulatory framework , the administration and congress have made several reform proposals , including space policy directive – 2 , streamlining regulations on commercial use of space ( spd - 2 , issued in may 2018 ) ; the american space commerce free enterprise act ( h.r .

2809 , passed by the house in april 2018 ) ; and the space frontier act of 2018 ( s. 3277 , ordered to be reported by the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation in august 2018 ) .

how the federal government makes use of commercial space capabilities is also evolving .

nasa used to own and operate the space shuttles that contractors built for it , but since 2012 it has contracted with commercial service providers to deliver cargo into orbit using their own spacecraft .

dod has its own satellite communications capabilities , but it also procures communications bandwidth from commercial satellite companies .

agencies are considering a host of new opportunities , including acquisition of weather data from commercial satellites , acquisition of science data from commercial lunar landers , and expanded commercial utilization of the international space station .

at present , congress is addressing these developments primarily through oversight of agency programs and decisions on agency budgets , rather than through authorizing legislation .

this report addresses these two distinct but closely related topics: how the federal government regulates , oversees , and promotes the commercial space sector ; and how the federal government itself uses ( or might in the future use ) commercial space capabilities .

as congress considers these topics , some of the questions that may arise include: should the federal regulatory framework for commercial space activities be consolidated ? .

how can the commercial space licensing process be made simpler , more timely , and more transparent ? .

how should federal regulatory policies be adjusted as the commercial space industry develops new capabilities and applications ? .

what government space activities can or should be conducted by commercial entities ? .

how can government and industry best work together ? .

key federal agencies involved in the regulation , oversight , and promotion of commercial space activities include the federal aviation administration , for regulation of launch and reentry ; the department of commerce , for regulation of earth remote sensing from space , promotion of the u.s. space industry , and export controls on space technology ; and the federal communications commission , for regulation of satellite communications .

some functions , such as mitigation of orbital debris , are shared among agencies .

agency roles are not yet fully settled for certain other functions , such as space situational awareness .

as well as regulating , overseeing , and promoting the commercial space industry , the federal government is a customer , acquiring commercial services .

in taking this approach , agencies may hope to increase efficiency and reduce cost in their own programs , while helping to develop an industry that could contribute to broader national objectives .

this section of the report discusses commercial resupply of the international space station , commercial launch of government satellites , commercial acquisition of satellite communications and data from space - based remote sensing , the potential government use of future in - space services such as satellite repair and refueling , and new commercial initiatives being proposed by nasa .

the section ends with a discussion of factors that congress and the administration may consider when deciding whether agencies should conduct space activities themselves or acquire them commercially .

as congress addresses the issues discussed in this report , there are several key policy questions to consider .

should the federal regulatory framework for commercial space activities be consolidated ? .

stakeholders sometimes call for a "one - stop shop" for commercial space licensing and regulation .

congress and the administration have made proposals to consolidate functions currently executed by multiple offices of the commerce department .

proposals for a new civil authority for space situational awareness would place it at an existing agency ( either commerce or the faa ) rather than create a new office .

so far , however , congress appears to have little appetite for transferring existing regulatory responsibilities between agencies .

how can the commercial space licensing process be made simpler , more timely , and more transparent ? .

congressional attention to this question has focused , in large part , on the process for interagency consultation on commercial remote sensing licenses .

the challenge for that process is balancing industry's need for timeliness and transparency with the government's need to meet national security and foreign policy objectives .

the rapidly advancing capabilities of foreign government and commercial satellites make identifying the appropriate balance more difficult , because if sensitive imagery can be obtained elsewhere , prohibiting u.s. companies from providing it may have few security benefits .

how should federal regulatory policies be adjusted as the commercial space industry develops new capabilities and applications ? .

for commercial human spaceflight , the limitation on faa safety regulation was instituted to avoid burdening a nascent industry .

at some point , congress may judge that the industry's development is ready for the limitation to be lifted or allowed to expire .

for new applications , congress and the administration have proposed additional mechanisms for authorization and supervision under the outer space treaty , but other issues may arise in particular cases .

for example , because satellite servicing involves intentional close approaches between satellites , it may create novel issues for space situational awareness , which currently focuses on avoiding close approaches .

what government space activities can or should be conducted by commercial entities ? .

how can government and industry best work together ? .

as the capabilities of the commercial space industry expand , there may be new opportunities for agencies to execute programs via commercial contracts .

changes in agency strategy or organization — such as the proposed creation of a space force within dod — may also create opportunities .

stakeholders may not always agree on which programs are suitable for a commercial approach , either because they have different perspectives on the roles of government and industry , or because they have different expectations about criteria such as technical maturity or likely commercial demand .

part of the debate may be about how to structure the relationship between agencies and contractors , through various forms of public - private partnership or through choices about contracting approaches .

