the combination of growing supplies of liquefied natural gas ( lng ) and new requirements for less polluting fuels in the international maritime shipping industry has heightened interest in lng as a maritime fuel .

for decades , lng tanker ships have been capable of burning boil - off gas from their lng cargoes as a secondary fuel .

however , using lng as a primary fuel is a relatively new endeavor ; the first lng - powered vessel — a norwegian ferry — began service in 2000 .

several aspects of lng use in shipping may be of congressional interest .

lng as an engine , or "bunker," fuel potentially could help the united states reduce harmful air emissions , it could create a new market for domestic natural gas , and it could create economic opportunities in domestic shipbuilding .

however , u.s. ports would need specialized vessels and land - based infrastructure for lng "bunkering" ( vessel refueling ) as well as appropriate regulatory oversight of the associated shipping and fueling operations .

the storage , delivery , and use of lng in shipping also has safety implications .

these and other aspects of lng bunkering may become legislative or oversight issues for congress .

one bill in the 115 th congress , the waterway lng parity act of 2017 ( s. 505 ) , would have imposed excise taxes on lng used by marine vessels on inland waterways .

this report discusses impending international maritime organization ( imo ) standards limiting the maximum sulfur content in shipping fuels , the market conditions in which lng may compete to become a common bunker fuel for vessel operators , and the current status of lng bunkering globally and in the united states .

a broader discussion of oil market implications is outside the scope of this report .

the imo is the united nations organization that negotiates standards for international shipping .

its standards limiting sulfur emissions from ships , adopted in 2008 , have led vessel operators to consider alternatives to petroleum - based fuels to power their ships .

in 1973 , the imo adopted the international convention for the prevention of pollution from ships ( marpol ) .

annex vi of the convention , which came into force in 2005 , deals with air pollution from ships .

the annex established limits on nitrogen oxide ( no x ) emissions and set a 4.5% limit on the allowable sulfur content in vessel fuels .

in 2008 , the imo announced a timeline to reduce the maximum sulfur content in vessel fuels from 4.5% to 0.5% by january 1 , 2020 .

annex vi requires vessel operators to either use fuels containing less than 0.5% sulfur or install exhaust gas - cleaning systems ( "scrubbers" ) to limit a vessel's sulfur oxide ( so x ) emissions to a level equivalent to the required sulfur limit .

the imo 2020 emissions requirement applies to vessels of 400 gross tons and over , which is estimated to cover about 110,000 vessels worldwide .

however , analysts indicate that many of the smaller vessels in this group already burn low - sulfur fuel .

accounting for these smaller vessels , one estimate is that about 55,000 vessels currently burn high - sulfur fuel .

ship owners have two main options for meeting the emission requirements with existing engines: burn low - sulfur conventional fuel ( or biofuels ) or install scrubbers to clean their exhaust gases .

alternatively , ship owners may opt to install new lng - fueled engines to comply with the imo standard .

a key requirement for ocean carriers to adopt lng as an engine fuel is the availability of lng bunkering facilities .

because lng is extremely cold ( - 260 °f ) and volatile , lng bunkering requires specialized infrastructure for supply , storage , and fuel delivery to vessels .

depending upon the specific circumstances , lng bunkering could require transporting lng to a port from an offsite liquefaction facility for temporary storage at the port , or building an lng liquefaction terminal on site .

alternatively , lng could be delivered from offsite facilities directly to vessels in port via truck or supply vessel ( figure 3 ) .

truck - to - vessel lng bunkering , in particular , provides some fueling capabilities without large upfront capital investments .

lng tanker trucks could also bring lng to a storage tank built on site at the port , which could then bunker the lng to arriving ships via pipeline .

supplying lng using tanker trucks in this way may face capacity limitations due to truck size , road limitations , or other logistical constraints , but it has been demonstrated as a viable approach to lng bunkering at smaller scales .

the predominant method of bunkering today with high - sulfur fuel is vessel to vessel , either by a tank barge or smaller tanker .

the type of infrastructure needed to temporarily store ( if needed ) and deliver lng within a given port would depend on the size and location of the port , as well as the types of vessels expected to bunker lng .

truck to ship bunkering is best suited for supporting smaller and mid - sized vessels , such as ferries or offshore supply vessels ( osvs ) that support offshore oil platforms .

liquefaction facilities built on site can provide the greatest capacity of any lng bunkering option , for example , to provide fuel for large vessels in transoceanic trade .

however , constructing small - scale liquefaction facilities to produce and deliver lng on site requires considerable planning and significant capital investment , in one case on the order of $70 million for a mid - sized port .

each lng bunkering option in figure 3 may be a viable means to begin lng bunkering service in a given port .

however , ports may face practical constraints as bunkering increases in scale .

for example , a container port of significant size typically has multiple terminals , so even with an on - site liquefaction facility , it may need additional infrastructure or supply vessels for moving lng to other port locations where a cargo ship might be berthed .

there may also be port capacity and timing constraints upon the movement of lng bunkering barges trying to refuel multiple large vessels in various locations around a crowded port .

to date , the lng bunkering operations already in place or in development are comparatively small , but scale constraints could become a factor as lng bunkering grows and might require additional bunkering - related port investments .

world production of lng has been rising rapidly over the last few years , driven by growth in the natural gas sector in new regions — especially australia and the united states .

according to one industry analysis ( figure 5 ) , global lng supply is expected to increase from 300 to 400 million metric tons per annum ( mmtpa ) from 2017 to 2021 based on new lng liquefaction projects already operating or under development .

an additional 150 mmtpa appears likely to come online after that .

collectively , lng supply from these new liquefaction projects could exceed projections of demand , which would put downward pressure on lng prices .

while increases in the global supply of lng do not necessarily translate directly into an increase in lng available for bunkering , such increases could provide options for lng bunkering in more ports .

estimating potential demand for lng in the maritime sector is complicated and uncertain .

one study of future lng demand for bunkering , specifically , projects that lng - powered vessels in operation and under construction as of june 2018 will require between 1.2 and 3.0 mmt of lng per year .

the study's review of several lng consumption forecasts in the maritime sector shows a consensus projection between 20 to 30 mmt per year by 2030 .

this level of demand growth implies an increase in lng - powered vessel construction from the current rate of around 120 ships per year to between 400 and 600 new builds per year .

if these levels were reached , they could create a significant new market for lng suppliers .

assuming a henry hub spot market price of $4 / mmbtu in 2030 , the annual market for lng in shipping could be worth $2.9 billion to $5.8 billion , before accounting for liquefaction and transportation charges .

some studies have projected the lng bunkering market to be even larger and to grow more quickly .

however , key variables — such as the prices of henry hub natural gas and crude oil , the number of new vessel orders , and the future costs of emissions technology — are notoriously hard to predict with accuracy .

thus , it is not assured that natural gas consumption in the maritime sector will absorb more than a small amount of the global liquefaction capacity in development .

the imo sulfur standards apply to ship owners globally , as does the development of new lng supply and bunkering infrastructure .

in addition to these factors , domestic lng bunkering also may be influenced by considerations more specific to the united states .

these considerations include growth of the u.s. natural gas supply , domestic shipbuilding opportunities , and lng safety and security .

the imo's overall framework for controlling vessels emissions ( marpol annex vi ) has been in place since 2005 .

while the united states , as an imo member , is subject to the imo's 2020 sulfur standards , the international standards apply equally to all parties and all vessels .

the impacts of sulfur standards on bunker fuel have been an important consideration , but imo member nations have agreed to the standards independent of any particular energy policies .

moreover , marpol annex vi preceded the u.s. shale gas boom , so commitment to that initial imo framework could not have anticipated united states' current role as a dominant energy producer .

any changes within the international shipping fleet to install sulfur scrubbers , fuel engines with lng , or switch to other low sulfur fuels , are being driven primarily by market forces in fuel supply , shipbuilding , and shipping — not by any particular push to favor one fuel over another .

nonetheless , given its particular status , the question arises whether the standards may create an economic opportunity for the united states , in energy or otherwise .

more specifically , could international adoption of lng as a bunker fuel create an important new market for u.s. natural gas producers , shipbuilders , or infrastructure developers ? .

as discussed above , depending upon the adoption of lng bunkering in the global fleet , the lng bunker fuel market could grow to several billion dollars by 2030 .

if u.s. lng producers were to supply a significant share of this market — on the strength of comparatively low lng production costs — lng bunkering could increase demand for u.s. natural gas production , transportation , and liquefaction .

opportunities in lng - related shipbuilding might be more limited , as most of this occurs overseas , with the exception of jones act vessels .

in the latter case , demand for domestically - constructed lng bunkering barges could be one significant area of economic growth .

engineering and construction firms could benefit from new opportunities to develop new port infrastructure for lng storage and transfer .

while likely limited in number , such port facilities could be complex , high value projects costing tens or hundreds of millions of dollars to complete .

such projects could create jobs in engineering , construction , and operation , which could be important to local communities .

although lng bunkering could present the united states with new economic opportunities , it may pose challenges as well .

rising demand for lng in the maritime sector could increase natural gas prices for domestic consumers .

in addition to being the world's largest natural gas producer , as of 2018 , the united states is also the world's largest producer of crude oil and the second largest bunkering hub .

consequently , while vessel conversion to lng bunkering may increase demand for u.s. - produced natural gas , it could be partially offset by reduced demand for u.s. - produced crude oil or refined products .

exactly how changing demand in one sector could affect the other is unclear .

furthermore , while lng can reduce pollutant emissions from vessels , emissions and environmental impacts from increased natural gas production and transportation could increase overall emissions .

much of the net environmental impact depends upon practices in the natural gas industry , which are the subject of ongoing study and debate .

although new lng bunkering infrastructure can create jobs , as the tacoma lng projects shows , the construction of such port facilities can be controversial for reasons of safety , security , and environmental impact .

overarching the considerations above is uncertainty about how the global shipping fleet will adapt to the imo sulfur standards over time .

this uncertainty complicates decisions related to both private investment and public policy .

lng - fueled ships still account for only a fraction of the u.s. and global fleets , and it may take several decades for significant benefits of lng - powered vessels to be realized .

it is also possible that alternative ship fuels , including biofuels , electric engines , and hybrid engines , will become more economically viable in coming years .

given the uncertainty surrounding the future of lng as a ship fuel , it is hard to predict the potential benefits or costs that lng bunkering may provide to the united states .

until now , the private sector has added lng - fueled vessels to fleets in the united states in a piecemeal manner under existing federal statutes and regulation .

congress could encourage the growth of lng bunkering by various means , such as providing tax incentives to support the construction of lng bunkering facilities and vessels , addressing any statutory or regulatory barriers to bunkering facility siting or operations , and providing funding for technical support to domestic carriers seeking to adopt lng technology .

alternatively , congress could seek to encourage competing bunker fuel options , such as biofuels , by incentivizing them in similar ways .

in addition , congress could also affect growth in lng bunkering through policies affecting the lng industry or domestic shipping industry as a whole .

changes in federal regulation related to natural gas production , or changes to the jones act , for example , while not directed at lng bunkering , could nonetheless affect its economics .

therefore , evaluating the potential implications on lng bunkering of broader energy , environmental , or economic objectives may become an additional consideration in congressional oversight and legislative initiatives .

if lng bunkering expands significantly in u.s. ports , congress also may examine the adequacy of existing measures to ensure the safety and security of lng vessels , storage , and related facilities .

