the federal government is the largest energy consumer in the united states , and it is one of the largest energy consumers in the world .

policymakers have highlighted the role of energy efficiency improvement in the federal sector as a mechanism to reduce energy consumption and its associated costs .

many members of congress have expressed a continuing interest in improving energy efficiency and increasing the use of renewable energy .

one barrier to federal agencies making such investments relates to the availability of capital given the constrained fiscal environment .

as a result , agency projects that could reduce federal energy usage , expand the use of renewable energy , and reduce federal energy costs may not be pursued .

to address this challenge , congress established alternative financing methods that utilize private sector resources and capabilities to facilitate federal energy projects .

two such alternative financing methods are energy savings performance contracts ( espcs ) and utility energy service contracts ( uescs ) .

an espc is a multiyear contract between a federal agency and an energy service company .

in general , under an espc , a federal agency agrees to pay an amount not to exceed the current annual utility costs for a fixed period of time ( up to 25 years ) to an energy service company , which finances and installs facility improvements .

in return , the contractor assumes the performance risks of energy conservation measures during the contract period and guarantees that the improvements will generate energy cost savings sufficient to pay for the improvements over the length of the contract , as well as providing the energy services company a return on the investment .

after the end of the contract , the agency benefits from reduced energy costs as a result of the improvements .

a uesc is a contract between a federal agency and the serving utility .

under a uesc , the utility arranges financing for efficiency projects and renewable energy projects , and the costs are repaid by the agency over the length of the contract .

the energy policy act of 1992 ( epact , p.l .

102-486 ) amended the national energy conservation policy act ( necpa , p.l .

95-619 ) and authorized alternative financing methods for federal energy projects , among other provisions .

section 155 of epact ( 42 u.s.c .

§§8287 et seq. ) .

defined the term "energy savings performance contract" and authorized federal agencies to incur obligations through espcs to finance energy conservation measures , provided certain conditions were met .

section 152 of epact authorized "utility incentive programs" ( codified as 42 u.s.c .

§8256 ) and encouraged agencies to participate in programs to increase energy efficiency , conserve water , or manage energy demand .

espcs and uescs were devised as part of a strategy to help meet federal energy and emissions reduction goals by improving the energy efficiency of federal facilities .

they offer the financial resources needed to make efficiency improvements to aging buildings and facilities .

for espcs , in return for privately financing and installing conservation measures , a contractor — referred to as an energy service company ( esco ) — would receive a specified share of any resulting cost savings .

the esco typically guarantees a fixed amount of energy savings and cost savings throughout the term of the contract , bearing the risk of the improvement's failure to produce a projected amount of energy savings and cost savings .

the efficiency improvement provided by the espc is referred to as an "energy or water conservation measure," and includes improvements such as energy - and water - saving equipment , energy savings measures such as better insulation or windows , and renewable energy systems such as solar energy panels .

in the case of uescs , the federal agency contracts with the utility that is providing services to finance and install energy conservation measures and to provide energy demand - reduction services .

the authority for uescs does not require utilities to guarantee savings ; the repayment is based on estimated cost savings .

espcs and uescs are seen as having tangible benefits for escos and utilities .

for an esco , the contract includes a guarantee of a specified amount of annual energy savings and cost savings that is sufficient to pay back the installation and financing costs .

when improvements yield savings in excess of the guarantee , the agency benefits and depending upon the contract , the esco may also benefit .

for utilities , the contracts do not require a savings guarantee although efficiency improvements can provide benefits such as reduction in demand , which can lead to cost savings for the utility .

local , state , or federal tax incentives may also be available to the contractors .

the department of energy's federal energy management program ( femp ) is the lead organization responsible for providing implementing rules and policies for espcs .

femp also provides training , guidance , and technical assistance to assist federal agencies in achieving energy goals including cost or use reduction or renewable use , greenhouse gas reduction goals , and water conservation goals as directed through legislation or executive orders .

federal agencies are required to document progress toward energy saving goals through annual reporting to the president and congress ; femp compiles these data annually .

espcs and uescs apply to energy use at federal facilities — not to vehicles and equipment .

in fy2017 , femp reports that federal agencies used 915 trillion british thermal units ( btu ) of delivered electrical and thermal energy across all end - use sectors .

figure 1 shows the end - use sectors for energy consumption — 62% of the energy consumed is from vehicles and equipment such as aircraft , ships , and on - road vehicle fleets .

in fy2017 , federal facilities used over 347 trillion btu of delivered electrical and thermal energy .

congressional budget office ( cbo ) scoring policies for espcs and uescs have changed over time .

initially , the budgetary cost of espcs and uescs were not scored by the cbo .

under the budget enforcement act of 1990 ( bea , p.l .

101-508 ) pay - as - you - go ( paygo ) rules , increases in mandatory spending scored by cbo had to be offset by mandatory spending cuts or increased revenues .

the budget enforcement act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-33 ) extended these enforcement mechanisms through fy2002 .

the bea also imposed limits on discretionary spending .

after an extensive review of whether espcs and uescs imposed a future financial obligation on the federal government , cbo began scoring them as mandatory spending .

this coincided with the expiration of the bea at the end of fy2002 .

this scoring reflected how espcs and uescs create future commitments to appropriations and was consistent with how appropriations - funded energy conservation projects would be scored throughout the budget .

however , the operations and maintenance funds that are used to pay for the espcs and uescs must be appropriated annually .

in the 115 th congress , the 2018 house budget resolution ( h.con.res .

71 ) directed cbo to change how espcs and uescs are scored .

section 5109 directs cbo to estimate provisions for espcs and uescs on a net present value basis with payments covering the period of the contract ( up to 25 years ) .

according to h.rept .

115-240 , this "would have the effect of capturing any long - term budgetary savings ( and costs ) resulting from these contracts. .

the scoring would classify the estimated net present value of the budget authority and any outlays as direct spending , and according to the accompanying report , "it would not change the fact that federal agencies would continue to cover contractual payments through annual , discretionary appropriations. .

according to cbo , "the provision [in h.con.res .

71 ] that prohibits any savings estimated by cbo to be considered as an offset for purposes of budget enforcement applies only to legislation considered by the house of representatives , not the senate. .

both the executive branch and congress have promoted energy efficiency within federal agencies .

shared energy savings ( and later espcs and uescs ) were included as part of an overall strategy to meet federal energy reduction goals .

since that time , espcs and uescs have continued to be used to implement energy and water efficiency improvements at federal facilities .

congress has revised the policies enabling espcs and uescs over time , and congress may wish to assess additional changes going forward .

among the issues for consideration .

in the 115 th congress , several bills would address various issues concerning espcs and uescs .

identical bills , h.r .

723 and s. 239 , "energy savings through public - private partnerships act of 2017," were introduced in january 2017 and seek to facilitate the use of espcs and uescs by implementing several changes to necpa .

section 543 ( f ) ( 4 ) of necpa states that not later than 2 years after the completion of each evaluation under paragraph ( 3 ) , each energy manager may ( a ) implement any energy - or water - saving measure that the federal agency identified in the evaluation conducted under paragraph ( 3 ) that is life cycle cost - effective ; and ( b ) bundle individual measures of varying paybacks together into combined projects .

the bills would replace "may" with "shall," which would require energy managers to bundle individual energy - or water - saving measures that are found to be life cycle cost - effective into combined projects to be implemented no later than two years after evaluating a facility for energy and water efficiency measures .

the bills would also expand annual reporting requirements to the president and to congress by requiring additional information on espcs and uescs including the investment value of the contracts , guaranteed energy savings compared to the actual energy savings for the previous year , plan for entering into contracts for the coming year , and an explanation for any previously submitted contracting plans that were not implemented .

the bills would also make definitional changes: "energy conservation measures" would be expanded to include energy consuming devices and required support structures .

"federal buildings" would not include dams , reservoirs , or hydropower facilities .

"energy savings" would include "the use , sale , or transfer of energy incentives , rebates , or credits," and any revenue generated from reducing energy or water use .

h.r .

723 and s. 239 would also clarify that federal agencies would not be able to limit recognition of cost savings from operation and maintenance improvements associated with energy - or water - conservation measures .

according to cbo , the budgetary effects under the two bills are the same .

however , as the prohibition on applying savings as an offset under h.con.res .

71 only applies to legislation considered by the house of representatives , cbo's cost estimate states that "while h.r .

723 would have no effect on direct spending for purposes of budget enforcement in the house , s. 239 would be considered as reducing net direct spending in the senate. .

similar versions of the bills have been introduced in previous congresses .

the provisions within h.r .

723 and s. 239 are identical to section 1006 of s. 2012 ( 114 th congress ) .

s. 2012 was passed by the senate with the provisions ; however the house passed an amended version that did not include the same language .

a conference committee did not reach an agreement on s. 2012 .

in the 115 th congress , the "energy and natural resources act of 2017" ( s. 1460 ) , introduced in june 2017 , would also amend necpa to facilitate the use of espcs and uescs .

similarly to h.r .

723 and s. 239 , the bill would require energy managers to bundle and implement energy - or water - saving measures that are found to be life cycle cost - effective .

s. 1460 would also modify annual reporting requirements for federal agencies regarding espcs and uescs .

the bill would clarify that the espcs and uescs are to be considered by the office of management and budget as best practices for meeting performance goals for energy - efficient and energy - saving information technology .

similar language regarding espcs and uescs for implementing energy - efficient and energy - saving information technology is included in h.r .

306 , "energy efficient government technology act," introduced in january 2017 , and in s. 385 and h.r .

1443 , two companion bills entitled the "energy savings and industrial competitiveness act of 2017. .

s. 1460 would also authorize a federal smart building program that would be required to leverage existing financing mechanisms including espcs , uescs , and direct appropriations to implement smart building technology and demonstrate the costs and benefits of smart buildings .

the bill would authorize a science laboratories infrastructure program that would be required to make use of existing financing mechanisms .

