combining elements of mathematics , computer science , engineering , and physical sciences , quantum information science ( qis ) has the potential to provide capabilities far beyond what is possible with the most advanced technologies available today .

quantum science , generally , is the study of the smallest particles of matter and energy ; qis builds on quantum science principles to obtain and process information in ways that cannot be achieved based on classical physics principles .

qis is based on the premise that information science depends on quantum effects in physics .

the advantages to using qis in certain circumstances can be illustrated by the example of quantum computing .

quantum computing is not just "faster" than classical computing .

it is not useful for many types of problems where a classical supercomputer would excel .

however , there are certain tasks for which the power of quantum computing is unmatched , such as code breaking .

this power is derived from quantum computing's use of "qubits" or "quantum bits. .

whereas classical computing uses "bits" for data processing , quantum computing uses qubits .

the practical difference between a bit and a qubit is that a bit can only exist in one of two states at a time , usually represented by a 1 and a 0 , whereas a qubit can exist in both states at one time .

this is a phenomenon called "superposition" and it is what allows the power of a quantum computer to grow exponentially with the addition of each bit .

two bits in a classical computer provides four possible combinations — 00 , 01 , 11 , and 10 , but only one combination at a time .

two bits in a quantum computer provides for the same four possibilities , but , because of superposition , the qubits can represent all four states at the same time , making the quantum computer four times as powerful as the classical computer .

so , adding a bit to a classical computer increases its power linearly , but adding a qubit to a quantum computer increases its power exponentially — doubling power with the addition of each qubit .

quantum computing , for all its promise , is still a developing technology ( along with other quantum applications ) .

assembling a working quantum computer is much more difficult than assembling a classical computer .

the difficulty is caused by the narrow set of conditions that must exist for a quantum computer to work .

for example , the temperature must be exactly 1 / 100 th of a degree above absolute zero .

also , the slightest vibration can cause a qubit to lose its superposition .

until systems can be developed to maintain the ideal conditions to maintain a qubit , many quantum systems will remain theoretical in nature .

although much of the press coverage of qis has been devoted to quantum computing , there is more to qis .

many experts divide qis technologies into three application areas: sensing and metrology , communications , and computing and simulation .

the government's interest in qis dates back at least to the mid - 1990s , when the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) and the department of defense ( dod ) held their first workshops on the topic .

qis is first mentioned in the fy2008 budget of what is now the networking and information technology research and development program and has been a component of the program since then .

in september 2018 , the department of energy ( doe ) announced that it had committed $218 million to 85 research projects lasting from two to five years .

also in september 2018 , the national science foundation ( nsf ) announced that it had awarded $31 million in grants to 33 projects .

eight projects receiving a total of $6 million are engineering projects aimed at creating working quantum information systems ( applied research ) .

the remaining $25 million will be distributed to 25 basic research projects .

government qis basic research is also conducted by nist , the dod services , and the office of the secretary of defense .

additionally , the defense advanced research projects agency and the intelligence advanced research projects activity have funded a series of targeted programs .

qis is a component of the national strategic computing initiative ( presidential executive order 13702 ) , which was established in 2015 .

the white house has issued two reports on qis strategy , the first under president obama and the second under president trump .

qis r&d is being pursued at major research centers worldwide , with china and the european union ( eu ) having the largest foreign qis programs .

the uk and canada have also made high - profile investments in qis r&d , while australia and the netherlands have made smaller investments .

even without explicit qis initiatives , many other countries , including russia , germany , and austria , are making strides in qis r&d .

a report by the institute for defense analysis , assessment of the future economic impact of quantum information science , and witness testimony at congressional hearings have provided information on these initiatives .

three qis - focused bills have been introduced in the 115 th congress .

additionally , the house has held three qis hearings .

in its july 2016 report , the nstc stated that creating a cohesive and effective u.s. qis r&d policy would require a collaborative effort among government , academia , and the private sector .

the report cited five key areas that need to be addressed in crafting an effective policy: institutional boundaries ; education and workforce training ; technology and knowledge transfer ; materials and fabrication ; and the level and stability of funding .

these topics were reiterated in the doe report quantum sensors at the intersections of fundamental science , quantum information science , and computing ( 2016 ) , and during congressional hearings .

qis research is often conducted within institutional boundaries with little coordination .

for example , federal departments , and even agencies and offices within a department , have sponsored r&d at a number of universities in different disciplines to address unique federal mission requirements .

as a result , coordination and collaboration among these university researchers is difficult .

the creation of cross - cutting teams with diverse expertise is seen by many as vital to success .

many observers and researchers contend that partnerships that encourage such collaboration will lead to greater progress than working alone .

scientists and industry representatives contend that current academic education and workforce training programs are insufficient for continued progress in qis r&d , which requires a diverse , cross - cutting range of skills and expertise that varies from one application to another .

for example , while a deep knowledge of quantum mechanics , taught in physics departments , is required for qis basic research and applications development , disciplines taught in other departments — such as computer science , applied mathematics , electrical engineering , and systems engineering — are needed as well .

multidisciplinary qis centers at universities and federal labs ( eg , doe , nist ) are seen as one possible solution to this problem .

some of the potentially serious impediments to creating successful commercial qis products include issues related to the complicated nature of licensing of intellectual property from universities and obtaining patents , lack of a strong venture capital environment , and difficulty connecting qualified recent graduates and experienced scientists with companies .

industry and government representatives have noted that some federal programs exist to address these issues , but that challenges remain .

advancement of qis applications depends heavily on the generation of novel quantum materials and on improving the tools needed to fabricate them and package hardware that may currently fill a room into usable forms .

these challenges are not yet fully understood , but scientists generally agree that advancement in qis r&d depends upon solving them .

like other r&d programs , qis is affected by fluctuations in federal funding .

some assert that such fluctuations have slowed qis progress , as well as the development of a fully qualified workforce .

some of the funding instability has been attributed to insufficient coordination among federal agencies , which has led to uncertainty in university research programs .

this uncertainty may have contributed to promising researchers seeking opportunities outside the united states or being actively recruited by foreign governments or companies .

