the united states and mexico share a nearly 2,000-mile border and multiple rivers , including the colorado river and the rio grande .

predominantly located in the united states , the colorado river crosses the u.s. - mexico border and empties into the gulf of california .

the rio grande's headwaters are in the united states , its significant tributaries lie in both the united states and mexico , and its riverbed is the u.s. - mexico border in texas .

these shared surface waters , which are shown in table 1 , are important to many border community economies and water supplies .

in 1944 , the united states and mexico entered into the treaty on utilization of waters of the colorado and tijuana rivers and of the rio grande ( hereinafter 1944 water treaty ) , which established the international boundary and water commission ( ibwc ) to oversee the u.s. - mexico border and water treaties .

to date , congress has been involved in binational water sharing pursuant to the 1944 water treaty primarily through oversight .

this includes oversight of ibwc's actions to manage the colorado river's water and infrastructure to improve water availability during drought and to restore and protect riverine ecosystems .

on multiple occasions since 1994 , mexico has not met its rio grande water delivery obligations to the united states within the five - year period prescribed by the 1944 water treaty .

since 2014 , congress has directed the u.s. department of state to report annually on mexico's deliveries and on efforts to improve mexico's treaty compliance .

this report examines binational sharing of the colorado river and the rio grande and addresses the evolution and framework of the ibwc and binational boundary and water treaties ; colorado river water sharing background and recent developments ; and rio grande water sharing background and recent developments .

appendix a provides detailed information regarding the reporting requirements established by congress for the rio grande in ill and report language since 2014 .

appendix b provides information on drought conditions in north america in recent years .

appendix c provides information on binational transboundary aquifers , which contain shared groundwater .

as depicted in figure 2 , the colorado river and its tributaries flow through seven u.s. states ( arizona , california , colorado , nevada , new mexico , utah , and wyoming ) and forms the border between the mexican states of baja california norte and sonora , before emptying into the gulf of california .

ninety - seven percent of the basin is in the united states .

disputes have occurred over the use of colorado river water supplies for most of the past century .

although many of these disputes have related to state allocations within the united states , issues also have arisen between the united states and mexico over water quality , availability , and conservation .

in the first half of the 20 th century and when the united states and mexico were negotiating the 1944 water treaty , there were varying estimates of the average volume of flow in the colorado river .

many of the estimates fell between 16 million af and 17 million af annually , although other estimates were higher and lower .

the u.s. department of the interior's bureau of reclamation has estimated the long - term average natural flow of the river between 1906 and 2016 at 14.8 million af .

at the same time , natural flows from 2000 to 2016 ( i.e. , during the current ongoing drought ) were estimated to be 12.4 million af .

since the 1.5 million af in flows reaching mexico generally has been a constant requirement since the 1944 water treaty , lower overall flows on the river mean the united states retains less of the river's natural flows than originally estimated .

in december 2012 , the bureau of reclamation published a study documenting that the demand for the basin's water in the united states in some years exceeds supply .

the study projected that the demand - supply imbalance would worsen in coming decades .

although discussion of colorado river water issues within the united states is beyond the scope of this report , concern about meeting future u.s. demands is significant to discussions about water sharing with mexico .

the following treaty - implementation issues in the colorado river basin are discussed in more detail below: salinity , instream flows for environmental restoration , minute 319 , and minute 323 ( which replaced minute 319 ) .

water sharing in two portions of the binational rio grande basin has distinct characteristics .

in the rio grande basin between the el paso - juárez valley and fort quitman , tx , water sharing is determined in large part by the 1906 convention .

in the el paso - juárez valley , the united states is required to deliver water to mexico .

in the rio grande basin below fort quitman , tx , to the gulf of mexico , water sharing is established in large part by the 1944 water treaty .

in this portion of the basin , mexico is obligated to deliver water to the united states .

figure 3 depicts the rio grande basin and its tributaries , including the rio conchos , which historically is the most significant rio grande tributary downstream of fort quitman .

water demands in the rio grande basin regularly exceed supply .

this imbalance becomes particularly apparent during droughts .

both parts of the rio grande basin can experience multiyear droughts ( see the drought monitor figures in appendix b for drought conditions in the basin in september for each of 2011 through 2018 ) .

reduced water availability due to hydrologic conditions and below - target or unpredictable deliveries from mexico can affect water supplies for the u.s. population and the economy in the u.s. border counties of the rio grande .

u.s. interests have been particularly concerned by mexico not meeting its five - year cycle delivery obligations on multiple occasions since 1994 .

dry conditions have contributed to u.s. deliveries to mexico in the el paso - juárez valley falling below the 60,000 af annual requirement established by the 1906 convention for six of the seven years from 2012 to 2018 .

since the start of the current five - year cycle for the rio grande below fort quitman , tx , in october 2015 , the role that dry conditions have had in shaping mexico's deliveries is less clear .

in the first year of the cycle , mexico fell 15% below its water - delivery obligations under the 1944 water treaty .

in the second year of the cycle , mexico made up its deficit and exceeded the cumulative target for the first two years .

the third year of the five - year cycle ended in october 2018 .

ibwc indicates that mexico delivered to the united states less than 350,000 af in the third year of the cycle .

however , mexico's higher deliveries in the second year resulted in cumulative deliveries for the first three years of the cycle being almost 98% of the three - year delivery target of 1.05 million af .

in recent years , congress has engaged in rio grande water issues by increasing its oversight of water deliveries , principally by requiring periodic reporting by the department of state .

as part of its broader effort to improve the reliability in mexico's water deliveries , the ibwc is developing a binational model for water management in the rio grande .

recent water deliveries in the two portions of the rio grande basin and related issues , including congressional and diplomatic efforts , are discussed in more detail below .

congress has maintained significant interest in mexico .

to date , congress has been involved in binational water - sharing issues primarily through oversight .

the tone and nature of binational water relations between the united states and mexico depend in part on the effectiveness of efforts to resolve water tensions and improve cooperative management of shared rivers .

binational water relations and the work of the ibwc also may be shaped by the broader u.s. - mexico relationship .

this broader relationship is determined by many issues such as trade , immigration , and efforts to enhance border security , including construction of a border wall or fencing .

some observers have raised questions about the ibwc's role in addressing flooding and floodplain concerns that may arise with some segments of a border wall or border fencing .

other factors that may shape future water sharing include basin hydrologic conditions , the population's water demand , and economic activity of the basins .

input on water sharing from and actions of the u.s. department of state , mexico's ministry of foreign affairs , and executive branch leaders in both countries also may shape how the ibwc addresses tensions and seeks opportunities for cooperation and improved management .

as this report discusses , various issues may shape binational water sharing and ibwc activities in the coming years .

for the colorado river basin , hydrologic conditions and the u.s. lower basin states' adoption of a drought contingency plan may shape what occurs pursuant to minute 323 .

for congress , binational colorado river oversight topics may encompass minute 323 implementation and operations and deliveries during shortage conditions .

for the rio grande , mexico has not met its 1944 water treaty deliver obligations at the conclusion of four recent five - year cycles .

the ibwc is working to identify opportunities for improving the predictability and reliability of mexico's water deliveries to the united states .

appendix a .

congressional reporting requirements related to the rio grande pursuant to the reporting requirements discussed below , the u.s department of state has delivered reports to various committees of congress , including as recently as march 2018 .

the reporting requirements are for report delivery directly to congress and congressional committees ; only limited information about these reports and their contents has been publicly available .

ongoing reporting requirements since 2014 , congress has asked the u.s. department of state to annually report to congress on mexico's rio grande water deliveries .

the 2014 farm bill ( agriculture act of 2013 ; p.l .

113-79 ) included the following requirement in section 12310: not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this act and annually thereafter , the secretary of state shall submit to congress a report on efforts by mexico to meet its treaty deliveries of water to the rio grande in accordance with the treaty between the united states and mexico respecting utilization of waters of the colorado and tijuana rivers and of the rio grande ( done at washington , february 3 , 1944 ) .

this reporting requirement has no explicit end date ; that is , the 2014 farm bill reporting requirement remains in effect .

reporting requirements in annual appropriations bills and accompanying reports water delivery reporting requirements beginning with statutory provisions for fy2015 , appropriators have regularly included direction in congressional reports accompanying appropriations bills for the u.s. department of state .

the direction is for a report on mexico's water deliveries to the united states in the rio grande .

on december 16 , 2014 , section 7045 ( g ) ( 3 ) of division j of p.l .

113-235 — the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act of 2015 — was enacted .

it required that the secretary of state report to the committees on appropriations on the following water delivery and accounting issues: not later than 45 days after the enactment of this act , the secretary of state , in consultation with the commissioner for the united states section of the international boundary and water commission ( ibwc ) , shall report to the committees on appropriations on the efforts to work with the mexico section of the ibwc and the government of mexico to establish mechanisms to improve the transparency of data on , and predictability of , the water deliveries from mexico to the united states to meet annual water apportionments to the rio grande , in accordance with the 1944 treaty between the united states and mexico respecting utilization of waters of the colorado and tijuana rivers and of the rio grande , and on actions taken to minimize or eliminate the water deficits owed to the united states in the current 5-year cycle by the end of such cycle: provided , that such report shall include a projection of the balance of the water delivery deficit at the end of the current 5-year cycle , as well as the estimated impact to the united states of a negative delivery balance .

the joint explanatory statement for the fy2016 consolidated appropriations act ( division k , p.l .

114-113 ) carried forward reporting requirements from p.l .

113-235 related to mexico's water deliveries .

for fy2017 and fy2018 , s.rept .

114-290 and s.rept .

115-152 continued similar reporting requirements .

for fy2018 , h.rept .

115-253 also included the following direction from the house appropriations subcommittee on state , foreign operations , and related programs: the committee notes the treaty obligations of mexico to supply water deliveries to the rio grande and recognizes the importance of transparency concerning such matters .

the committee directs international boundary and water commission ( ibwc ) to regularly publish water delivery data on its web site , including projections for the balance of water deliveries .

the committee expects ibwc to hold quarterly meetings with interested stakeholders to inform them of ibwc activities and receive feedback .

some annual appropriations - related reporting requirements also may continue in fy2019 .

the 115 th congress is considering various bills with accompanying reports that include references to reporting on rio grande water topics .

for example , the senate report for fy2019 department of state appropriations — s.rept .

115-282 accompanying s. 3108 — would continue the reporting requirement .

the house report for fy2019 appropriations — h.rept .

115-829 for h.r .

6538 — would continue report language requiring the publishing of data and the holding of stakeholder meetings , similar to h.rept .

115-253 .

other rio grande reporting h.rept .

115-253 also includes the following language related to flood control rehabilitation: the committee recommendation includes not less than the request for the rio grande flood control system rehabilitation project to continue and maintain levee projects along the rio grande , including environmental , hydrologic , hydraulic , and low water weir studies along the rio grande valley that are consistent with the projects outlined within the mexican water treaty of 1944 , treaty series 994 .

h.rept .

115-829 would continue the above language and add the following from the house appropriations subcommittee on state , foreign operations , and related programs: "the committee also supports efforts to reduce the amount of sediment and other activities to maintain the health of the river. .

appendix b. drought monitor water sharing becomes more complicated during droughts , and both the colorado river and the rio grande basins are prone to multiyear droughts .

the north american drought monitor provides maps that synthesize various drought indexes and impacts .

experts from the united states , mexico , and canada create these maps .

figure b - 1 shows the drought monitor in september 2016 , september 2017 , and september 2018 .

for september 2018 , extreme and exceptional drought conditions existed in the headwaters of the rio grande , and drought conditions of varying degrees in most of the colorado river basin .

figure b - 2 shows the evolution of drought conditions from september 2011 through september 2015 .

for the rio grande , as shown in figure b - 2 , both 2011 and 2012 were marked by dry conditions , resulting from high heat , low precipitation , and low runoff throughout most of the basin .

for the colorado river , dry conditions in the basin developed in 2012 , persisted in varying degrees through october 2016 , and prominently returned in 2018 .

appendix c. u.s. - mexican transboundary aquifers binational aquifers are transboundary water resources that can be particularly important for meeting needs during dry times .

in some parts of the border , binational aquifers are significant sources of domestic water supply for overlying populations .

for example , the hueco bolson aquifer provides water for the 1.5 million residents of ciudad juárez and for 40% of the 730,000 residents of el paso , tx .

over the last century , many border aquifers have declined in volume and / or quality .

no broad bilateral agreement exists on u.s. - mexican border groundwater management and use .

declining water levels , deteriorating water quality , and increasing use of groundwater resources have raised concerns about the long - term availability of the border's groundwater .

knowledge about the extent , depletion rates , and quality of transboundary aquifers is limited , and in some areas extremely limited .

a 2016 study entitled "identifying and characterizing transboundary aquifers along the mexico - u.s. border: an initial assessment" identified 36 aquifers along the u.s. - mexican border , as shown in figure c - 1 .

as the level of water in an aquifer falls , surface water flows can decline .

for example , historically , the hueco bolson aquifer was recharged primarily by precipitation and the aquifer contributed to the flow of the rio grande ( i.e. , the rio grande gained water from the aquifer ) .

however , as the aquifer's level declined due to pumping levels exceeding recharge rates , the river - aquifer flows reversed .

the rio grande began to recharge the aquifer , resulting in diminished surface water flows ; that is , the river became a losing stream in the reach of the hueco bolson , as surface water entered the hueco bolson aquifer .

a binational aquifer quantity and quality assessment program has been initiated , pursuant to the u.s. - mexican transboundary aquifer assessment act ( p.l .

109-448 ; 42 u.s.c .

§1962 note ) ; the legislation identified four border aquifers as priorities for study .

the act authorized the secretary of the interior , through the u.s. geological survey , to collaborate with the states of arizona , new mexico , and texas through their water resources research institutes and with the international boundary and water commission , stakeholders , and mexican counterparts to provide information and a scientific foundation for state and local officials to address pressing challenges along the u.s. - mexican border .

according to the act's accompanying senate report ( s.rept .

109-17 ) , ground - water pumping has lowered the water table , depleted aquifers , and reduced the base flow of many streams thus decreasing the quantity of water available to support critical riparian habitats .

excessive groundwater pumping in some major urban centers , such as in the el paso / juárez metropolitan region , has caused land subsidence that has damaged homes and essential urban infrastructure .

in addition to the effects of ground - and surface - water depletion , degradation of water quality has reduced habitat suitability for the region's diverse biota .

both u.s. and mexican entities fund the aquifer assessment program .

after multiple years of no u.s. federal funding , federal funds for the assessments resumed in fy2016 , with $1 million provided ; an additional $1 million in federal funding was provided in each of fy2017 and fy2018 .

before the resumption of federal funding in fy2016 , federal funding had totaled $2 million and had last been provided in fy2010 .

in november 2016 , a binational study of the san pedro aquifer , located along a portion of the arizona - sonora border , was released .

the study identified available data and data gaps .

it noted that discharges from the aquifer into the san pedro river are in decline , with climate cycles and pumping likely contributing to the decline .

activities planned in 2018 include continued development of the report and database on the santa cruz aquifer ( to the west of the san pedro aquifer ) and additional research on saline - water topics associated with the two freshwater aquifers near el paso .

