in 2008 , an unknown computer programmer or group of programmers using the pseudonym satoshi nakamoto created a computer platform that would allow users to make valid transfers of digital representations of value .

the system , called bitcoin , is the first known cryptocurrency .

a cryptocurrency is digital money in an electronic payment system in which payments are validated by a decentralized network of system users and cryptographic protocols instead of by a centralized intermediary ( such as a bank ) .

since 2009 , cryptocurrencies have gone from little - known , niche technological curiosities to rapidly proliferating financial instruments that are the subject of intense public interest .

recently , they have been incorporated into a variety of other financial transactions and products .

for example , cryptocurrencies have been sold to investors to raise funding through initial coin offerings ( icos ) , and the terms of certain derivatives are now based on cryptocurrencies .

some government central banks have examined the possibility of issuing cryptocurrencies or other digital currency .

media coverage of cryptocurrencies has been widespread , and various observers have characterized cryptocurrencies as either the future of monetary and payment systems that will displace government - backed currencies or a fad with little real value .

when analyzing the public policy implications posed by cryptocurrencies , it is important to keep in mind what these currencies are expressly designed and intended to be — alternative electronic payment systems .

the purpose of this report is to assess how and how well cryptocurrencies perform this function , and in so doing to identify possible benefits , challenges , risks , and policy issues surrounding cryptocurrencies .

the report begins by reviewing the most basic characteristics and economic functions of money , the traditional systems for creating money , and traditional systems for transferring money electronically .

it then describes the features and characteristics of cryptocurrencies and examines the potential benefits they offer and the challenges they face regarding their use as money .

the report also examines certain risks posed by cryptocurrencies when they are used as money and related policy issues , focusing in particular on two issues: cryptocurrencies' potential role in facilitating criminal activity and concerns about protections for consumers who use these currencies .

finally , the report analyzes cryptocurrencies' impact on monetary policy .

money exists because it serves a useful economic purpose: it facilitates the exchange of goods and services .

without it , people would have to engage in a barter economy , wherein people trade goods and services for other goods and services .

in a barter system , every exchange requires a double coincidence of wants — each party must possess the exact good or be offering the exact service that the other party wants .

anytime a potato farmer wanted to buy meat or clothes or have a toothache treated , the farmer would have to find a particular rancher , tailor , or dentist who wanted potatoes at that particular time and negotiate how many potatoes a side of beef , a shirt , and a tooth removal were worth .

in turn , the rancher , tailor , and dentist would have to make the same search and negotiation with each other to satisfy their wants .

wants are satisfied more efficiently if all members of a society agree they will accept money — a mutually recognized representation of value — for payment , be that ounces of gold , a government - endorsed slip of paper called a dollar , or a digital entry in an electronic ledger .

how well something serves as money depends on how well it serves as ( 1 ) a medium of exchange , ( 2 ) a unit of account , and ( 3 ) a store of value .

to function as a medium of exchange , the thing must be tradable and agreed to have value .

to function as unit of account , the thing must act as a good measurement system .

to function as a store of value , the thing must be able to purchase approximately the same value of goods and services at some future date as it can purchase now .

returning to the example above , could society decide potatoes are money ? .

conceivably , yes .

a potato has intrinsic value ( this report will examine value in more detail in the following section , " traditional money " ) , as it provides nourishment .

however , a potato's tradability is limited: many people would find it impractical to carry around sacks of potatoes for daily transactions or to buy a car for many thousands of pounds of potatoes .

a measurement system based on potatoes is also problematic .

each potato has a different size and degree of freshness , so to say something is worth "one potato" is imprecise and variable .

in addition , a potato cannot be divided without changing its value .

two halves of a potato are worth less than a whole potato — the exposed flesh will soon turn brown and rot — so people would be unlikely to agree to prices in fractions of potato .

the issue of freshness also limits potatoes' ability to be a store of value ; a potato eventually sprouts eyes and spoils , and so must be spent quickly or it will lose value .

in contrast , an ounce of gold and a dollar bill can be carried easily in a pocket and thus are tradeable .

each unit is identical and can be divided into fractions of an ounce or cents , respectively , making both gold and dollars effective units of account .

gold is an inert metal and a dollar bill , when well cared for , will not degrade substantively for years , meaning can both function as a store of value .

likewise , with the use of digital technology , electronic messages to change entries in a ledger can be sent easily by swiping a card or pushing a button and can be denominated in identical and divisible units .

those units could have a stable value , as their number stays unchanging in an account on a ledger .

the question becomes how does a lump of metal , a thing called a dollar , and the numbers on a ledger come to be deemed valuable by society , as has been accomplished in traditional monetary systems .

money has been in existence throughout history .

however , how that money came to have value , how it was exchanged , and what roles government and intermediaries such as banks have played have changed over time .

this section examines three different monetary systems with varying degrees of government and bank involvement .

today , money is widely exchanged electronically , but electronic payments systems can be subject to certain difficulties related to lack of scarcity ( a digital file can be copied many times over , retaining the exact information as its predecessor ) and lack of trust between parties .

electronic transfers of money are subject to what observers refer to as the double spending problem .

in an electronic transfer of money , a payer may wish to send a digital file directly to a payee in the hopes that the file will act as a transfer of value .

however , if the payee cannot confirm that the payer has not sent the same file to multiple other payees , the transfer is problematic .

because money in such a system could be double ( or any number of times ) spent , the money would not retain its value .

as described in the preceding section , this problem traditionally has been resolved by involving at least one centralized , trusted intermediary — such as a private bank , government central bank , or other financial institution — in electronic transfers of money .

the trusted intermediaries maintain private ledgers of accounts recording how much money each participant holds .

to make a payment , an electronic message ( or messages ) is sent to an intermediary or to and between various intermediaries , instructing each to make the necessary changes to its ledgers .

the intermediary or intermediaries validate the transaction , ensure the payer has sufficient funds for the payment , deduct the appropriate amount from the payer's account , and add that amount to the payee's account .

for example , in the united states , a retail consumer may initiate an electronic payment through a debit card transaction , at which time an electronic message is sent over a network instructing the purchaser's bank to send payment to the seller's bank .

those banks then make the appropriate changes to their account ledgers ( possibly using the federal reserve's payment system ) reflecting that value has been transferred from the purchaser's account to the seller's account .

significant costs and physical infrastructure underlie systems for electronic money transfers to ensure the systems' integrity , performance , and availability .

for example , payment system providers operate and maintain vast electronic networks to connect retail locations with banks , and the federal reserve operates and maintains networks to connect banks to itself and each other .

these intermediaries store and protect huge amounts of data .

in general , these intermediaries are highly regulated to ensure safety , profitability , consumer protection , and financial stability .

intermediaries recoup the costs associated with these systems and earn profits by charging fees directly when the system is used ( such as the fees a merchant pays to have a card reading machine and on each transaction ) or by charging fees for related services ( such as checking account fees ) .

in addition , intermediaries generally are required to provide certain protections to consumers involved in electronic transactions .

for example , the electronic fund transfer act ( p.l .

95-630 ) limits consumers' liability for unauthorized transfers made using their accounts .

similarly , the fair credit billing act ( p.l .

93-495 ) requires credit card companies to take certain steps to correct billing errors , including when the goods or services a consumer purchased are not delivered as agreed .

both acts also require financial institutions to make certain disclosures to consumers related to the costs and terms of using an institution's services .

notably , certain individuals may lack access to electronic payment systems .

to use an electronic payment system , a consumer or merchant generally must have access to a bank account or some retail payment service , which some may find cost prohibitive or geographically inconvenient , resulting in underbanked or unbanked populations ( i.e. , people who have limited interaction with the traditional banking system ) .

in addition , the consumer or merchant typically must provide the bank or other intermediary with personal information .

the use of electronic payment services generates a huge amount of data about an individual's financial transactions .

this information could be accessed by the bank , law enforcement ( provided proper procedures are followed ) , or nefarious actors ( provided they are capable of circumventing the intermediaries' security measures ) .

cryptocurrencies — such as bitcoin , ether , and litecoin — provide an alternative to this traditional electronic payment system .

the previous section illustrates that the use of cryptocurrencies as money in a payment system is still quite limited compared with traditional systems .

however , the invention and growth in awareness of cryptocurrencies occurred only recently .

some observers assert that cryptocurrencies' potential benefits will be realized in the coming years or decades , which will lead to their widespread adoption .

skeptics , however , emphasize the obstacles facing the widespread adoption of cryptocurrencies and doubt that cryptocurrencies can overcome these challenges .

this section of the report describes some of the potential benefits cryptocurrencies may provide to the public and the economic system as a whole .

later sections — " potential challenges to widespread adoption " and " potential risks posed by cryptocurrencies " — discuss certain potential challenges to widespread adoption of cryptocurrencies and some potential risks cryptocurrencies pose .

the appropriate policy approach to cryptocurrencies likely depends , in part , on how prevalent these currencies become .

for cryptocurrencies to deliver the potential benefits mentioned above , people must use them as money to some substantive degree .

after all , as money , cryptocurrencies would do little good if few people and businesses accept them as payment .

for this reason , currencies are subject to network effects , wherein their value and usefulness depends in part on how many people are willing to use them .

currently , cryptocurrencies face certain challenges to widespread adoption , some of which are discussed below .

policymakers developed most financial laws and regulations before the invention and subsequent growth of cryptocurrencies , which raises questions about whether existing laws and regulations appropriately and efficiently address the risks posed by cryptocurrency .

some of the more commonly cited risks include the potential that cryptocurrencies will be used to facilitate criminal activity and the lack of consumer protections applicable to parties buying or using cryptocurrency .

each of these risks is discussed below .

as discussed in the " government authority: fiat money " section , in the united states , the federal reserve has the authority to conduct monetary policy with the goals of achieving price stability and low unemployment .

the central banks of other countries generally have similar authorities and goals .

some central bankers and other experts and observers have speculated that the widespread adoption of cryptocurrencies could affect the ability of the federal reserve and other central banks to implement and transmit monetary policy , and some have suggested that these institutions should issue their own digital , fiat currencies .

the future role and value of cryptocurrencies remain highly uncertain , due mainly to unanswered questions about these currencies' ability to effectively and efficiently serve the functions of money and displace existing money and payment systems .

proponents of the technology assert cryptocurrencies will become a widely used payment method and provide increased economic efficiency , privacy , and independence from centralized institutions and authorities .

skeptics — citing technological challenges and obstacles to widespread adoption — assert cryptocurrencies do not effectively perform the functions of money and will not be a valuable , widely used form of money in the future .

as technological advancements and economic conditions play out , policymakers likely will be faced with various issues related to cryptocurrency , including concerns about its alleged facilitation of crime , the adequacy of consumer protections for those engaged in cryptocurrency transactions , the level of appropriate regulation of the industry , and cryptocurrency's potential effect on monetary policy .

