t he farm bill is an omnibus , multiyear law that governs an array of agricultural and food programs .

it provides an opportunity for congress to choose how much support to provide for agriculture and nutrition and how to allocate it among competing constituencies .

the farm bill has typically undergone reauthorization about every five years .

the current farm bill — the agriculture improvement act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-334 , h.r .

2 ) , often called the "2018 farm bill" — was enacted in december 2018 and expires in 2023 .

from its beginning in the 1930s , farm bills have focused primarily on farm commodity programs to support a handful of staple commodities — corn , soybeans , wheat , cotton , rice , dairy , and sugar .

in recent decades , farm bills have expanded in scope to include a nutrition title since 1973 and since then conservation , horticulture , bioenergy , credit , research , and rural development titles .

budget matters increasingly influence the development of the farm bill .

while other reports discuss policy issues , this report focuses on the budgetary effects across the whole farm bill .

one way to compare the activities covered by a farm bill is by the allocation of federal spending and , more specifically , by how much is spent in total and how a new law changes allocations or policy .

congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates are the official measures when bills are considered and are grounded in long - standing budget laws and rules .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) baseline is a projection at a particular point in time of future federal spending on mandatory programs under current law .

the baseline is the benchmark against which proposed changes in law are measured .

the cbo develops the budget baseline under various laws and follows the supervision of the house and senate budget committees .

when a new bill is proposed that would affect mandatory spending , the score ( cost impact ) is measured in relation to the baseline .

changes that increase spending relative to the baseline have a positive score ; those that decrease spending relative to the baseline have a negative score .

having a baseline essentially gives programs built - in future funding if policymakers decide that the programs should continue — that is , straightforward reauthorization would not have a scoring effect ( budget neutral ) .

once a new law is passed , the projected outlays at enactment equal the baseline plus the score .

this sum becomes the budget foundation of the new law .

the cbo score measures the budgetary impact of changes made by the 2018 farm bill .

it is measured relative to its benchmark — the cbo baseline .

budget enforcement procedures follow an array of federal budget rules , such as "paygo," which required budgetary offsets to balance new spending to avoid increasing the federal deficit .

although the farm bill is a five - year authorization — the 2018 farm bill covers fy2019-fy2023 — budget rules required it to be scored over a 10-year budget window .

thus , when the farm bill is discussed during legislative development , it may be more often presented by its effect over the 10-year budget window than the five - year duration of the law .

separately , statements about the total cost of the farm bill may be in terms of its five - year outlays ( i.e. , projected spending over the five - year life of the farm bill ) .

both can be accurate measures of the farm bill budget depending on the context .

cbo released several interim scores of the 2018 farm bill during the various stages of its development .

these include scores of the effects of the house - introduced bill ( h.r .

2 ) , house - reported bill ( h.r .

2 ) , senate - reported bill ( s. 3042 ) , house - passed bill ( h.r .

2 ) and the senate - passed amendment to h.r .

2 ( the second , third , seventh and eighth columns in table 1 ; see also the more detailed section - level scores in appendix a ) , conference agreement for h.r .

2 ( the fourth and ninth columns in table 1 ; see also the more detailed section - level scores in table 3 ) .

subsequent to the house - passed score , cbo released a more detailed assessment of the farm commodity program payment limit provisions in the house - passed bill .

this score did not change the amounts but explained background for the score of those provisions in greater detail .

when a new law is passed , the projected cost at enactment equals the baseline plus the score .

this sum becomes the foundation of the new law and may be compared to future cbo baselines as an indicator of how actual costs develop as the law is implemented and conditions change .

table 4 shows the result of this calculation by updating the farm bill baseline ( table 2 ) by adding the score for programs that were changed by the farm bill ( table 3 ) .

the $428 billion projected five - year total for the life of the 2018 farm bill ( fy2019-fy2023 ) is illustrated in figure 1 .

agriculture program - level detail is illustrated in figure 2 .

table 1 summarizes these amounts by title for the five - and 10-year budget windows ( the fifth and 10 th columns ) .

snap accounts for 76% of the $428 billion five - year total .

the remaining 24% , $102 billion of projected outlays , is for agricultural programs , mostly in crop insurance ( 8.9% ) , farm commodity programs ( 7.3% ) , and conservation ( 6.8% ) .

relative to historical farm bill spending , figure 10 shows mandatory outlays for the four largest titles — nutrition , crop insurance , farm commodity programs , and conservation — that account for 99% of projected spending in the 2018 farm bill .

the figure shows the following trends: snap outlays , which compose most of the nutrition title , increased markedly after the recession in 2009 and have been gradually decreasing since 2012 .

crop insurance outlays increased steadily over the period , especially as higher market prices and program participation over the past decade have raised the value of insurable commodities .

farm commodity programs outlays generally rise and fall inversely with commodity markets .

they were high after losses in the early 2000s , generally trended lower under the direct payment program , and tended to increase after a return to counter - cyclical programs in the 2014 farm bill .

conservation program outlays have grown steadily but have leveled off in recent years .

appendix a .

scores of house - passed and senate - passed versions of h.r .

2 appendix b .

discretionary authorizations in addition to providing mandatory spending , various sections of the farm bill authorize appropriations that may be provided in future discretionary appropriations acts .

such "authorizations for appropriation" are not actual funding but are essentially an indication from the authorizing committees to the appropriations committees about funding intentions .

they are subject to budget enforcement via future appropriations bills .

although the score of the farm bill is primarily about mandatory spending , some cbo scoring documents include an estimate of the discretionary spending that would be needed to implement provisions that have authorizations of appropriations .

the cbo score of the conference agreement did not address discretionary authorizations .

however , earlier cbo scores of the house - and senate - passed bills did summarize the authorizations for appropriation .

overall , the similarity between the scores of these bills may be an indicator of the authorization levels in the enacted farm bill .

for the house - passed version of the farm bill , cbo estimated that implementing the provisions of h.r .

2 that specified authorizations of appropriations would cost $24.5 billion over the five - year period fy2019-fy2023 , assuming appropriation of the specified amounts .

for the senate - passed version , the amount was slightly smaller at $23.7 billion .

these projections were for the whole bill and not by title .

however , the earlier committee - reported scores did estimate the authorizations by title , as shown in table b - 1 .

because the totals of the chamber - passed versions remain nearly the same as the committee - reported totals , the earlier title - level estimates may be indicative of the conference agreement .

three titles account for about 85% of the discretionary authorizations for appropriation in the house and senate committee - reported farm bill scores: trade , research , and rural development ( table b - 1 ) .

actual funding in annual agriculture appropriations acts does not necessarily correlate to the authorization for appropriation in the farm bill .

the annual authorization for appropriation provided in the 2018 farm bill is between $2 billion and $6 billion ( table b - 1 ) , which for this comparison is broadly similar to nearly $7 billion in authorizations for appropriation that were in the 2014 farm bill .

however , actual discretionary funding in recent agricultural appropriations acts total in excess of $20 billion .

the difference is because not all of the actual appropriations have their authorization in each farm bill .

for example , the agriculture appropriations act includes funding for salaries and expenses of usda agencies that may be permanently authorized or is not necessarily reauthorized in the farm bill .

also , jurisdiction for appropriations acts may include agencies or programs that are not in the jurisdiction of the farm bill authorizing committees ( such as the roughly $6 billion appropriation for the special supplemental nutrition assistance program for women , infants , and children that is not in house agriculture committee jurisdiction ) .

