the united states has played a leading role in global efforts to alleviate hunger and improve food security .

current food assistance programs originated in 1954 with the passage of what is now named the food for peace act ( ffpa , p.l .

83-480 ) .

this legislation , commonly referred to as "p.l .

480," established the food for peace program ( ffp ) .

originally , ffp had multiple aims: ( 1 ) to provide food to undernourished people abroad , ( 2 ) to reduce u.s. stocks of surplus grains that had accumulated under u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) commodity support programs , and ( 3 ) to expand potential markets for u.s. food commodities .

since the end of the cold war , u.s. food assistance goals have shifted away from the latter two aims and more toward emergency response and supporting recipient country agriculture markets .

for example , in 2018 the united states provided food assistance to food - insecure people in ethiopia .

this food assistance targeted those affected by flooding in spring 2018 as well as refugees who had fled to ethiopia from neighboring countries , such as south sudan .

for most of its existence , u.s. international food assistance provided exclusively i n - kind aid — commodities sourced in the united states and shipped to recipient countries .

in recent decades , u.s. food assistance programs have shifted from exclusively in - kind to a combination of in - kind and cash - based assistance , such as locally procured food , cash transfers , or vouchers .

more recently , feed the future ( ftf ) , a government - wide initiative that coordinates u.s. agriculture and food assistance , has increasingly aligned non - emergency food assistance with other food - security - related programs such as agricultural development and global health programs .

u.s. law requires federal international food assistance to be provided primarily through in - kind aid .

opinions among policymakers and interested parties differ over whether such requirements make food assistance programs less efficient or whether they have substantive benefits , such as lowering the risk of recipients using assistance for unintended purposes and preserving the coalition of nonprofit organizations , farmers , and shippers who support these programs .

this report provides an overview of u.s. international food assistance programs , including authorizing legislation , historical funding trends , and common program features and requirements .

it also discusses issues for congressional consideration and recent legislative proposals .

this report focuses on international food assistance programs that currently receive funding from congress .

two main legislative tracks authorize international food assistance programs , each with different authorizing histories and congressional committees responsible for funding .

first , the ffpa authorizes traditional food assistance programs based primarily on in - kind aid .

these programs ( explained later in this section ) include ffp title ii , ffp title v , the mcgovern - dole international food for education and child nutrition program , the bill emerson humanitarian trust , and food for progress .

congress has reauthorized the ffpa through periodic farm bills , most recently the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) .

these programs are under the jurisdiction of the house and senate agriculture committees .

second , congress permanently authorized the emergency food security program ( efsp ) as part of the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( faa , p.l .

87-195 ) in the global food security act of 2016 ( gfsa , p.l .

114-195 ) .

efsp is under the jurisdiction of the house foreign affairs and senate foreign relations committees .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) implement international food assistance programs .

usda procures commodities for all food assistance programs , regardless of which agency implements the program .

table 1 lists each active food assistance program along with its primary delivery method , statutory authority , source of funding , and implementing agency .

other key participants in delivering international food assistance are: non governmental or intergovernmental organizations ( ngos or ios ) : an ngo is a private organization that provides services or advocates on public policy issues , such as an organization that works to solve development problems at the local level .

an io is a multilateral institution such as the u.n. world food program .

ngos and ios implement food assistance projects in countries of need , with oversight and program funding from usaid or usda .

the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) : the ccc is a government - owned financial institution , overseen by usda , which procures commodities , processes financial transactions , and finances domestic and international programs to support u.s. agriculture .

the u.s. government provides food assistance through two distinct methods: 1 .

in - kind contributions are commodities produced in the united states and shipped to the target region .

some shelf - stable ( i.e. , not easily spoiled ) u.s. commodities can be prepositioned in storage facilities in the united states and abroad to enable quicker response to emergencies .

monetization is a form of in - kind aid in which the entity sells u.s. commodities on local markets in developing countries and uses the proceeds to fund development projects .

2 .

cash - based assistance provides direct cash transfers or food vouchers to beneficiaries .

under local and regional procurement ( lrp ) , ngos or ios purchase food in the country or region where it is to be distributed to beneficiaries rather than in the united states .

the obama administration created feed the future ( ftf ) in 2010 .

ftf is a government - wide initiative that aims to improve u.s. international food security efforts by uniting all food - security related programs under common goals and evaluation criteria .

because ftf focuses on long - term food security , it does not coordinate emergency food assistance activities .

however , non - emergency food assistance activities — such as mcgovern - dole , food for progress , farmer - to - farmer , and non - emergency assistance provided under ffp title ii — are part of ftf .

under ftf , non - emergency food assistance programs coordinate activities with other food security efforts , such as global health and agricultural development programs .

non - emergency food assistance programs also submit data to collaborative ftf evaluations .

the trump administration and some members of congress proposed changes to the structure and intent of u.s. international food assistance programs during the 115 th congress .

the administration proposed changes through its fy2018 and fy2019 budget requests .

some members of congress proposed changes in the house and senate 2018 farm bills ( h.r .

2 ) .

members also proposed changes in the global food security reauthorization act of 2017 ( p.l .

115-266 ) , which became law in october 2018 , and the food for peace modernization act ( s. 2551 / h.r .

5276 ) .

these administrative and legislative proposals are detailed below .

the trump administration's fy2018 budget request proposed a major reorganization of international food assistance funding .

the request would have eliminated funding for the mcgovern - dole program and ffp title ii .

instead , it would have funded all international food assistance through the ida subaccount within the state and foreign operations appropriations .

the trump administration requested $2.5 billion for ida , of which $1.1 billion would be allocated for emergency food assistance .

compared to fy2017 appropriated levels , the request would have reduced total ida funding by 39% and total emergency food assistance funding by 38% .

congress did not enact any of the administration's proposed changes but instead increased funding for mcgovern - dole , ffp title ii , and ida .

in its fy2019 budget request , the trump administration repeated its proposals from fy2018 to eliminate mcgovern - dole and ffp title ii funding and instead to fund all food assistance through the ida subaccount .

the request would decrease the ida subaccount by 17% from fy2018-enacted levels .

the house fy2019 agriculture appropriations bill ( h.r .

5961 ) was reported by the house appropriations committee in may 2018 .

it would decrease ffp funding by $100 million and maintain mcgovern - dole funding at fy2018-enacted levels .

the senate approved an agricultural appropriations bill for fy2019 ( h.r .

6147 ) in august 2018 .

the senate - passed bill would maintain ffp funding at fy2018-enacted levels and increase mcgovern - dole funding by $2.6 million , or 1% .

in september 2018 , president trump signed a continuing resolution ( p.l .

115-245 ) funding agriculture - related programs through december 7 , 2018 .

on june 21 , 2018 , the house passed the agriculture and nutrition act of 2018 ( h.r .

2 ) .

the senate subsequently passed its version of h.r .

2 , the agriculture improvement act of 2018 , on june 28 , 2018 .

both the house and senate farm bills would make changes to u.s. international food assistance programs .

both bills would amend ffp title ii by removing the requirement to monetize a minimum of 15% of title ii non - emergency commodities .

the bills would also increase the minimum annual funding allocation for ffp title ii non - emergency assistance from $350 million to $365 million of the annual funds appropriated for ffp title ii .

both bills would include outlays for food security activities authorized by the faa as part of the minimum non - emergency allocation .

the senate bill would also include farmer - to - farmer outlays as part of the minimum non - emergency allocation .

the house and senate farm bills would amend the mcgovern - dole program by directing the secretary of agriculture to ensure , to the extent practicable , that assistance coincides with the beginning of the school year and other relevant times during the school year .

the senate bill would authorize usda to provide locally and regionally procured foods under the mcgovern - dole program in addition to u.s. - sourced foods .

it would authorize up to 10% of funds appropriated to the mcgovern - dole program to be used for lrp activities .

the senate bill would also amend the food for progress program by designating the secretary of agriculture , rather than the president , as having program authority .

the bill would authorize a portion of food for progress funds to directly fund food security projects in recipient countries rather than monetization proceeds funding all food security projects .

both the house and senate bills would also amend reporting requirements to allow usaid and usda to submit annual reports on international food assistance activities either jointly or separately .

current law requires the two agencies to jointly prepare and submit an annual report .

the house bill would extend the labeling requirement — that all food aid be labeled as provided by the united states — to apply to food procured outside the united states .

the house bill would also amend the requirement that food aid not interfere with markets in recipient countries to apply to all forms of food assistance , including cash - based assistance .

the senate bill does not contain such provisions .

the senate bill would create a new initiative — international food security technical assistance — that would provide technical assistance to ngos , ios , foreign governments , or u.s. government agencies to implement projects to improve international food security .

the initiative would prioritize projects related to developing food and nutrition safety net systems in food - insecure countries .

the senate bill authorizes $1 million in annual funding for this initiative .

the house bill does not contain such provisions .

in october 2018 , president trump signed the global food security reauthorization act of 2017 ( p.l .

115-266 ) into law .

the bill reauthorizes the gfsa — and therefore efsp and the feed the future initiative — through 2023 .

the bill authorizes appropriations of $2.8 billion per year for efsp and $1.0 billion per year for the department of state and usaid to carry out the global food security strategy ( gfss ) .

the obama administration created the gfss in 2016 in response to the passage of the original gfsa .

in march 2018 , s. 2551 / h.r .

5276 , the food for peace modernization act , was introduced .

both bills would change ffpa requirements by reducing the share of aid that must be u.s. commodities from 100% to 25% .

the remaining 75% could be in the form of u.s. commodities or cash - based assistance .

the bills would also eliminate the requirement that 15% of food aid be monetized , replacing this required minimum with the option to monetize up to 15% of food aid .

s. 2551 and h.r .

5276 would also add the senate foreign relations committee and the house and senate appropriations committees as committees receiving reports on international food assistance activities from usaid and usda .

lastly , the bills would remove references in statute to using abundant u.s. agricultural productivity to deliver aid , emphasizing instead the goals of promoting agricultural - led growth in developing countries and reducing long - term reliance on u.s. foreign assistance .

s. 2551 was referred to the senate foreign relations committee , and h.r .

5276 was referred to the house agriculture committee .

