t he constitution neither establishes administrative agencies nor explicitly prescribes the manner by which they may be created .

even so , the supreme court has generally recognized that congress has broad constitutional authority over the establishment and shape of the federal bureaucracy .

this power stems principally from the combination of congress's enumerated powers under article i of the constitution to legislate on various matters ; language in article ii , section 2 , which authorizes the appointment of "officers" to positions "which shall be established by law" ; and article i , section 8 , which authorizes congress to "make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution" not only congress's own enumerated powers , but "all other powers vested by this constitution in the government of the united states , or in any department or officer thereof. .

acting pursuant to its broad constitutional authority , congress may create federal agencies and individual offices within those agencies , design agencies' basic structures and operations , and prescribe , subject to certain constitutional limitations , how those holding such offices are appointed and removed .

congress also may enumerate the powers , duties , and functions to be exercised by agencies , as well as directly counteract , through later legislation , certain agency actions implementing delegated authority .

the most potent tools of congressional control over executive branch agencies , including structuring , empowering , regulating , and funding agencies , typically require enactment of legislation .

such legislation must comport with the constitutional requirements of bicameralism ( i.e. , it must be approved by both houses of congress ) and presentment ( i.e. , it must be presented to the president for signature ) .

for legislation to take effect , that constitutional process requires the support of the house , senate , and the president , unless the support in both houses is sufficient to override the president's veto .

but congress does not always need to act through legislation to impact agency decisionmaking .

several tools available to the house , senate , congressional committees , and even individual members of congress may be employed to influence agency action .

some tools are explicitly enumerated in the constitution , such as impeachment and subsequent removal from office , and senate advice and consent to the ratification of treaties and the appointment of certain executive officers , ambassadors , and judges .

under these provisions , the constitution has explicitly authorized an individual house of congress to act unilaterally with binding legal effect .

other tools , however , are both non - constitutional ( i.e. , they are not explicitly established in the constitution ) and non - statutory ( i.e. , they do not require enactment of legislation ) .

most of these non - constitutional , non - statutory tools , while capable of influencing agency decisionmaking , cannot themselves legally compel agency action .

this distinction between the compulsory nature of statutory enactments and the non - binding nature of most ( though not all ) non - statutory legislative actions is essential to understanding the scope of congressional authority over federal agencies .

congress's power to create agencies is well established .

members of the first congress viewed the constitution as contemplating the creation of "departments of an executive nature" to "aid" the president in the execution of law .

toward this end , the first congress enacted measures creating the departments of foreign affairs , treasury , and war .

at this early stage , congress sought to ensure it retained some degree of influence and control over the new departments .

the secretary of the treasury , for example , had to report directly to congress , either "in person or in writing," on "all matters referred to him by the senate or the house. .

yet the debates of the first congress also provide evidence of congress's acknowledgment of what would become the delicate , and at times uneasy , balance between congressional creation and control of agencies and the president's authority to supervise executive officials pursuant to his constitutional obligation to "take care that the laws be faithfully executed. .

from the very outset , congress wrestled with defining the scope of both presidential and congressional control of executive agencies .

for example , in 1789 congress engaged in a historically significant debate on the president's authority to remove the secretary of foreign affairs .

although members' views differed , ultimately the prevailing position was "in favor of declaring the power of removal to be in the president," rather than in the congress .

similarly , a proposal to structure the department of the treasury as a multi - member commission , partly to insulate the agency from presidential control , was debated and eventually rejected out of concern that such a body would not be able to administer effectively the finances of the new government .

as reflected in the debates of the first congress and confirmed by later supreme court decisions , congress's power over the administrative state , though broad , is not unlimited .

in particular , constraints on congressional power over executive agencies flow from the foundational constitutional doctrine of the separation of powers .

although the text of the constitution distributes the legislative , executive , and judicial powers among the three branches of government , the supreme court has not endorsed any absolute separation .

the allocation of powers was never intended , in the words of justice oliver wendell holmes , to cause the branches to be "hermetically sealed," or divided into "fields of black and white. .

instead , observed justice robert jackson , the separation of powers "enjoins upon [the] branches separateness but interdependence , autonomy but reciprocity. .

it is a doctrine generally characterized by ambiguity and overlap rather than bright - line rules .

yet some well - established principles govern the relationship between congress and the administrative state .

for example , congress may neither displace executive authority by directly implementing the law itself , nor appoint or reserve for itself the power to remove ( except through impeachment ) executive officers engaged in the execution of law .

on the other end of the spectrum , the separation of powers is not violated merely by congress directing , prohibiting , or otherwise legislating on most forms of agency action .

it would appear that the chief substantive limitations on congress's ability to control the executive branch arise from specific constitutional provisions and implied principles — intimately connected to the separation of powers — that buttress the general division of power among the branches .

these provisions and principles , which include the appointments clause , the take care clause , and the president's authority to supervise the executive branch , are addressed below in conjunction with congress's statutory powers .

the above discussion establishes congress's broad authority to control federal agencies by enacting legislation .

these statutory tools , however , may be exercised only under congress's lawmaking power , which requires the participation and agreement of the house , senate , and , absent a veto override , the president .

but there are also many non - statutory tools ( i.e. , tools not requiring legislative enactment to exercise ) that may be used unilaterally and independently by the house , senate , congressional committees , or individual members of congress to influence and control agency action .

congress has an array of tools at its disposal to influence and control executive branch agencies .

through the exercise of its legislative power and subject to certain limitations rooted mainly in the separation of powers , congress may not only establish federal agencies and individual agency offices , but also shape agencies' basic structures and operations , set the manner in which those holding agency offices are appointed and removed , and delegate lawmaking authority to agencies .

in addition , congress may directly reverse certain agency actions and decisions through later legislation .

but congress need not confine itself to the legislative process to exert control or influence over executive branch agencies or officials .

many non - statutory tools that inhere to congress as a whole , the house or senate exclusively , committees , or even individual members of congress may be used to influence or , in some cases , control agencies or officials .

some of these non - statutory tools , such as impeachment and removal , are of potentially legally binding effect .

other tools , such as censure or resolutions of inquiry , are not legally compulsory , but are possibly powerful tools of influence .

