human activities , particularly fossil fuel combustion and industrial operations , have raised the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) and other greenhouse gases ( ghg ) by about 40% over the past 150 years .

almost all climate scientists agree that these ghg increases have contributed to a warmer climate today and that , if they continue , will contribute to future climate change .

although a range of actions that seek to reduce ghg emissions are currently underway or being developed on the international and sub - national level ( eg , individual state actions or regional partnerships ) , federal policymakers and stakeholders have different viewpoints over what to do , if anything , about future climate change and related impacts .

congressional interest in ghg emission control legislation has fluctuated over the last 15 years .

proposals to limit ghg emissions have often focused on market - based approaches , such as a ghg emission cap - and - trade program or a ghg emissions tax ( often referred to as a carbon tax ) or fee .

in general , a market - based approach would place a price on ghg emissions ( eg , through an emissions cap or emission tax or fee ) , allowing covered entities to determine their pathway of compliance .

this report provides a comparison of the legislative proposals from the 108 th through the 116 th congresses that were and are designed primarily to reduce ghg emissions using market - based approaches such as cap - and - trade or carbon tax / fee programs .

during this time frame , members introduced multiple energy - related proposals that would have likely resulted in reductions in ghg emissions — legislation that promotes renewable energy or encourages carbon capture and sequestration — but these bills are not discussed in this report .

in addition , starting in the 112 th congress , some members have introduced resolutions in the house and senate expressing the view that a carbon tax is not in the economic interests of the united states .

in september 2018 , the house passed a resolution "expressing the sense of congress that a carbon tax would be detrimental to the united states economy" ( h.con.res .

119 ) .

an analogous resolution was not introduced in the senate in the 115 th congress .

as figure 2 illustrates , between the 108 th and 111 th congresses , most of the introduced bills would have established cap - and - trade systems .

between the 112 th and 115 th congresses , most of the introduced bills would have established carbon tax or emissions fee programs .

in the 111 th congress , members offered multiple and varied proposals , ultimately resulting in the house passage of h.r .

2454 , an economy - wide cap - and - trade bill .

a companion bill in the senate ( s. 1733 ) was ordered reported from the committee on environment and public works , but the bill was never brought to the senate floor for consideration .

in subsequent congresses , some members continued to offer ghg emission control legislation , but these proposals saw minimal legislative activity .

during that time frame , the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) used existing clean air act authorities to promulgate ghg emission standards for key sectors , including the electric power and transportation sectors .

epa rulemakings in this area — particularly the 2015 clean power plan final rule and the 2018 affordable clean energy proposed rule — generated considerable interest and debate in congress .

the proposals from the 116 th congress range in their scope of emissions covered from co 2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion to multiple ghg emissions from a broader array of sources .

in addition , the proposals differ by how , to whom , and for what purpose the fee revenues or allowance value would be applied .

some economic analyses indicate that policy choices to distribute the tax , fee , or emission allowance revenue would yield greater economic impacts than the direct impacts of the carbon price .

the first section of this report provides background information on cap - and - trade and carbon tax or emission fee programs .

the second section compares the ghg emission reduction legislation in each congress ( 108 th - 116 th ) .

over the last 15 years , broad ghg emission reduction legislation has generally involved market - based approaches — such as cap - and - trade systems or carbon tax programs — that rely on private sector choices and market forces to minimize the costs of emission reductions and spur innovation .

both carbon tax and emissions cap - and - trade programs would place a price — directly or indirectly — on ghg emissions or their inputs ( eg , fossil fuels ) , both would increase the price of fossil fuels for the consumer , and both would reduce ghg emissions to some degree .

preference between the two approaches ultimately depends on which variable policymakers prefer to precisely control: emission levels or emission prices .

as a practical matter , these market - based policies may include complementary or hybrid designs , incorporating elements to increase certainty in price or emissions quantity .

for example , legislation could provide mechanisms for adjusting a carbon tax / fee if a targeted range of emissions reductions were not achieved in a given period .

alternatively , legislation could include mechanisms that would bound the range of market prices for a cap - and - trade system's emissions allowances to improve price certainty .

this section compares ghg emission reduction legislation from the 108 th congress to the 116 th congress by including a separate legislative table for each congress .

the tables compare the bills by their overall framework , scope , stringency , and selected design elements .

categories of comparison include general framework: the proposed program structure — emissions cap , emissions tax or fee , or some combination of both — and scope in terms of emissions covered ( multiple ghg emissions or just co 2 emissions ) .

covered entities / materials: the industries , sectors , or materials that would be subject to the program .

emissions limit or target: the ghg or co 2 emissions target or cap for a particular year .

some targets / caps would apply only to covered sources ; others apply to total u.s. ghg emissions .

distribution of allowance value or tax revenue: how emission allowance value or carbon tax or fee revenue would be distributed ( if applicable ) .

offset and international allowance treatment: the degree to which offsets and international allowances could be used for compliance purposes and the types of offset activities that would qualify .

some proposals limit offsets by percentage of required reductions ; others limit offsets as a percentage of allowance submissions .

mechanism to address carbon - intensive imports: a central concern with a u.s. ghg reduction program is that it could raise u.s. prices more than goods manufactured abroad , potentially creating a competitive disadvantage for some domestic businesses , particularly carbon - intensive , trade - exposed industries .

policymakers could address these potential impacts in several ways — for example , through border adjustments , tax rebates , or emission allowances provided at no cost to selected industrial sectors .

additional ghg reduction measures: other mechanisms that are designed to further reduce ghg emissions that are not covered in the central program .

