over the last decade , migration to the united states from central america — in particular from el salvador , guatemala , and honduras ( known collectively as the northern triangle ) — has increased considerably .

from 2006 to 2016 , the number of individuals living in the united states who were born in the northern triangle grew from 2.2 million to almost 3 million ; this increase ( 37% ) was more than twice the increase for the total foreign - born population ( 16% ) .

during the same period , the foreign - born population from mexico living in the united states held steady at 11.5 million ( which is more than any other country - of - birth group ) .

in 2016 , the foreign - born population from the northern triangle comprised less than 1.0% of the u.s. population and 6.8% of the 43.7 million foreign - born residents of the united states , up from 5.8% in 2006 .

even though total apprehensions of illegal border crossers were at a 45-year low in fy2017 , the number of families from the northern triangle apprehended at the u.s. - mexico border has increased in recent years .

while earlier migrants apprehended at the southwest border were predominantly single , adult males from mexico , currently the majority of apprehended migrants are families and unaccompanied children , and the majority of apprehended migrants come from the northern triangle .

an increasing share of those arriving at the southwest border are requesting asylum , some at official ports of entry and others after entering the united states "without inspection" ( i.e. , illegally ) between u.s. ports of entry .

this is adding to a large backlog of asylum cases in u.s. immigration courts .

in the past year , news reports of migrant "caravans" from the northern triangle traveling toward the u.s. border have sparked intense interest and many questions from congress , including the following: what factors are contributing to the increase in migration from the northern triangle to the united states ? .

is the choice to migrate in large groups a new trend ? .

how are the united states , mexico , and central american governments responding ? .

how are u.s. policies at the border — including security screening , removal proceedings , military involvement , and asylum processing — being implemented ? .

this report addresses these and other frequently asked questions .

for more information on relevant topics and issues congress may consider , see the following reports or contact the authors: crs report r44812 , u.s. strategy for engagement in central america: policy issues for congress , by peter j. meyer crs report r45120 , latin america and the caribbean: issues in the 115th congress , coordinated by mark p. sullivan ( see "migration issues" section ) crs in focus if10215 , mexico's immigration control efforts , by clare ribando seelke and carla y. davis - castro crs report r43616 , el salvador: background and u.s. relations , by clare ribando seelke crs report rl34027 , honduras: background and u.s. relations , by peter j. meyer crs report r42580 , guatemala: political and socioeconomic conditions and u.s. relations , by maureen taft - morales crs report r45266 , the trump administration's "zero tolerance" immigration enforcement policy , by william a. kandel crs insight in10993 , presidential proclamation on unlawful border crossers and asylum , by andorra bruno crs report rs20844 , temporary protected status: overview and current issues , by jill h. wilson crs legal sidebar lsb10150 , an overview of u.s. immigration laws regulating the admission and exclusion of aliens at the border , by hillel r. smith crs report r42138 , border security: immigration enforcement between ports of entry , coordinated by audrey singer crs report r43356 , border security: immigration inspections at ports of entry , by audrey singer crs report r43599 , unaccompanied alien children: an overview , by william a. kandel crs legal sidebar lsb10121 , the president's authority to use the national guard or the armed forces to secure the border , by jennifer k. else .

