in the past two decades , increasing global trade liberalization , among other factors , has led to a rise in u.s. agricultural imports .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) reports that u.s. agricultural imports reached nearly $121 billion in the 2017 calendar year ( figure 1 ) , which was twice the level of such imports in 2000 .

consequently , the increasing volume of imports has heightened public concern about the potential for introducing pests and diseases .

most imported agricultural products , such as live animal and plants , are inspected by u.s. government officials and have accompanying documentation — animal and plant health import permits — certifying adherence to u.s. requirements .

more than ever , the u.s. government depends on the proper use of these import permits to facilitate u.s. agricultural trade .

the usda's animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) regulates the import , transit , and release of regulated animals , animal products , veterinary biologics , plants , plant products , pests , organisms , soil , and genetically engineered organisms .

aphis - issued import health permits verify that the health status and the production practices of an imported product meet u.s. import standards .

aphis works with foreign exporters , u.s. importers , and foreign governments to interpret and enforce aphis - issued animal and plant health import permits .

animal and plant health import permits include components from u.s. specific regulations and world trade organization ( wto ) guidelines .

further , these health import permits are a part of broader agreements between the united states and its trading partners in the wto that establish sanitary and phytosanitary ( sps ) standards .

sps measures aim to protect against diseases , pests , toxins , and other contaminants .

since 2000 , the united states has entered into a dozen free trade agreements ( ftas ) , which include an sps chapter containing specific u.s. import requirements that the partner country has agreed to recognize .

examples include specific product or processing standards , requirements for products to be produced in disease - free areas , quarantine and inspection procedures , sampling and testing requirements , residue limits for pesticides and drugs in foods , and prohibitions on certain food additives .

aphis works with the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) customs and border protection ( cbp ) , in addition to other federal agencies ( eg , food safety and inspection service , food and drug administration ) , to enforce agricultural import regulations .

cbp has authority to enforce aphis regulations at ports of entry .

aphis and cbp personnel inspect shipments of imported agricultural products and certify that the required animal or plant health import permits and sps documentation accompany each shipment .

for much of the 20 th century , animal and plant health bureaus within usda operated independently of one another .

the creation of aphis consolidated these bureaus in 1972 .

there are a number of statutes ( eg , table 1 ) that have established aphis's authority over health import permits .

however , the majority of the directives are found in two key legislative actions: 1 .

the animal health protection act ( ahpa , 7 u.s.c .

§ § 8301 et seq . ) .

is the primary federal law governing the protection of animal health .

it gives aphis broad authority to detect , control , or eradicate pests or diseases of livestock or poultry .

ahpa consolidated all of the animal quarantine and related laws — some dating back to the late 1800s — and replaced them with one statutory framework .

while most of the authorities contained in the consolidated ahpa were taken from existing laws , some new provisions were added to fill in gaps in legal authority .

2 .

the plant protection act of 2000 ( ppa , 7 u.s.c .

§ § 7701 et seq . ) .

is the primary federal law governing plant pests in foreign and interstate commerce , covering agricultural commodities , plants , biological control organisms , articles that might be infested , means of transportation , and other pathways for moving pests .

it authorizes aphis to prohibit or restrict the importation , exportation , and interstate movement of plants , plant products , certain biological control organisms , noxious weeds , and plant pests .

it also authorizes aphis to inspect foreign plant imports , quarantine any state or premise infested with a new pest or noxious weed , and cooperate with states in certain control and eradication actions .

both ahpa and ppa give aphis authority to inspect agricultural imports .

however , after the events of september 11 , 2001 , congressional concern about agroterrorism — the deliberate introduction of an animal or plant disease to infect food , causing economic losses and / or undermining social stability — triggered the strengthening of aphis and other federal agency agricultural inspection activities .

congress passed the public health security and the bioterrorism preparedness and response act of 2002 ( 16 u.s.c .

§§3371-3378 ; commonly referred to as the bioterrorism act ) to bolster protection of the nation's food and water supplies and prevent unauthorized access to certain animal and plant disease organisms in laboratories .

since the enactment of the bioterrorism act , aphis - issued health permits have been required to accompany aphis - regulated agricultural imports to facilitate trade .

agricultural imports arrive to the un ited states through five u.s. customs districts ( figure 2 ) .

although aphis regulations are enforced at the ports of entry , they are typically mediated through health import permits .

aphis's plant production quarantine and veterinary services oversee the health import permit process for a "plant health import permit" or "animal health import permit," respectively ( figure 3 ) .

aphis works with several federal agencies to issue import permits .

u.s. importers obtain aphis health import permits via the aphis website ( "epermit" ) or in consultation with aphis or state department of agriculture offices .

many u.s. importers use epermit for the importation of products from abroad as well as for interstate trade .

the epermit system enables federal regulatory officials to issue , track , and verify the validity of import permits online .

there is a cost to the importer associated with each epermit application .

aphis and the state - level authorities often request health import permit submissions alongside supporting documentation ( figure 4 ) .

in many cases , a biosafety facility inspection is a part of the review process — where a facility ( eg , laboratory , greenhouse , growth chamber ) must demonstrate they can adequately and safely contain certain organisms .

health import permits are normally processed and issued within 10 business days of receipt of the application .

after a health import permit is obtained , aphis and / or cbp must inspect the aphis - regulated product .

one of the flagship programs that aphis and cbp collaborate on and administer is the agricultural quarantine inspection ( aqi ) program .

aqi ensures that the required health permits , sanitary certificates ( for animal products ) , and phytosanitary certificates ( for plant products ) accompany each shipment .

aphis transfers funds to cbp to conduct aqi activities .

aphis collects aqi user fees from international airline passengers , operators of commercial vehicles , cruise ship passengers , and importers of shipments requiring phytosanitary treatments .

congress appropriates funding for aqi each year ( eg , operating expenses such as rent , utilities , travel , and supplies to conduct program activities ) .

the aqi user fees recover costs that aphis and cbp bear to administer the inspections .

usda estimates that in fy2018 , aqi collected $765 million in fees , of which it transferred $539 million to dhs and retained $226 million to augment its discretionary appropriation .

in a 2013 report , the government accountability office ( gao ) identified a gap between fee revenues and total program costs .

in its report , gao recommended aligning the division of fees between aphis and cbp with their respective costs and that the two agencies ensure that fees are collected when due .

in february 2018 , aphis announced it had implemented all of gao's recommendations .

importers must obtain aphis - issued health import permits before beginning the inspection process .

in addition to aphis , congress has directed other federal agencies and state - level departments of agriculture ( see table 2 ) to participate in inspecting aphis - regulated products: the food and drug administration ( fda ) has taken steps to protect the public from terrorist attacks on the u.s. food supply and other food - related emergencies in collaboration with dhs .

since 2003 , fda has advised u.s. importers to submit "prior notice" online forms to fda before food is imported or offered for import into the united states .

unlike aphis , fda does not enforce industry guidelines , but fda does review aphis - issued import permits to verify the disease or pest status of the agricultural product .

the food safety modernization act ( fsma ; p.l .

111-353 ) created new rules governing fda's food inspection regime of both domestic and imported foods under the agency's jurisdiction .

cbp and aphis inspect agricultural products together through the aqi program .

cbp officials require u.s. importers to present an aphis - issued import permit before conducting inspections .

the f ood safety and inspection service ( fsis ) has regulatory oversight of meat , poultry , and some egg products .

fsis often requests aphis - issued health import permits before proceeding with meat inspections .

in the case of fsis - regulated products , fsis requires aphis - issued animal health import permits to ensure that the meat and / or poultry ingredients in such food products are prepared under fsis inspection or in a foreign establishment certified by a foreign inspection system approved by fsis .

s tate - l evel d epartments of a griculture enforce aphis regulations .

states have different animal and plant health import restrictions that apply to interstate trade .

some states have heightened restrictions based on disease and pest detections .

similar to fsis , state - level regulators typically request aphis - issued animal or plant health import permits before conducting their inspections .

state - level departments of agriculture often coordinate with aphis and cbp directly ( eg , when a state detects a disease outbreak ) .

congress has long been involved in efforts to prevent the entry of pest and disease threats into the united states from agricultural imports .

this oversight has manifest in various congressional actions , including continuing to provide aphis with appropriations to monitor pests and diseases , introducing legislation to address invasive species ( eg , areawide integrated pest management , h.r .

5411 , 115 th congress ) , and directing cbp to enforce aphis regulations to deter agricultural smuggling into the united states .

aphis - issued animal and plant health import permits can be a tool to prevent agricultural import threats to the united states .

the sections that follow summarize selected issues that congress has addressed by directing aphis to undertake a specific role , assigning the agency with specific responsibilities , or authorizing it carry out certain actions .

in the event of a u.s. disease outbreak or pest infestation , aphis is designated to be the lead u.s. agency for informing the international community ( such as to the world organization for animal health , also known as "oie" ) .

typically , aphis would directly contact the partner country's scientific authority to explain the nature and extent of the outbreak .

in most cases , aphis and officials of the partner country observe the sps guidelines agreed upon under the wto framework or , in some cases , the sps chapters in individual ftas .

responses to a pest or disease outbreak can include a complete ban on the importation of u.s. products impacted by the pest / disease .

under certain circumstances , a "regionalization" protocol may be applied in which a specific exporting region within the united states may be recognized as disease - or pest - free .

in the event of a trading partner experiencing a disease outbreak or pest infestation , the notification process is similar to a u.s. outbreak ( eg , informing oie ) .

aphis informs u.s. importers of the trading partner outbreak .

u.s. importers work with aphis to verify that the health import permit reflects the disease or pest status of the exporting country .

aphis provides guidance to u.s. importers if their health import permits would be accepted ( eg , following sps protocol of regionalization ) or rejected ( eg , ban products from an infected trading partner ) .

table 3 provides a selected listing of prominent aphis - monitored diseases and pests that pose a threat to u.s. agriculture .

among these are disease concerns , including avian influenza and foot - and - mouth disease , and invasive plant pests such as the asian longhorned beetle and the emerald ash borer .

in some instances , agricultural imports ( or even interstate shipments ) can arrive into aqi with pests and diseases that could impact public health or u.s. agricultural production systems .

congress has sometimes directed aphis to address certain diseases through the annual appropriations process .

for example , the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) , includes a general provision providing aphis with an additional $5.5 million — to remain available until the end of fy2019 — to fund a multiple - agency response to citrus greening disease .

agroterrorism is the deliberate introduction of an animal or plant disease with the objective of infecting food , causing economic losses and / or undermining social stability .

requiring u.s. importers to obtain aphis - issued health import permits is one way that aphis and the cbp protect against agroterrorism .

permits provide aphis and cbp inspectors an opportunity to conduct random sampling to assist in disease and pest identification or to detect other potential threats .

congress has taken steps to address potential harmful imports ( "select agents" ) that could impact public health or animal / plant health through the bioterrorism act by directing the department of health and human services's ( hhs ) centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) and aphis to enforce the select agents and toxins list under the federal select agent program .

the agents and toxins on this list have been determined to pose a threat to human and animal health , plant health , or animal and plant products .

some of these agents and toxins are overseen by hhs , others by usda , and certain ones by both agencies .

an invasive species is a nonnative ( also known as an alien ) species that does or is likely to cause economic or environmental harm or harm to human health .

invasive species include plants , animals , and microbes .

the introduction of invasive species into the united states — whether deliberate or unintentional — can threaten native animal and plant communities , lead to ecosystem disruptions , and contribute to extinctions of native species .

invasive species can also impact biodiversity and alter habitats and can result in the introduction of new pests and diseases .

an estimated 50,000 non - native invasive animal and plant species have been introduced to the united states for over a century , with a 2011 study citing total costs exceeding $100 billion annually — including economic costs related to damages as well as management , mitigation , and recovery activities .

aphis collects information on invasive species and monitors their impacts ( eg , on agricultural production , forest lands ) .

the information is updated and shared with aqi and ports of entries .

the health import permits provide the aphis / cbp officials specific guidelines ( eg , identifying specific pests ) , depending on the origination of the product , that facilitate detection during inspecting or random sampling of the imported agricultural products .

u.s. importers also work with aphis and other federal agencies ( eg , the environmental protection agency ) to obtain regulations on preventing an invasive species infestation ( eg , vessel ballast water discharge ) .

several statutes provide federal agencies with authorities to address invasive species in the united states .

some in congress have expressed interest in pursuing legislation to reduce the prevalence of invasive species , such as through the introduction of "area - wide integrated pest management" ( eg , h.r .

5411 , 115 th congress ) , a pest management strategy that is applied within a geographical area .

this bill would have expanded the usda integrated research , education , and extension competitive grants program for qualified area - wide integrated pest management projects .

over the past 30 years , there has been a steady increase in the movement of people and agricultural products around the world .

the volume of smuggled and improperly imported agricultural products entering the united states has been a congressional concern .

products smuggled into the united states can harbor exotic plant and animal pests , diseases , or invasive species that could damage domestic crops , livestock , and the environment .

if aphis identifies an illegally imported product or a regulatory violation , it may seize the item and pursue civil and criminal penalties , if warranted .

aphis encourages distributors and retailers to purchase products that have been imported through legal channels that are typically accompanied by aphis health import permits .

one way that congress has attempted to prevent agricultural smuggling is through the lacey act .

the lacey act dates from 1900 and prohibits the importation of any plant — with limited exceptions — that is taken or traded in violation of domestic or international laws .

the act requires declarations — in addition to the aphis - issued plant health import permits — for imported shipments of most plants or plant products .

aphis works with cbp , the u.s. coast guard ( eg , for fisheries violations ) , the national marine fisheries service , the federal bureau of investigation , the u.s. forest service , and u.s. immigration and customs enforcement to enforce the lacey act through inspection or monitoring activities .

aphis's role in this context is to collect aphis - issued health import permits , manage the declaration requirement , provide guidance to importers regarding the declaration , perform compliance checks , and provide enforcement agencies with information to assist their investigations .

the declaration is to be made by the importer at the time of import .

according to usda , both cbp and aphis activities have contributed to an increase in the number of declarations , with approximately 1 million declarations in fy2017 , up roughly 300,000 from fy2016 .

this increase has coincided with the introduction of the online system in lieu of paper - based declarations .

