the employer shared responsibility provisions ( esrp ) of the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) generally incentivize large employers to offer adequate and affordable health insurance coverage to their full - time employees and their full - time employees' dependents .

if an applicable large employer fails to offer health insurance or offers substandard coverage to its employees , that employer may be subject to a penalty .

as shown in figure 1 , all common - law employers , including government entities ( such as federal , state , local , or indian tribal government entities ) , are responsible for annually determining whether they are considered an applicable large employer ( ale ) .

an ale is generally an employer that has at least 50 full - time employees ( including full - time equivalent employees , which are a representation of non - full - time employees as full - time employees ) .

if an employer qualifies as an ale in a given year , then it will be subject to the esrp in the subsequent year .

an employer subject to the esrp is incentivized to offer adequate , affordable health insurance coverage to their full - time employees ( and their full - time employees' dependents ) .

if an employer does not offer such coverage , the employer risks being subject to a penalty if at least one full - time employee receives a premium tax credit or cost - sharing subsidy through a health insurance exchange ( exchange ) .

if an employer does not qualify as an ale , then it will not be subject to the esrp , nor will it be at risk of a penalty for failing to offer health insurance coverage to its full - time employees .

this report begins with an overview of how employers determine whether they are considered an ale before outlining the esrp .

it then discusses the two types of esrp penalties and introduces administrative aspects of the esrp .

this report also includes two appendixes that contain definitions of terms as used in the report and a summary of how various worker classifications are considered for ale determinations and under the esrp ( appendix a and appendix b ) .

all common - law employers , including government entities ( such as federal , state , local , or indian tribal government entities ) and nonprofit organizations that are exempt from federal income taxes , can be subject to the esrp .

for an employer to be subject to the esrp , the employer must be considered an ale , which is an employer that has an average of at least 50 full - time employees ( including full - time equivalent employees ) on business days during the preceding calendar year .

if an employer does not qualify as an ale , then it will not be subject to the esrp , nor will it be at risk of a penalty for failing to offer appropriate health insurance coverage to its full - time employees .

once an employer is determined to be an ale , the employer must either satisfy the esrp by offering affordable and adequate health insurance coverage to its full - time employees ( and their dependents ) or risk being subject to a penalty payment if at least one full - time employee receives a premium tax credit through an exchange .

for purposes of the esrp , ales must identify which of their employees are considered full - time employees and need to be offered health insurance in order to not risk being subject to a penalty .

to do this , employers may use the same full - time - employee conclusions from the ale determination , may redetermine which employees are considered full - time using a different measurement method ( see the " look - back measurement method ," below ) , or , in certain instances , may use a combination of both methods .

when an ale is part of an aggregated ale group , each subcomponent ( ale member ) is responsible for identifying which employees are considered full - time under the esrp , deciding whether to offer health insurance coverage to its full - time employees , and if applicable , paying any specific esrp penalty amount .

if full - time employees were not offered appropriate health insurance by their employer ( as defined in " health insurance coverage requirements for employer plans " ) and did not receive a premium tax credit through an exchange , the employer would not be subject to a penalty .

ales are not at risk of a penalty for failing to offer health insurance coverage to non - full - time employees , such as part - time employees .

ales are potentially subject to an esrp assessment payment if at least one full - time employee receives a premium tax credit through an exchange .

an individual may be eligible for a premium tax credit if the individual's employer does not offer health insurance coverage or offers insurance that is either inadequate or unaffordable .

therefore , if an ale offered adequate and affordable coverage to every full - time employee ( and his or her dependents ) , the ale would not be subject to an esrp penalty .

esrp penalties apply to all applicable common - law employers , including government entities ( such as federal , state , local , or indian tribal government entities ) and nonprofit organizations , even if the employers are exempt from federal income taxes .

as enacted , the esrp were supposed to take effect in 2014 .

however , the irs provided transition relief in 2014 and did not enforce the esrp or any associated penalties for that year .

the irs enforced a limited rollout of the provisions in 2015 , generally applying the esrp to employers with at least 100 full - time employees ( including full - time equivalent employees ) .

in 2016 , the irs further expanded enforcement to include nearly every business as required by law , except for certain specific circumstances .

the esrp were enforced on all ales beginning in 2017 .

although 2015 was the first year in which the provisions were enforced , ales did not receive a notification from federally facilitated exchanges during that year because the federally facilitated exchanges' employer notification program was not phased in until 2016 .

with respect to the irs notification , ales began receiving a notification about potential penalties for tax year 2015 in november 2017 .

by january 2 , 2018 , the irs had notified only 3,820 of 33,080 ales identified as being potentially subject to a penalty for tax year 2015 .

in 2017 , an audit by the treasury's inspector general for tax administration found that the delay in irs notifications resulted from some of the irs's esrp compliance processes either not working as intended or being delayed , not initiated , or canceled .

the audit also found that as of march 21 , 2018 , the irs still was unable to process paper information returns promptly and accurately .

appendix a. definitions as used under the employer shared responsibility provisions appendix b .

employer shared responsibility provisions treatment of different types of worker classification .

