the fifth amendment to the u.s. constitution provides that "[n]o person shall be held to answer for a capital , or otherwise infamous crime , unless on a presentment or indictment of a grand jury. .

this provision requires that a federal prosecutor , in order to charge a suspect with a serious federal crime , secure the assent of an independent investigative and deliberative body comprising citizens drawn from the jurisdiction in which the crime would be tried .

federal grand juries serve two primary functions: ( 1 ) they aid federal prosecutors in investigating possible crimes by issuing subpoenas for documents , physical evidence , and witness testimony ; and ( 2 ) they determine whether there is sufficient evidence to charge a criminal suspect with the crime or crimes under investigation .

traditionally , the grand jury has done its work in secret .

secrecy prevents those under scrutiny from fleeing or importuning the grand jurors , encourages full disclosure by witnesses , and protects the innocent from unwarranted prosecution , among other things .

the long - established rule of grand jury secrecy is enshrined in federal rule of criminal procedure 6 ( e ) , which provides that government attorneys and the jurors themselves , among others , "must not disclose a matter occurring before the grand jury. .

accordingly , as a general matter , persons and entities external to the grand jury process are precluded from obtaining transcripts of grand jury testimony or other documents or information that would reveal "what took place" in the proceedings , even if the grand jury has concluded its work and even if the information is sought pursuant to otherwise - valid legal processes .

at times , the rule of grand jury secrecy has come into tension with congress's power of inquiry when an arm of the legislative branch has sought protected materials pursuant to its oversight function .

for example , some courts have determined that the information barrier established in rule 6 ( e ) extends to congressional inquiries , noting that the rule "contains no reservations in favor of .

 .

 .

congressional access to grand jury materials" that would otherwise remain secret .

nevertheless , the rule of grand jury secrecy is subject to a number of exceptions , both codified and judicially crafted , that permit grand jury information to be disclosed in certain circumstances ( usually only with prior judicial authorization ) .

and because rule 6 ( e ) covers only "matters occurring before the grand jury," courts have recognized that documents and information are not independently insulated from disclosure merely because they happen to have been presented to , or considered by , a grand jury .

as such , even if rule 6 ( e ) generally limits congressional access to grand jury information , congress has a number of tools at its disposal to seek materials connected to a grand jury investigation .

this report begins with an overview of the standards governing — and exceptions applicable to — grand jury secrecy under federal rule of criminal procedure 6 ( e ) .

the report also addresses whether and how the rule of grand jury secrecy and its exceptions apply to congress , including the circumstances under which congress may obtain grand jury information and what restrictions apply to further disclosures .

concluding this report is a discussion of past legislative efforts to amend rule 6 ( e ) in order to provide congressional committees with access to grand jury materials .

federal law requires the various united states district courts to order one or more grand juries to be summoned when the public interest requires .

grand jurors must be "selected at random from a fair cross section of the community in the district or division wherein the court convenes," among other things .

grand jury panels consist of 16 to 23 members .

after selection , the court swears in members of the grand jury ; names a "foreperson and deputy foreperson" ; and instructs the panel .

federal grand juries sit until discharged by the court , but generally for no longer than 18 months , with the possibility of one six - month extension .

the authority of a federal grand jury is sweeping , but it is limited to the investigation of possible violations of federal criminal law triable in the district in which it is sitting .

the grand jury may begin its examination even in the absence of probable cause or any other level of suspicion that a crime has been committed within its reach .

the grand jury does not conduct its business in open court , nor does a federal judge preside over its proceedings .

the grand jury meets behind closed doors , with only the jurors , attorney for the government , witnesses , someone to record testimony , and possibly an interpreter present .

the grand jury acts on the basis of evidence presented by witnesses called for that purpose .

the attorney for the government will ordinarily arrange for the appearance of witnesses before the grand jury , will suggest the order in which they should be called , and will take part in questioning them .

the grand jury most often turns to the prosecutor for legal advice and to draft most of the indictments , which the grand jury returns .

grand jury witnesses usually appear before the grand jury under subpoena .

subpoenas may be issued and served at the request of the panel itself , although the attorney for the government usually arranges the case to be presented to the grand jury .

unjustified failure to comply with a grand jury subpoena may result in a witness being held in contempt .

a witness who lies to a grand jury may be prosecuted for perjury or for making false declarations to the grand jury .

neither a potential defendant nor a grand jury target nor any of their counsel has any right to appear before the grand jury unless invited or subpoenaed .

nor does a potential defendant , a grand jury target , or their counsel have any right to present exculpatory evidence or substantive objection to the grand jury .

there are four possible outcomes of convening a grand jury — ( 1 ) indictment ; ( 2 ) a vote not to indict ; ( 3 ) discharge or expiration without any action ; or ( 4 ) submission of a report to the court under certain circumstances .

a grand jury indictment may issue upon the vote of 12 of its members that probable cause exists to believe the accused committed the crime charged .

as the discussion of grand jury secrecy and federal rule of criminal procedure 6 ( e ) above reflects , no exception to the general rule of secrecy explicitly authorizes disclosure of grand jury matters to congress , either by agreement or pursuant to a congressional subpoena .

nevertheless , a few courts have addressed the applicability of rule 6 ( e ) and its exceptions to congressional requests for information , including in the course of committee investigations and preliminary to impeachment proceedings .

at a minimum , these decisions indicate that congress may be able to obtain grand jury materials by invoking a rule 6 ( e ) exception before a court under certain circumstances .

congress has also previously considered legislation that would have expressly permitted a court to authorize disclosure of grand jury matters to congressional committees , though the congressional - access provision ultimately did not become law .

this section of the report addresses the circumstances in which congress may obtain and disseminate grand jury materials under rule 6 ( e ) as it is presently construed ; it then addresses legal issues to consider if congress seeks to create a new rule 6 ( e ) exception for congressional committees .

congress generally has broad authority to obtain information for oversight and investigative purposes .

the power of congress to conduct investigations is "inherent in the legislative process," and such power is "as penetrating and far - reaching as the potential power to enact and appropriate under the constitution. .

as a corollary , the "[i]ssuance of subpoenas .

 .

 .

has long been held to be a legitimate use by congress of its power to investigate. .

beyond subpoenas , congress has exercised its power of inquiry through less formal means , such as by submitting letter requests for information .

congressional inquiries are broadly protected from judicial scrutiny .

provided that a committee's investigation is authorized and conducted pursuant to a valid legislative purpose , the speech or debate clause of article i of the constitution creates "an absolute bar to [judicial] interference. .

pursuant to its broad authority to investigate , congress has on several occasions sought grand jury information based on legislative interest in particular executive branch activities , either through letters or subpoenas to executive branch officials or through petitions filed with the court .

faced with these legislative efforts to obtain otherwise - secret grand jury materials , courts have reached conflicting conclusions as to whether the rule of grand jury secrecy enshrined in rule 6 ( e ) applies to disclosures to congress at all .

relying on an apparently novel conception of the "authority of congress under the speech or debate clause," two courts have held that congress has a "constitutionally independent legal right" to obtain documents in furtherance of "legitimate legislative activity" regardless of whether the documents disclose matters occurring before a grand jury .

first , in in re grand jury investigation of ven - fuel , the chairman of the subcommittee on oversight and investigations of the house of representatives' committee on interstate and foreign commerce petitioned a district court for an order authorizing disclosure of documents presented to a federal grand jury in florida in the course of its investigation of possible criminal conduct by a company called ven - fuel , inc .

the court recognized that the subcommittee's request implicated "the powers and operations of the coequal , but interdependent , branches of the federal government .

 .

 .

over theoretical fault lines," but concluded there was no "direct conflict" because the subcommittee's legitimate legislative purpose in seeking the documents meant that it was "entitled to disclosure" regardless of grand jury secrecy rules .

ten years after the decision in ven - fuel , the issue of congressional access to grand jury materials came before a different court in connection with the potential impeachment of a federal judge .

the judge had been indicted for conspiring to solicit a bribe to influence a judicial decision , causing the house of representatives to introduce a resolution calling for his impeachment .

the resolution was referred to the house committee on the judiciary , which subsequently requested that the district court deliver all records of the grand jury that had indicted the judge .

the judge objected , but the district court concluded that the committee was entitled to the records for several reasons , one of which was that , in accordance with ven - fuel , a "congressional investigation relating to the impeachment of a federal judge" falls within the authorized legislative activities "embraced" by the speech or debate clause .

criticizing the decision in ven - fuel , other courts have sharply disagreed with the conclusion that the speech or debate clause provides a basis to ignore grand jury secrecy when congress is the requester .

in in re grand jury investigation of uranium industry , for instance , the senate judiciary committee petitioned a court for an order authorizing disclosure of documents in the possession of the department of justice related to its investigation of the uranium industry .

the committee's interest in the documents apparently stemmed from the fact that an expansive grand jury investigation conducted by the department's antitrust division had yielded no indictments .

in seeking court - ordered disclosure of the grand jury materials , the committee asserted , among other things , that it was not required to establish the applicability of a rule 6 ( e ) exception or make a showing of particularized need because the speech or debate clause entitled it to the materials .

the court , however , considered "the suggestion that rule 6 ( e ) does not apply to disclosures to congress" to be "[un]acceptable. .

the court noted that rule 6 ( e ) "contains no reservations in favor of congress" and rejected the ven - fuel court's suggestion that the speech or debate clause may be "used as a sword to enable congress to penetrate an otherwise secret function of one of the other branches. .

while , in the court's view , the clause would protect congress from collateral interference if it were attempting to "acquire materials which it has a legal right to obtain," the clause would not sanction expansion of congress's legal rights "to manufacture a new right to obtain grand jury materials" that could be affirmatively employed .

as the court in uranium industry recognized , the ven - fuel decision's reliance on the speech or debate clause as a font of constitutional authority permitting congressional access to grand jury materials finds little support in the broader case law on the clause .

though the clause functions to protect congressional activity , including lawful use of the subpoena power , from judicial interference when such activity is challenged by a third party , courts have not viewed the clause to constitute a sword that congress may use to affirmatively seek judicial authorization for disclosure of information in the possession of a coordinate branch .

that said , the extent to which the rule of grand jury secrecy applies more generally along the "theoretical fault line[]" that exists between executive branch activity and congress's article i investigative authority remains unsettled .

it is worth noting in this regard that although congress's power to obtain information for legitimate legislative purposes is broad , it is not limitless .

though no federal appellate courts have spoken directly to the issue , decisions addressing the now - lapsed independent counsel statute appear to lend some support to the position that congress enjoys no special constitutional solicitude in obtaining otherwise - secret grand jury materials .

that statute required a duly appointed independent counsel to file a pre - termination "final report" with the court "setting forth fully and completely a description of the work of the independent counsel," and the statute permitted the court to release "to the congress , the public , or any appropriate person , such portions of [the] report .

 .

 .

as the division of the court considers appropriate. .

in several decisions considering whether to authorize such release of independent counsel reports to congress and the public , the d.c .

circuit has recognized that rule 6 ( e ) applies to an independent counsel , meaning that "any release of grand jury material" in the final report authorized by statute "falls within the protective provisions" of the rule unless an exception applies .

nevertheless , the court has read a provision of the independent counsel statute permitting a court to authorize disclosure of the report as establishing a "judicial proceeding" such that release of the report may fall within that exception to rule 6 ( e ) .

pursuant to the exception , the court has proceeded to consider multiple factors in deciding whether to authorize the report's release .

in other words , rather than finding an independent constitutional entitlement to grand jury material when faced with the question of whether to authorize the release to congress of a report containing such material , the d.c .

circuit has simply applied rule 6 ( e ) .

it could be argued , however , that because these cases did not involve a congressional subpoena , the court was not faced with a direct exercise of congress's constitutional power of inquiry .

the department of justice , for its part , agrees that it may release grand jury material to congress in response to a subpoena only to the extent that disclosure is permitted under rule 6 ( e ) .

it takes the opposite position from the ven - fuel court with respect to separation - of - powers implications when congress requests grand jury material: in the department's view , recognizing a congressional "independent right of access" to grand jury material would amount to "legislative encroachment into the executive's exclusive authority to enforce the law. .

assuming that rule 6 ( e ) does apply to congressional requests , it is clear that congress may nevertheless obtain materials that do not constitute "matters occurring before the grand jury" within the meaning of the rule .

rule 6 ( e ) protects from disclosure only those materials that "tend to reveal some secret aspect of the grand jury's investigation. .

thus , where a congressional committee has an interest in the subject matter of an ongoing grand jury investigation , the committee may be able to obtain most , if not all , of the same evidence the grand jury is considering from other sources .

for instance , although the court in ven - fuel viewed congress as constitutionally entitled to disclosure of documents that had been presented to a grand jury , the court also determined that the documents were not necessarily cloaked in secrecy under rule 6 ( e ) in the first instance .

and while not all courts may take such a narrow view of grand jury "matters," the principle that "[t]here is no per se rule against disclosure of any and all information which has reached the grand jury chambers" is a well - recognized one .

although no exception to grand jury secrecy explicitly encompasses disclosures to congress , a few of the exceptions could apply to congress in particular situations , which are discussed below in turn .

as discussed , rule 6 ( e ) permits disclosure of grand jury matters , excluding grand jury deliberations and votes , to "any government personnel — including those of a state , state subdivision , indian tribe , or foreign government — that an attorney for the government considers necessary to assist in performing that attorney's duty to enforce federal criminal law. .

the term "government personnel" is not defined in the rule , and the provision's legislative history reflects a concern with information - sharing between federal prosecutors and federal law enforcement officers or agency subject - matter experts who were needed to understand certain issues in complex cases .

that said , during the hearings on the proposed amendments that added the exception , there was some testimony indicating that the breadth of the term "government personnel" could mean that "even members of congress or the military" would be included .

it is thus possible that a member of congress , or congressional staff , could be considered "government personnel" to whom disclosure could be made without a court order under this exception .

any such disclosure , however , would be exceedingly circumscribed in light of the exception's other requirements .

first , disclosure would be at the discretion of the attorney for the government , and would be limited to a situation in which the attorney believed that the member or staff was needed to assist the attorney in enforcing federal criminal law .

second , the member or staff to whom disclosure was made could use the grand jury information only for the same purpose , that is , to assist the attorney in prosecuting the federal crimes to which the information related .

third , the member or staff would be obligated to maintain the secrecy of the information and could further disclose it only in accordance with rule 6 ( e ) .

as such , even assuming members of congress or congressional staff fall within the meaning of "government personnel," the exception would not permit congress to seek grand jury materials for broader independent investigative or legislative purposes .

rule 6 ( e ) ( 3 ) ( d ) permits an attorney for the government to disclose , among other things , any grand jury matter involving threats of attack or intelligence gathering by foreign powers or threats of sabotage or terrorism to "any appropriate federal .

 .

 .

government official" ( among others ) .

similar to the exception for "government personnel," the rule does not define the term "appropriate .

 .

 .

government official. .

nonetheless , other statutory provisions suggest that the term "government official" could be construed to include a member of congress .

as with the "government personnel" exception , however , disclosure under this exception would be limited: only grand jury information pertaining to the specified subject matter would be available , at the discretion of the attorney for the government , and the member receiving the information could use it "only as necessary in the conduct of [her] official duties subject to any limitations on the unauthorized disclosure of such information. .

rule 6 ( e ) 's "judicial proceeding" exception may also be relevant to congress .

as previously described , the rule provides that a court may authorize disclosure of a grand jury matter "preliminarily to or in connection with a judicial proceeding," with the term "judicial proceeding" generally contemplating some necessary resort to the judicial system .

two courts have determined that a congressional committee's request for grand jury materials pursuant to its ordinary investigative and oversight functions does not qualify under this exception , as the possibility that "the actions it is investigating may wind up in the courts if wrongdoing is uncovered" is "too remote to trigger the rule 6 ( e ) exception. .

by contrast , where a congressional committee has sought grand jury materials in connection with the contemplated impeachment of a specific public official , several courts have recognized that court - ordered disclosure may be available pursuant to the "judicial proceeding" exception .

under this view , though "impeachment proceedings before congress .

 .

 .

are not by a 'court,'" a "contemplated trial" in the senate is still "very much a judicial proceeding. .

a committee seeking court - authorized disclosure on the basis of this exception must establish a "particularized need" for the materials at issue , which requires a showing that the need outweighs the public interest in secrecy .

in the context of impeachment , courts have concluded that a congressional committee's need is sufficient to warrant disclosure , at least where the grand jury's work has concluded .

nevertheless , given that mere "relevance" or "efficiency" is generally insufficient to establish a particularized need for grand jury materials , the context of the request and the materials at issue could influence whether a committee can show such a need .

as discussed , some federal courts have recognized that courts have "inherent authority" to order the release of grand jury information in "special" or "exceptional" circumstances , regardless of whether an explicit rule 6 ( e ) exception would otherwise apply .

one lower court has relied on this inherent authority over grand jury matters , among other things , to authorize the release to the house judiciary committee of a report prepared by the grand jury investigating the alleged — and potentially impeachable — improprieties of president nixon .

the d.c .

circuit essentially affirmed that decision , expressing "general agreement" with the lower court decision .

another court has also relied on its inherent authority to order the release of the records of a grand jury that had indicted a federal judge to an investigating committee of the judiciary , relying on the "exceptional circumstance[]" that the "question under investigation" — whether a federal judge should be recommended for impeachment or otherwise disciplined — was "of great societal importance. .

recognizing that the investigating committee still was required to show a sufficient need for the grand jury materials , the court concluded such a showing had been made ( and was not outweighed by the interest in secrecy ) because ( 1 ) the investigating committee was composed of federal judges who were acting pursuant to express statutory authority ; ( 2 ) the grand jury investigation and trial of the judge had already concluded ; and ( 3 ) only by "examining all of the record" could the committee "determine the true state of the evidence for or against the charge. .

assuming a court adopts the inherent authority view of rule 6 ( e ) based on the above decisions , it is possible that a court would be willing to authorize the disclosure of grand jury materials to a congressional committee pursuant to the court's inherent authority .

precedential support for disclosure is strongest in the context of an impeachment inquiry ( assuming the court did not view such an inquiry as being "preliminar[y] to .

 .

 .

a judicial proceeding" ) .

it is less certain that an "inherent authority" disclosure order would be available to a congressional petitioner when not tied to a contemplated impeachment proceeding .

in an appropriately "exceptional" situation , a court could be amenable to exercising its inherent authority to order the release of grand jury information in the face of a pressing congressional request .

the outcome would depend in large part on whether congress could establish a sufficiently weighty need for the materials , which would implicate a variety of circumstantial factors .

once grand jury materials find their way into the possession of a member or committee of congress , the question arises as to what limits exist on further dissemination of those materials .

as previously discussed , federal rule of criminal procedure 6 ( e ) imposes an obligation of secrecy only on specified persons , of which congress ( or , more generally , a recipient of grand jury information pursuant to the "judicial proceeding" or "inherent authority" exceptions ) is not one .

that said , rule 6 ( e ) does explicitly make court - authorized disclosures "subject to any .

 .

 .

conditions that [the court] directs. .

it is thus conceivable that in ordering the release of grand jury information , a court could impose a requirement that the information not be further distributed .

however , such a requirement would be in tension with the constitution's speech or debate clause in the case of congress , at least where further dissemination occurs in the course of legitimate legislative activity , as the clause prevents a court from blocking disclosure of information in congress's possession in such a circumstance .

in any event , courts will "presume that the committees of congress will exercise their powers responsibly and with due regard for the rights of affected parties," though a court may consider the extent to which congress has taken specific precautions to protect against further dissemination of grand jury materials in deciding whether disclosure is appropriate .

past congresses , faced with potential limitations on the ability to obtain grand jury materials , have considered legislation that would amend federal rule of criminal procedure 6 ( e ) to , among other things , permit a court to authorize disclosure of grand jury matters "upon a showing of substantial need" to "any committee of congress .

 .

 .

for use in relation to any matter within the jurisdiction of such .

 .

 .

congressional committee. .

a bill to this effect was introduced during the 99th congress , prompting the department of justice's office of legal counsel to issue a memorandum opinion "strongly oppos[ing] any provision that would permit congress independently to petition the courts for rule 6 ( e ) material. .

in the office's view , such a provision would "codify legislative encroachment into the executive's exclusive authority to enforce the law. .

in other words , the office took the position that creating a mechanism for congress to obtain grand jury materials from the court , without any opportunity for interposition by the executive branch , would be inconsistent with the constitution's separation of powers and would invite "legislative pressures" that would interfere with prosecutorial discretion and due process of law .

the senate judiciary committee held a hearing on the legislation and a similar bill as to their impacts on rule 6 ( e ) and grand jury disclosure practices , during which the bill's sponsor , senator charles grassley , expressed concern that rule 6 ( e ) had been "utilized by the justice department as a shield against legitimate congressional inquiry. .

the senator pointed out that the bill did not provide "automatic congressional access to grand jury information," but rather allowed "congressional committees[,] in performance of their constitutional duty to oversee the executive agencies , an opportunity to demonstrate to the court a 'substantial need' for access[.] .

an associate deputy attorney general reiterated in testimony the department of justice's position that the provision for congressional access "would raise substantial constitutional concerns in terms of separation of powers as to where the enforcement authority lies ; due process issues in terms of fairness and the application of decisionmaking with respect to criminal prosecutions ; as well as the issue of opening the door for raising concerns about potential political influence or persuasion upon criminal prosecutions. .

he did point out , however , that the department had "accommodate[d] requests from particular congressional committees for investigative materials on an ad hoc basis by appropriate application to the courts , and subject to necessary protective conditions," which it would continue to do .

in separate testimony , representatives of the american bar association and the national association of criminal defense lawyers argued that the provision under consideration could violate the separation - of - powers doctrine and undermine the "fundamental tradition of grand jury secrecy" by "subvert[ing] the purpose of the grand jury" to legislative ends .

an attorney with expertise on the subject of congressional access to information also testified at the hearing and expressed the view that a bill permitting a court to provide grand jury materials to a congressional committee "with legitimate oversight functions would not violate separation - of - powers principles. .

however , he believed that congress should have access to grand jury materials only "in very limited circumstances" and suggested that an amendment to rule 6 ( e ) "should instruct a federal court to weigh congressional needs against grand jury secrecy requirements in determining whether to grant access. .

in the attorney's view , this weighing would include consideration of whether the committee could acquire sufficient information from non - grand - jury sources , whether the grand jury proceedings for which information was sought had terminated or were ongoing , and whether the committee had "in place special provisions to protect the confidentiality of grand jury material. .

the attorney did not view the provision under consideration , as written , to be adequate in light of the considerations he identified .

ultimately , the bill was reported out of committee with the changes to rule 6 ( e ) , including the congressional - access provision , excised , and it does not appear that the legislation was further pursued .

consequently , ambiguity remains regarding the relationship between grand jury secrecy and congressional access to grand jury materials .

as the debate in the 99th congress reflects , any change to the rule could raise potentially difficult constitutional , interpretive , and policy questions .

in any event , should congress desire to create further exceptions to the secrecy framework beyond rule 6 ( e ) , the supreme court has instructed that it must "affirmatively express its intent to do so. .

