providing for the national defense is a central concern of congress , and technological advantage has long provided u.s. forces with a battlefield overmatch , deterring potential conflicts and contributing to decisive u.s. military victories .

underpinning u.s. technological advantage are leading - edge innovations built on a foundation of insights gained from research and development ( r&d ) activities .

today , many analysts believe that u.s. technological overmatch — and , by extension , national security — is at risk due to a number of factors , including a rapidly evolving global landscape for innovation ; changes in the composition of r&d funding ; and the increasing technological prowess of potential adversaries .

many policymakers believe that new approaches and mechanisms are required to maintain u.s. technological advantage .

congress plays a central role in how the department of defense ( dod ) creates and acquires leading - edge technologies , including establishing and refining the organizational structure of dod research and development activities , providing policy direction , and appropriating funds for r&d and innovation - related activities .

congress and the administration have undertaken actions in these areas in an effort to ensure that the united states maintains superiority over its potential adversaries .

this report provides an overview of the changes that have occurred in the global r&d landscape , the administration's policies and perspectives on how to maintain u.s. military technological leadership , actions taken by congress , and potential issues for consideration .

prior to the 1940s , the united states depended on europe as a major source of scientific capital .

world war ii ( wwii ) initiated a vastly expanded role for the u.s. government in funding , administering , and conducting research and development .

in support of the war effort , new offices were established at the highest levels of the federal government to support the planning and oversight of scientific and technological efforts .

president franklin roosevelt created the u.s. office of scientific research and development ( osrd ) by executive order in june 1941 to ensure "adequate provision for research on scientific and medical problems relating to the national defense. .

the r&d managed by osrd contributed to the allied victory in wwii in a number of ways .

among its best known achievements were the development of atomic weapons under the manhattan project and the development of radar .

several of today's largest and most prestigious u.s. national laboratories have their roots in these efforts .

in light of the success of the nation's wwii investments in r&d , president roosevelt sent a letter to osrd director vannevar bush in november 1944 requesting recommendations on the future of the nation's scientific enterprise , including what government could do to aid the research activities of public and private organizations .

with the death of president roosevelt in april 1945 , bush directed his response to president harry truman in the form of a report , science: the endless frontier .

the report asserted the need for , value of , and rationale for an expanded federal role in supporting r&d and the development of scientific talent to meet societal needs .

the report provided specific recommendations for federal government action .

in his report , bush asserted that "science is a proper concern of government" and advocated for a strong and steady federal government commitment to scientific research to "insure our health , prosperity , and security as a nation in the modern world. .

the report stated that "scientific progress is essential" and must be "continuous and substantial" to enable more jobs , higher wages , shorter hours , more abundant crops , more leisure for recreation , for study , for learning how to live without the deadening drudgery which has been the burden of the common man for ages past … for higher standards of living … the prevention and cures of diseases … conservation of our limited national resources , and … means of defense against aggression .

in particular , the report called for "extend[ing federal] financial support to basic medical research in the medical schools and in universities," "more adequate military research in peacetime," and for the public welfare , which the report described in terms of full employment through the creation of "new jobs…new and better and cheaper products…[and] plenty of vigorous new enterprises. .

the report asserted that this required the united states to create its own scientific capital , turning away from u.s. pre - war reliance on europe for such knowledge .

while its recommendations were not implemented in their entirety , science: the endless frontier served as a blueprint for a greatly expanded federal role in funding r&d , including the establishment of the national science foundation and increased funding for federal laboratories , private industry , u.s. universities , and other nonprofit organizations .

federal r&d funding as a share of total u.s. r&d grew from 53.9% in 1953 to 65% by 1960 , peaking at 67% in 1964 .

between 1953 and 1960 , federal r&d funding more than tripled in current dollars , and by fy1966 it had quintupled .

from 1955 to 1966 , the vast majority ( 81% ) of the growth in federal r&d funding was for national defense ( 42% of the growth ) and space flight ( 39% of the growth ) .

 ( see figure 1 for illustration of federal r&d funding by budget function , current dollars , fy1960-fy2016. ) .

concerns about declining u.s. economic competitiveness and technological leadership — and their potential implications for economic growth , industrial productivity , employment , standard of living , and national security — are not new .

following wwii , america's new - found global technological leadership and industrial capabilities contributed to strong u.s. economic growth , low unemployment rates , and improvements in the standard of living for americans .

however , in the late 1970s and early 1980s , the united states faced growing trade deficits ; slowing rates of productivity growth ; increased competition in industries such as automobiles , steel , consumer electronics , and semiconductors ; lower corporate profits ; plant closings ; and job losses .

congress responded , in part , to these challenges by enacting legislation intended to improve u.s. development and commercialization , including the stevenson - wydler technology innovation act of 1980 ( p.l .

96-480 ) , bayh - dole act ( p.l .

96-517 ) , small business innovation development act of 1982 ( p.l .

97-219 ) , cooperative research and development act of 1984 ( p.l .

98-462 ) , and federal technology transfer act of 1986 ( p.l .

99-502 ) .

 ( see appendix for more detailed information on these acts. ) .

toward the end of the 1980s , the challenge to u.s. competitiveness became more specific .

japan's economic success , export penetration of u.s. markets , industrial strength , innovative manufacturing approaches , and technological capabilities gave rise to increasing concerns about the competitiveness of u.s. industry .

some policymakers and analysts asserted that japan's success was based on government - coordinated industrial policies and trade advocacy ( this cooperation was sometimes referred to as "japan , inc." , a term suggesting japan's government and private sector acted as a single entity ) , unfair policies and practices , closed or difficult to access markets , appropriation of u.s. technologies through reverse engineering , and lack of reciprocal access to science and technology programs .

others asserted that japan's economic system , including the industrial organizations known as keiretsu , offered a superior competitive structure that the u.s. government and american industry should emulate .

some saw the perceived loss of u.s. competitiveness as attributable to other factors as well , such as industrial complacency driven by a large domestic market that resulted in a failure to continue to innovate and a lack of support for small and medium - size manufacturers .

congress responded to concerns about japan's rising technological and industrial strength and its potential implications for the united states , in part , by enacting legislation such as the omnibus trade and competitiveness act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-418 ) and the national competitiveness technology transfer act of 1989 ( p.l .

101-189 ) .

 ( see appendix for more detailed information on these and similar acts. ) .

in the mid - 1980s , the u.s. semiconductor industry became a focus of concern about america's loss of technological leadership .

during the 1980s , the industry experienced a steep decline in its share of u.s. and global markets due to competition from japanese producers .

in 1986 , japan surpassed the united states in commercial semiconductor chip production ; the u.s. share of the world market for merchant producers fell from 100% in 1975 to less than 5% ; and by 1986 , japanese firms accounted for 65% of the dram ( dynamic random - access memory ) chips sold in the united states , and more than 80% of the global market .

the department of defense , a long - time supporter and user of semiconductor technology , was particularly concerned about the implications of a loss of u.s. leadership in semiconductors .

in 1987 , a report by the defense science board ( dsb ) , a panel of government and industry experts , concluded that "u.s. leadership in semiconductor manufacturing is rapidly eroding," and that not only was "the manufacturing capacity of the u.s. semiconductor industry … being lost to foreign competitors , principally japan… , but of even greater long - term concern , that technological leadership is also being lost. .

the dsb proposed the establishment of a public - private semiconductor manufacturing technology r&d partnership supported equally by dod and the semiconductor industry .

the partnership was to focus on next generation semiconductor technology ( the 64 megabit dram ) , and include support for a manufacturing facility .

in december 1987 , congress authorized dod financial support of up to $100 million for the sematech consortium , while limiting federal , state , and local government support to no more than 50% of total funding .

concerned about supporting a government - industry semiconductor facility that would manufacture drams for the commercial market , congress directed that sematech funding be used for the conduct of research on advanced semiconductor manufacturing techniques , and for the development of manufacturing techniques for a variety of semiconductor products .

in late 1987 , sematech was established under a memorandum signed by representatives of dod and 11 u.s. semiconductor companies .

congress provided $100 million for sematech in fy1988 and a total of approximately $870 million through fy1996 when funding ended .

these funds were matched by the industry partners .

while some analysts assert that sematech played an important role in preserving the u.s. semiconductor's competitive position during this period , others disagree .

concerns about japanese dominance in technology - intensive industries have diminished in the interceding decades .

while japanese firms are formidable competitors in a number of industries ( eg , machine tools , robotics , automobiles , consumer products , steel , semiconductors ) , they have not become the economic juggernaut that some feared would seize global leadership across a vast swath of technologies and undermine u.s. economic prosperity .

in more recent years , some have expressed concerns about the competitive challenges posed by certain countries in a narrower swath of industries .

for example: south korea experienced a swift rise from an agriculture - based economy in the 1960s to an industrial economy built , in part , on advanced technological capabilities .

today , south korea has thriving consumer electronics and automobile industries .

some credit south korea's success to export - oriented policies , improvements in its business environment ( eg , ease of starting a business , enforcing contracts , getting electricity ) , and policies to incentivize innovation ( eg , south korea leads the world in r&d intensity , defined as r&d spending as a percentage of gross domestic product ) .

india had rapid growth in the 1990s and 2000s in fields such as software ; information technology services ; and information technology - enabled industries ( ites ) , including outsourcing of business processes ( eg , human resources , finance , accounting , customer service ) .

india's population ( 1.282 billion in 2017 , second only to china's population of 1.379 billion ) might also provide it with a competitive advantage in creating and testing products tailored to consumers in developing countries and to build market share in that demographic through domestic sales .

as with japan , south korea and india have been successful in advancing their industries and improving their standards of living , but neither has become an across - the - board economic juggernaut that threatens u.s. technological and economic leadership .

none of these countries posed or pose both a broad , multi - industry technology - based competitiveness challenge to the united states as well as a near - peer national security challenge .

these countries also did not or do not have an integrated civilian - military strategy for achieving global technological dominance .

today , china has each of these elements .

the leading role of the private sector in driving advances in the technologies ( eg , artificial intelligence , autonomous systems , robotics , quantum computing , advanced gene editing ) that are expected to be critical to both commercial competitiveness and military strength has given rise to concerns that are discussed in the next section .

a primary challenge to american military technological preeminence is the emergence of china as a potential military adversary and as a science and technology powerhouse .

the president's national security strategy and the national defense strategy echo this theme .

and in june 2018 , several senior dod officials raised this concern in congressional testimony: the department of defense is facing an unprecedented threat to its technological and industrial base .

continued globalization and our open society , both in academia and business , has offered china and others access to the same technology and information that is critical to the success of our future warfighting capabilities .

china is making significant and targeted investments in the same technologies of interest to the department.… china has made it a national goal to acquire foreign technologies to not only advance its economy , but also to use these technologies to advance its military capabilities , and it is doing so through both licit and illicit means .

china's emergence as a global science and technology leader is evidenced in part by its rising position among nations in the funding of r&d .

china's share of global r&d rose from 4.9% in 2000 to 25.1% in 2016 .

during this same period , the united states , japan , and germany saw their collective share of global r&d fall from 62.6% to 44.3% .

moreover , while the united states remained the world's single largest funder of r&d in 2016 , spending 13% more than china ( see table 1 ) , china's r&d funding has been growing at a much more rapid pace .

as a result , china's r&d expenditures passed germany's in 2004 and japan's in 2009 ( see figure 6 ) .

if china and the united states continue to grow at the same rates as their recent averages , china may soon pass the united states in r&d spending .

figure 7 shows the percentage growth in r&d expenditures for selected nations between 2000 and 2016 , as reported to the oecd .

it further illustrates the rapid growth of china's r&d investments relative to those of other nations .

during this period , china's r&d grew by 1,264% while u.s. r&d grew by 90% .

in absolute terms , china's r&d grew by $418.1 billion , while u.s. r&d growth was $241.6 billion and r&d growth of the 28 countries of the european union combined was $208.8 billion .

though the growth shown in figure 7 is for total r&d funding , only a portion of which is defense - related , these trends have raised concerns among many defense analysts and senior dod leaders .

for example , obama administration under secretary of defense frank kendall testified in january 2015 that [o]ver the past few decades , the u.s. and our allies have enjoyed a military capability advantage over any potential adversary... .

the first gulf war put this suite of technologies and the associated operational concepts on display for the world to observe and study .

the first gulf war also marked the beginning of a period of american military dominance that has lasted about a quarter of a century and served us well in several conflicts .

we used the same capabilities , with some notable enhancements , in serbia , afghanistan , libya and iraq .

it has been a good run , but the game isn't one sided , and all military advantages based on technology are temporary... .

the rise of foreign capability , coupled with the overall decline in u.s. research and development investments , is jeopardizing our technological superiority .

despite continued u.s. science and technology ( s&t ) leadership , it is widely asserted that the gap between the united states and china has been decreasing in recent years .

in 2015 , michael dumont , then - principal deputy assistant secretary of defense for special operations / low intensity conflict , reportedly stated many of our adversaries have acquired , developed and even stolen technologies that have put them on somewhat equal footing with the west in a range of areas.... [t]he u.s. government no longer has the leading edge developing its own leading edge capabilities , particularly in information technology .

the national security strategy of the united states ( nss ) , released by president donald trump in december 2017 , and the national defense strategy of the united states of america: sharpening the american military's competitive edge ( nds ) , released by defense secretary jim mattis in january 2018 , offer insights into the administration's perspectives on the changing global r&d landscape and provide a strategic framework for its policies and approaches to ensuring u.s. technological dominance on the battlefield .

over the past several years , policymakers and others have expressed concern that the long - held technological edge of the u.s. military is eroding .

this erosion is attributed , in part , to the increased development of advanced technologies outside the defense sector and to dod organizational and cultural barriers to effectively incorporating and exploiting commercial innovations .

some have also expressed concerns about the extent and effectiveness of dod's engagement with leading - edge companies that have not historically been a part of the dod innovation ecosystem .

congress has taken a number of actions to address these concerns , some of which are described below ; the actions described should be consider illustrative and not exhaustive .

research and development is now a global enterprise , with the private sector driving technology development .

some assert that dod has been slow to react and adapt to this new reality , raising concerns that the united states military may be unable to maintain its historical technological advantages .

congress and the administration have adopted a number of reforms to address the perceived concerns , including those described above .

many of these efforts will likely require sustained focus to ensure dod transforms into a more innovative , risk - tolerant r&d organization that delivers new technologies to the warfighter in a timely and relevant manner .

as congress considers the impact of these reforms and their effectiveness , including the establishment of the position of usd ( r&e ) , there are a number of questions it may want to consider .

in the near - term , congress may want to focus its oversight efforts on organizational , structural , and procedural changes , especially those implemented by the usd r&e , who is tasked with leadership of dod's r&d enterprise .

for example , policymakers may want to consider how is the office of the usd ( r&e ) structured ? .

how does the organizational structure compare to the prior version of the office of usd ( r&e ) and is it effective ? .

what level of staffing and technical expertise is appropriate for the office of the usd ( r&e ) to meet its goals and mission ? .

has the usd ( r&e ) created an overarching vision and strategic plan for dod's research , development , testing , and evaluation ( rdt&e ) activities and programs ? .

has the usd ( r&e ) sought and incorporated the perspectives of various stakeholders , including industry , academia , and dod services and agencies in the development of an rdt&e strategic plan ? .

if there is an rdt&e strategic plan , what steps have been taken to implement the plan ? .

how does the plan prioritize rdt&e activities and investments ? .

how does it ensure dod maintains an adequate technical workforce ? .

how does it ensure dod's r&d facilities and test infrastructure are state - of - the - art and adequately maintained ? .

what policies and processes has the usd ( r&e ) put in place to ensure adequate and appropriate coordination of rdt&e programs and activities among and between dod rdt&e organizations and those of the military branches ? .

how do these policies and processes differ from previous coordination - related efforts ? .

what , if any , best practices from previous iterations of the usd ( r&e ) have been reestablished under the current usd ( r&e ) ? .

what , if any , policies or procedures has the usd ( r&e ) implemented to help foster a culture of risk - taking and an appropriate tolerance for failure within dod ? .

what , if any , policies or procedures has the usd ( r&e ) implemented to increase dod collaboration and engagement with leading - edge technology companies that have not historically been a part of dod's innovation ecosystem ? .

what barriers and challenges has dod found with respect to such expanded collaboration and engagement ? .

in the mid - term and long - term , congress may want to focus its oversight efforts on outcomes of congressional and dod actions .

for example: how are promising technologies being transitioned into operational use and what are the appropriate metrics for determining success ? .

has dod increased the use of prototypes and other experimentation methods ? .

what has dod learned from the greater use of prototypes and other methods ? .

has dod increased its tolerance for failure ? .

how has the failure rate and failure speed of projects changed ? .

how quickly are resources redeployed to new potential opportunities ? .

for example , is dod pursuing multiple lines of inquiry simultaneously with some projects failing and resources being quickly reallocated accordingly ? .

is the usd ( r&e ) effectively leveraging and coordinating rdt&e activities and investments across dod and with other federal agencies ? .

is the dod rdt&e strategic plan being effectively implemented ? .

is dod addressing and advancing identified technological goals and needs in areas deemed critical for the future military ( eg , artificial intelligence , hypersonics , directed energy ) ? .

has dod increased collaboration and partnership with leading - edge technology companies that have not historically been a part of dod's innovation ecosystem ? .

is dod effectively using other transaction authority to increase its innovative capacity and access technologies outside of the agency's traditional contractor base ? .

is dod using special hiring authorities appropriately and effectively in recruiting and retaining outstanding scientific and engineering talent ? .

how systemic are the changes in the dod culture of innovation ? .

what signs of change and innovation are being observed in core elements of dod outside of special offices such as the defense innovation unit ( diu ) , the strategic capabilities office ( sco ) , or the rapid capabilities offices within the military services ? .

as the global r&d landscape continues to evolve , congress may conduct hearings to stay apprised of the competitive positions of near - peer nations ( and firms ) in key fields of science and technology ; the science , technology , and innovation policies of those countries ; and new and emerging models for technology development and innovation .

stevenson - wydler technology innovation act of 1980 ( p.l .

96-480 ) the stevenson - wydler technology innovation act of 1980 articulated a clear and strong linkage between u.s. economic performance and technological leadership , stating "technology and industrial innovation are central to the economic , environmental , and social well - being of citizens of the united states... .

increased industrial and technological innovation would reduce trade deficits , stabilize the dollar , increase productivity gains , increase employment , and stabilize prices. .

the act expressed concern about potential u.s. decline , noting that "industrial and technological innovation in the united states may be lagging when compared to historical patterns and other industrialized nations. .

further , the act asserted the need for a comprehensive national policy to enhance technological innovation for commercial and public purposes , including a strong national policy supporting domestic technology transfer and utilization of the science and technology resources of the federal government .

among its provisions , the act sought to improve technology transfer from federal laboratories to industry by requiring federal laboratories to take an active role in technical cooperation , expanding the dissemination of information about research activities and results , and establishing offices of research and technology applications at major federal laboratories to coordinate and promote technology transfer .

the act also established an office of industrial technology at the commerce department with a broad mandate to conduct and report studies and policy experiments related to technology , innovation , and industrial and national economic performance .

government patent policy act ( p.l .

96-517 , referred to as the "bayh - dole act" ) the government patent policy act ( p.l .

96-517 , commonly referred to as the "bayh - dole act" ) provided small businesses , universities , and not - for - profit organizations the right to obtain titles to inventions developed with federal funds .

president ronald reagan issued a memorandum in 1983 and executive order 12591 in 1987 directing federal agencies to apply this provision to all businesses , regardless of size , to the extent permitted by law .

small business innovation development act of 1982 ( p.l .

97-219 ) the small business innovation development act of 1982 ( p.l .

97-219 ) established the small business innovation research program by requiring certain agencies to set aside a portion of their annual extramural r&d funding to competitively award r&d funds for small businesses .

cooperative research and development act of 1984 ( p.l .

98-462 ) the cooperative research and development act of 1984 ( p.l .

98-462 ) sought to encourage firms to pool their research funds and engage in precompetitive research by eliminating treble damages for antitrust violations .

the act contributed to the development of research consortia such as the semiconductor research corporation ( sematech ) .

federal technology transfer act of 1986 ( p.l .

99-502 ) the federal technology transfer act of 1986 ( p.l .

99-502 ) authorized government - owned , government - operated ( gogo ) laboratories to enter into cooperative research and development agreements ( cradas ) and to negotiate licenses on patents owned by the laboratories .

it also required laboratories to share a portion of patent licensing royalties with the government employed inventor ( s ) .

the act made technology transfer , consistent with mission responsibilities , a responsibility of each laboratory scientist and engineer .

in addition , the act codified the federal laboratory consortium ( flc ) and charged it with facilitating technology transfer through professional development training , providing advice and assistance to agencies and laboratories , and acting as a clearinghouse for requests for technical assistance received by laboratories .

malcolm baldrige national quality improvement act of 1987 ( p.l .

100-107 ) the malcolm baldrige national quality improvement act of 1987 ( p.l .

100-107 ) sought to improve the quality of american goods and services by instituting an awards program to honor companies and other organizations that practice effective quality management , and by disseminating information about successful quality improvement strategies and programs .

during this period , japanese products were often seen as superior in quality to similar american products .

during its recovery from wwii , japan embraced the work of w. edwards deming , a leading pioneer in the field of statistical quality control ( sqc ) and total quality management ( tqm ) , including industrial adoption of statistical process controls .

omnibus trade and competitiveness act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-418 ) the omnibus trade and competitiveness act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-418 ) , among other things: sought to facilitate more open , equitable , and reciprocal market access ; reduce or eliminate barriers and other trade - distorting policies and practices ; enable a more effective system of international trading disciplines and procedures ; increase intellectual property protections ; and improve enforcement of u.s. antidumping and countervailing duties ; authorized trade adjustment assistance to firms and workers ; extended federal patent royalty payments to nongovernment employees ; declared as u.s. policy that federally supported international science and technology agreements should be negotiated to ensure that intellectual property rights are properly protected and that access to r&d opportunities and facilities , and the flow of scientific and technological information , are , to the maximum extent practicable , equitable and reciprocal ; changed the name of the national bureau of standards to the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) , expanded its technology transfer role , and mandated an annual report on emerging technologies ; established the nist advanced technology program ( atp ) to assist u.s. businesses in creating and applying generic technology and research results needed to commercialize significant new scientific discoveries and technologies rapidly and to refine manufacturing technologies ; established the nist manufacturing extension partnership ( mep ) program to assist in the establishment of regional centers to enhance productivity and technological performance of u.s. small and medium - size manufacturers .

national institute of standards and technology authorization act for 1989 ( p.l .

100-519 ) the national institute of standards and technology authorization act for 1989 ( p.l .

 ( 100-519 ) , among other things , established a department of commerce technology administration , led by an under secretary for technology , composed of nist , the office of technology policy , and the national technical information service ; national competitiveness technology transfer act of 1989 ( p.l .

101-189 ) the national competitiveness technology transfer act of 1989 ( p.l .

101-189 ) extended to government - owned , contractor - operated ( goco ) laboratories many of the same crada authorities provided to gogos by p.l .

99-502 ) ; protected information created under a crada from disclosure to third parties , and provided a technology transfer mission to the department of energy's nuclear weapons laboratories .

