since their creation a decade ago , cryptocurrencies have become more prominent in the global economy .

cryptocurrencies are digital representations of value that have no status as legal tender and are administer ed using distributed ledger technology , running on a network of independent , peer - to - peer computers .

bitcoin is the most common and well - known cryptocurrency , but according to one estimate , about 2,100 cryptocurrencies are currently in circulation .

some analysts believe that cryptocurrencies could revolutionize the financial and banking industries , increasing the speed and reducing the cost of transactions .

others believe that cryptocurrencies , which do not have status as legal tender , are a scam and a financial bubble that has burst , as evidenced by the approximately 85% drop in value of cryptocurrencies over the course of 2018 .

governments around the world are taking different approaches to cryptocurrencies .

some governments are actively promoting digital currencies in their jurisdictions , while others are banning them outright .

others still are seeking a middle path , allowing cryptocurrency transactions , but regulating the industry to minimize the risks .

the interest and debate surrounding cryptocurrencies has led some central banks to examine whether the technology underpinning cryptocurrencies could be leveraged to create digital versions of state - created currencies , which would have legal status in their jurisdiction of issue .

a major policy question is whether state - issued digital currencies could draw on the benefits of cryptocurrencies while minimizing the risks , but there are varying views on the need for or desirability of digital fiat currencies .

the policy questions posed by digital currencies , as well as variation in government responses , have also become a focus for several international organizations and forums .

in november 2018 , the u.s. department of the treasury announced it is developing a report on cryptocurrency regulation , including a legislative framework for the 116 th congress to consider in 2019 .

as congress considers issues related to digital currencies , including whether to regulate further the cryptocurrency industry , the approaches taken by other governments and international bodies may be of interest .

this report is part of a suite of crs products on digital currencies and the underlying technology , distributed ledger technology and blockchain ( see textbox below ) .

money is the set of assets in an economy that consumers , businesses , and governments regularly use to buy goods and services from others .

it has three functions in the economy: 1 ) a medium of exchange ( an item that buyers give to sellers when they want to purchase goods and services ) ; 2 ) a unit of account ( the yardstick people use to post prices and record debts ) ; and 3 ) a store of value ( an item that people can use to transfer purchasing power from the present to the future ) .

traditionally , money has taken two major forms ( figure 1 ) .

commodity money is made of materials that have intrinsic value , like gold and silver coins .

fiat money has no intrinsic value , but serves as money by government decree .

before world war i , most countries were on the gold standard , using gold coins or paper money convertible to gold on demand .

today , most countries , including the united states and other major economies , use fiat money as national currencies .

more recently , technological developments have led to the creation of virtual currencies , digital representations of value that can be digitally traded ( without any physical banknotes or coins ) and strive to function as a medium of exchange , unit of account , and store of value .

however , unlike a fiat currency , virtual currencies generally do not have legal tender status in any jurisdiction ; they have value only by agreement within the community of users of the virtual currency .

there are different types of virtual currencies .

convertible virtual currencies can be exchanged back - and - forth with fiat ( real ) currencies , while non convertible virtual currencies are used in restricted online domains ( such as multiplayer online gaming ) and are not converted into fiat currencies .

there are a number of exchanges that have been established to facilitate the conversion of virtual currencies to other assets , such as conventional fiat money or different virtual currencies .

additionally , some virtual currencies are run by a centralized administrator that issues currency and maintains a central payment ledger .

other virtual currencies are decentralized , for which transactions are recorded on a distributed ledger , which is maintained by many independent , peer - to - peer computers .

they rely on encryption techniques to control the creation of monetary units and to verify the transfer of funds .

users are given some level of anonymity or pseudonymity , and the system does not rely on government agencies ( central banks ) or financial institutions , which are generally embedded in the creation and transfer of fiat money .

convertible , decentralized virtual currencies are often referred to as cryptocurrencies .

bitcoin was the first and continues to be the most widely used cryptocurrency , but a number of competitors have emerged .

according to one estimate , there are about 2,100 cryptocurrencies currently in circulation , with a total market capitalization of $121.1 billion as of november 25 , 2018 .

as cryptocurrencies have proliferated , they have taken on more forms .

some virtual currencies , such as ripple , are arguably centralized currencies , but nonetheless are frequently referred to under the general umbrella term of cryptocurrencies .

"cryptocurrency" is sometimes used broadly for any digital currency not issued by a sovereign government .

one process by which new cryptocurrency coins or tokens are issued is called initial coin offerings ( icos ) .

cryptocurrency currency transactions are validated by a process known as mining ; successful miners are rewarded for their efforts through new cryptocurrency tokens .

a number of companies have also developed to facilitate the use of cryptocurrencies .

for example , exchanges are platforms that allow customers to trade cryptocurrencies for other cryptocurrencies and / or fiat currencies .

wallets are applications or interfaces that can be downloaded onto a device to make transacting in cryptocurrencies more user friendly .

some central banks are considering or are actively exploring using distributed ledger technology to create digital representations of fiat currencies , or digital fiat currencies .

thus far , venezuela is the only country that has launched a digital fiat currency , but several other central banks are in the process of doing so or undertaking research efforts to consider the option .

digital currency is a broad term that refers to virtual ( nonfiat ) currency and digital fiat currency .

the emergence of digital currencies has captured attention outside of national - level governments .

many international organizations and forums are examining the potential implications of digital currencies and , in some cases , are starting to make policy recommendations .

they have examined a range of issues , including the utility of digital currencies for improving the international payments systems ; the possible threats digital currencies may or may not pose to international financial stability ; the divergence of national - level cryptocurrency regulations and whether international regulatory coordination is desirable ; how cryptocurrencies should be treated in bank prudential regulation ; and how to adapt international recommendations to combat money laundering and terrorist financing to cryptocurrencies .

below is an overview of major assessments and recommendations from different intergovernmental forums and organizations on digital currencies ; a more thorough discussion is provided in the appendix ( table a - 1 ) .

the g - 7 and g - 20 finance ministers and central bank governors have discussed cryptocurrency and its implications for global financial stability ; they have expressed a desire to coordinate national - level regulations of cryptocurrencies , similar to their work coordinating financial regulatory policies following the global financial crisis of 2008-2009 .

the financial stability board ( fsb ) , which promotes international financial stability by coordinating national financial authorities and international standard - setting bodies , created a framework to monitor the financial stability implications of developments in cryptocurrency markets .

the fsb found that cryptocurrencies do not currently pose a risk to global financial stability .

the fsb cautions that cryptocurrencies could pose risks in the future but the risks are difficult to assess and monitor due to information gaps about the market .

the international monetary fund ( imf ) , an international organization tasked with promoting international monetary stability , has weighed the pros and cons of cryptocurrencies .

imf managing director christine lagarde has said that international regulation and supervision of cryptocurrencies is "inevitable. .

the imf has also discouraged at least one country ( the marshall islands ) from adopting a digital fiat currency , and released a staff discussion paper conceptually evaluating the creation of digital fiat currencies .

the basel committee on banking supervision ( bcbs ) , the primary global standard setter for the prudential regulation of banks and a forum for regular cooperation on banking supervisory matters , is assessing banks' direct and indirect exposure to cryptocurrencies .

it is also considering whether to formally clarify the prudential treatment of cryptocurrencies across the set of risk categories .

the financial action task force ( fatf ) , which sets standards and promotes effective implementation of legal , regulatory , and operational measures for combating money laundering and terrorist financing , has adapted its recommendations to combat money laundering and terrorist financing to clarify how they apply in the case of financial activities involving virtual currencies .

the international organization of securities commissions ( iosco ) , an association of organizations that regulate the world's securities and futures markets , has discussed the investor protection concerns posed by icos .

the bank for international settlements ( bis ) , which fosters monetary and financial stability through discussion and collaboration among central banks , has assessed the utility and risks of digital fiat currencies .

the world bank , a multilateral development bank that promotes economic development around the world , has been critical of cryptocurrencies but used the underlying technology to issue the world's first bond created and managed using blockchain technology .

after 10 years , the relevance , utility , and implications of digital currencies powered by distributed ledger technology are still evolving .

for cryptocurrencies , the market is worth roughly 15% of its peak at the start of 2018 , but the number of cryptocurrencies continues to grow .

meanwhile , governments are taking different approaches to cryptocurrencies .

the resulting patchwork of national - level cryptocurrency regulation is being assessed by international organizations and forums ; these groups are considering whether greater coordination is needed .

they are also considering many policy issues raised by cryptocurrencies , ranging from efforts to combat money laundering to updating bank prudential standards to financing world bank development projects .

some central banks are also considering , or are in the process of , launching digital fiat currencies , while others have determined that at present digital fiat currencies are either unnecessary or undesirable .

the changing and developing international landscape for digital currencies raises a number of potential oversight issues and questions for congress .

these include the following: the department of the treasury announced it is developing a report on cryptocurrency regulation , including a legislative framework for congress to consider in 2019 .

how do u.s. current regulations and the treasury's proposed framework , when released , compare to other countries' regulations ? .

what lessons might be gleaned from other countries that could inform u.s. regulations of the cryptocurrency market ? .

some governments are actively recruiting cryptocurrency companies and developing cryptocurrency industries .

should the united states follow suit , or risk losing market share in the industry ? .

alternatively , some governments are tightly restricting , or even banning , cryptocurrency activities to protect consumers .

in the united states , do consumers have adequate protections in terms of cryptocurrencies ? .

in april 2009 , the g - 20 leaders agreed that "major failures in the financial sector and in financial regulation and supervision were fundamental causes of the [global financial] crisis. .

the g - 20 leaders then launched a major multi - year effort to undertake and coordinate financial sector reforms .

ten years after the crisis , cryptocurrency has emerged as a new financial market , and national governments are taking dramatically different regulatory approaches .

does the experience of the global financial crisis suggest that there should there be more international coordination on digital currency regulations ? .

or does variation in regulatory approaches allow for desirable financial innovation and competition in a growing industry ? .

has the federal reserve adequately assessed the potential benefits and costs of developing a digital u.s. dollar relying on distributed ledger technology ? .

how does the u.s. position on this issue compare to other countries' calculations ? .

if other countries proceed with digital fiat currencies and the united states does not , would this affect the status of the u.s. dollar as a reserve currency ? .

or does the continuing importance of the u.s. dollar give the united states a leadership role in shaping the international payment systems , including the extent to which distributed ledger technology is adopted ? .

many international organizations and forums are working on various aspects of digital currencies .

is there , or should there be , a leading international body on digital currency , and if so , which one ? .

how are international bodies dividing up analysis of digital currencies , and how are they coordinating their work ? .

is there duplication of efforts , or gaps , in international bodies' analysis of digital currencies ? .

what digital currency policies are being advocated by the trump administration at various international organizations ? .

how much sway does the united states have in shaping these discussions ? .

how do international recommendations and standards fit with u.s. regulations ? .

