the violence against women act ( vawa ) was originally enacted in 1994 ( p.l .

103-322 ) .

it addressed congressional concerns about violent crime , and violence against women in particular , in several ways .

among other things , it allowed for enhanced sentencing of repeat federal sex offenders ; mandated restitution to victims of specified federal sex offenses ; and authorized grants to state , local , and tribal law enforcement entities to investigate and prosecute violent crimes against women .

this report provides a brief history of vawa and an overview of the crimes addressed through the act .

it includes brief descriptions of earlier vawa reauthorizations and a more - detailed description of the most recent reauthorization in 2013 .

it also briefly addresses reauthorization activity in the 116 th congress .

the report concludes with a discussion of vawa programs and a five - year history of funding from fy2015 through fy2019 .

the enactment of vawa was ultimately spurred by decades of growing unease over a rising violent crime rate and a focus on women as crime victims .

in the 1960s , the violent crime rate rose fairly steadily — it more than doubled from 1960 ( 160.9 per 100,000 ) to 1969 ( 328.7 per 100,000 ) — igniting concern from both the public and the federal government .

adding to this was the concern about violent crimes committed against women .

in the 1970s , grassroots organizations began to stress the need for attitudinal change among both the public and the law enforcement community regarding violence against women .

in the 1970s and 1980s , researchers increased their attention on the issue of violence against women as well .

in one study , researchers collected data on family violence and attributed declines in spousal assault to heightened awareness of the issue in men as well as the criminal justice system .

the public and the criminal justice system were beginning to view family violence as a crime rather than a private family matter .

in 1984 , congress and president reagan enacted the family violence prevention and services act ( fvpsa , p.l .

98-457 ) to assist states in preventing incidents of family violence and to provide shelter and related assistance to victims and their dependents .

while fvpsa authorized programs similar to those discussed in this report and fvpsa reauthorizations subsequently reauthorized programs that were originally created by vawa , such as the national domestic violence hotline , it is a separate piece of legislation and beyond the scope of this report .

in 1994 , congress passed and president clinton signed into law , the violent crime control and law enforcement act of 1994 ( p.l .

103-322 ) , which included vawa as title iv .

the act created an unprecedented number of programs geared toward helping local law enforcement fight violent crime and providing services to victims of violent crime , among other things .

in their opening remarks on vawa in 1994 , senators barbara boxer and joseph biden highlighted the insufficient response to violence against women by police and prosecutors .

the shortfalls of legal responses and the need for a change in attitudes toward violence against women were primary reasons cited for the passage of vawa .

vawa has been reauthorized three times since its original enactment .

most recently , congress passed and president obama signed the violence against women reauthorization act of 2013 ( p.l .

113-4 ) , which reauthorized most of the programs under vawa , among other things .

in addition , this vawa reauthorization amended and authorized appropriations for the trafficking victims protection act of 2000 , enhanced measures to combat trafficking in persons , and amended vawa grant purpose areas to include sex trafficking .

moreover , p.l .

113-4 gave american indian tribes authority to enforce tribal laws pertaining to domestic violence and related crimes against non - tribal members , and established a nondiscrimination provision for vawa grant programs .

the reauthorization also included new provisions to address states' rape kit backlogs .

vawa programs generally address domestic violence , sexual assault , dating violence , and stalking , although some vawa programs address additional crimes .

vawa grant programs largely address the criminal justice system and community response to these crimes , but certain programs address prevention as well .

these crimes involve a wide range of victim demographics , but the risk of victimization is highest for women .

public concern over violence against women prompted the original passage and enactment of vawa .

as such , vawa legislation and programs have historically emphasized women victims .

more recently , however , there has been a focus on ensuring that the needs of all victims are met through provisions of vawa programs .

of note , while the title of the act and some headings and general purpose areas refer to women only , most vawa grant purpose areas are not specific to women .

national victimization data on domestic violence , sexual assault , dating violence , and stalking are available from two surveys , the national crime victimization survey ( ncvs ) and the youth risk behavior surveillance system .

offense data are available from the federal bureau of investigation's ( fbi's ) uniform crime reporting ( ucr ) program .

ucr data differ from victimization data because the ucr data describe crimes that were reported to law enforcement , while victimization data include crimes that might not have been reported to law enforcement .

due to differences in what they are trying to measure , victimization data are not directly comparable to ucr data .

the fundamental goals of vawa are to prevent violent crime ; respond to the needs of crime victims ; learn more about crime ; and change public attitudes through a collaborative effort by the criminal justice system , social service agencies , research organizations , schools , public health organizations , and private organizations .

the federal government tries to achieve these goals primarily through federal grant programs that provide funding to state , tribal , territorial , and local governments ; nonprofit organizations ; and universities .

as previously mentioned , ovw administers the majority of vawa - authorized programs , while other federal agencies , including ojp and the cdc , also manage vawa programs .

since its creation in 1995 through fy2018 , ovw has awarded more than $8 billion in grants and cooperative agreements to state , tribal , and local governments ; nonprofit organizations ; and universities .

since it was enacted in 1994 , vawa has been reauthorized three times .

of note , the reauthorizations in 2000 and 2005 had broad bipartisan support , while the most recent reauthorization in 2013 had bipartisan support but faced greater opposition .

this section will provide comparatively more detail for the 2013 reauthorization because it was the most recent and some issues may remain relevant to current reauthorization discussions .

there are several issues that congress may consider in current reauthorization efforts .

these include , but are not limited to , improvements to data collection , assessing tribal jurisdiction over non - tribal members who commit vawa - related crimes on tribal lands , new approaches for law enforcement in assisting victims , and enforcement of the federal prohibition on firearms for those convicted of a misdemeanor crime of domestic violence and those who are subject to a domestic violence protective order .

congress may also consider further changes to vawa programs .

the violence against women reauthorization act of 2019 ( h.r .

1585 ) , as passed by the house , would address some of these issues .

among other things , it would reauthorize funding for vawa programs and authorize new programs ; amend and add definitions used for vawa programs ; amend federal criminal law relating to firearms , custodial rape , and stalking ; and expand tribal jurisdiction over certain crimes committed on tribal lands .

congress may address issues concerning limited law enforcement data at the national level on the crimes of domestic violence and stalking .

the data are limited because the ucr does not currently collect information on these offenses from state and local agencies like it does for its traditional violent and property crime offense categories .

in 2019 , the ucr program plans to begin collecting domestic violence offense data through the national incident - based reporting system ( nibrs ) .

nibrs also includes stalking as part of an intimidation offense category .

even though the nibrs data are not yet nationally representative , the fbi states that it is transitioning its ucr program to a "nibrs only data collection" by 2021 .

congress may consider options to expand the nibrs program sooner than 2021 or to adjust the ucr program in other ways , such as by requiring the fbi to collect data on stalking as its own offense under nibrs rather than incorporating it into the intimidation offense category .

congress may also address the availability of data on the sexual assault kit ( sak , or rape kit ) backlog .

according to the national institute of justice ( nij ) , "it is unknown how many unanalyzed [saks] there are nationwide. .

nij notes that while there are many reasons why there are no data on the number of untested saks in law enforcement's possession , one contributing factor is that there is no national system for collecting these data .

also , tracking and counting saks is an antiquated process in many jurisdictions ( often done in nonelectronic formats ) , and the availability of computerized evidence - tracking systems has been an issue for many jurisdictions for years .

the joyful heart foundation , a grassroots organization , addressed the sak data void by attempting to count the backlog ( through public records requests ) and track data in cities and states across the country .

while the organization's data are incomplete , it has estimates of rape kit backlogs for various cities and states .

thus far , it has identified approximately 41 municipal and county jurisdictions with known rape kit backlogs ranging from several hundred to thousands — its current total is 40,000 untested saks .

congress may assess the sak backlog and debate if the federal response should be changed as the issue evolves and agencies , including nij , capture the full breadth of the problem .

h.r .

1585 , as passed by the house , would authorize several new activities related to increasing or improving data collection .

these include , but are not limited to , the following: requiring the attorney general to establish an interagency working group to study federal efforts to collect data on sexual violence and to make recommendations on the harmonization of such efforts , authorizing funding for tribal governments to improve data collection and to enter information into and obtain information from national crime information databases , and requiring nij to prepare a report on the status of women in federal incarceration — this requirement allows for inmate and personnel data to be collected from the bureau of prisons .

as discussed previously , vawa 2013 granted authority to american indian tribes to exercise special domestic violence criminal jurisdiction and civil jurisdiction to issue and enforce protection orders over any person , including non - tribal members .

as of march 2018 , 18 tribes were exercising this authority .

these tribes have reported 143 arrests of 128 non - tribal individuals , which led to 74 convictions and five acquittals with 24 cases pending as of march 2018 .

according to the national congress of american indians ( ncai ) , tribes are exercising jurisdiction "with careful attention to the requirements of federal law and in a manner that upholds the rights of defendants. .

while ncai issued its assessment report in 2018 , congress also may elect to assess implementation in the five years since this authority was granted .

if it so chooses , congress may require the government accountability office ( gao ) to evaluate tribal jurisdiction .

congress may elect to grant special jurisdiction over non - tribal members for additional vawa crimes such as sexual assault and stalking , as well as non - vawa crimes .

ncai stated in its assessment report that many implementing tribes were unable to prosecute non - tribal members for many crimes that co - occur with domestic violence such as drug and alcohol offenses .

h.r .

1585 , as passed by the house , would amend tribal criminal jurisdiction authorized under section 204 of the indian civil rights act .

among other changes , tribal jurisdiction over criminal behavior on tribal lands would consist of domestic violence ( h.r .

1585 would also expand the definition of domestic violence used for tribal jurisdiction ) , as well as obstruction of justice , assaulting a law enforcement officer , sex trafficking , sexual violence , and stalking .

as there are further developments in the fields of criminal justice and public health , researchers and practitioners report new and developing approaches and methods for law enforcement and other criminal justice personnel in working with victims of domestic violence , sexual assault , dating violence , and stalking .

congress may consider these new approaches when debating additions to grant purpose areas or encouraging states to adopt certain practices .

for example , over the last decade there has been a push for criminal justice professionals to incorporate trauma - informed policing and response policies .

congress may consider requiring law enforcement grantees to incorporate trauma - informed training and policies into their required training or standard operating procedures or creating new funding opportunities to develop these trainings and policies .

of note , ovw has supported several initiatives related to trauma - informed approaches .

other new and developing approaches include , but are not limited to , new protocols for police officers about when they would activate their body - worn cameras as they interact with victims of domestic violence , sexual assault , dating violence , or stalking and so - called "red flag" laws that allow law enforcement or family members to petition a court to have firearms removed from those who are a danger to themselves or others .

h.r .

1585 , as passed by the house , would authorize a new demonstration program under ovw to promote trauma - informed training for law enforcement .

through this program , ovw would make grants on a competitive basis to eligible entities to implement evidence - based or promising policies and practices to incorporate trauma - informed techniques designed to prevent re - traumatization of crime victims and improve communication between victims and law enforcement officers , among other purpose areas , in an effort to increase the likelihood of successful investigations and prosecutions of reported crime in a manner that protects the victim to the greatest extent possible .

the gun control act ( gca ) prohibits certain individuals from possessing firearms , including individuals who have been convicted of a misdemeanor crime of domestic violence and those who are subject to a protective order involving an intimate partner or child of an intimate partner .

congress may consider any number of issues surrounding prohibitions on firearms possession and matters of domestic violence , but the issue of enforcement of domestic violence and protection order prohibitions has been subject to some debate .

while there is a federal process for preventing those convicted of a misdemeanor crime of domestic violence or those subject to a protective order from purchasing a firearm , there is not a federal process for these individuals to surrender their firearms .

the process is left up to states and local jurisdictions , which vary in their approaches to enforcing these prohibitions .

in some jurisdictions , the process for informing defendants / respondents they must surrender their firearms can vary by judge .

of note , vawa 2005 established a provision that required states or units of local government to certify that its judicial policies and practices included notification to domestic violence offenders of the firearms prohibitions in section 922 ( g ) ( 8 ) and ( g ) ( 9 ) of title 18 in order to be eligible to receive stop funding .

congress may choose to take further steps to ensure the enforcement of these prohibitions , such as adding to the certification requirement , or it might leave the decisions to the states , some of which have enacted laws requiring the removal of firearms from those subject to the prohibitions .

h.r .

1585 , as passed by the house , includes several provisions that seek to reduce firearms - related intimate partner violence .

it would amend federal law to prohibit persons convicted of misdemeanor stalking crimes from receiving or possessing a firearm or ammunition , and revise related provisions governing domestic violence protection orders and the definition of "intimate partner" under current law .

h.r .

1585 also includes other provisions related to improving enforcement of federal firearm possession prohibitions under 18 u.s.c .

§922 , subsections ( g ) ( 8 ) , ( g ) ( 9 ) , and ( g ) ( 10 ) .

in the next effort to reauthorize vawa , congress may debate additional changes to vawa programs such as adding new grant purpose areas or additional crimes , creating new programs , or consolidating existing programs .

examples of potential changes congress may consider should it choose to reauthorize vawa appropriations include the following: female genital mutilation or female genital cutting ( fgm / c ) may be added to grant programs in a variety of ways .

for example , it can be added as a crime for services eligibility , or congress may try to encourage or require states ( in order to receive grant funding ) to make fgm / c a crime .

many vawa grant programs fund the same services and the same organizations .

for example , nine separate vawa programs may be used to fund emergency shelter or transitional housing .

congress may consider streamlining funding into fewer , larger grant programs .

currently , ovw administers 4 formula grant programs and 15 discretionary grant programs .

congress may opt to support domestic violence courts .

while some grantees already use funds for this purpose and ovw has provided technical assistance to fund model domestic violence courts , congress may elect to create a program to support these specialized courts .

while there is a large amount of grantee data available on the vawa programs administered by ovw , grantee data from the rape prevention and education ( rpe ) formula grant program administered by the cdc are limited .

congress may choose to require the cdc to submit reports on the activities supported with rpe funds .

h.r .

1585 , as passed by the house , would define fgm / c for vawa grant purposes , and amend the purpose areas of three vawa grant programs ( stop , outreach and services to underserved populations , and choose children and youth ) to include providing culturally specific victim services regarding responses to , and prevention of , fgm / c .

the bill would also require the director of the fbi to classify fgm / c , or female circumcision , as a part ii crime in the ucr ( see " categories of crime addressed through vawa " for discussion of ucr crime data ) .

h.r .

1585 would also amend the rape prevention and education grant program to require the cdc director to submit to congress a report on the activities funded by grants and best practices relating to rape prevention and education .

h.r .

1585 , if enacted , would make many other changes that are not discussed in detail in this report .

these include changes to definitions used for vawa grant purposes , new housing protections for victims , and the creation of new grant programs that address issues such as lethality assessment in domestic violence cases and economic security for victims .

of note , h.r .

1585 would reauthorize funding for most vawa programs for fy2020-fy2024 .

the violence against women reauthorization act of 2013 ( p.l .

113-4 ) authorized appropriations for most vawa programs for fy2014 through fy2018 .

table a - 1 provides descriptions of currently funded vawa programs , table a - 2 provides a list of unfunded vawa - authorized programs , and table a - 3 provides a five - year funding history of vawa programs by total funding amounts for each administrative office .

for more - detailed program funding , see table 1 .

