t his report provides an overview of statutory inspectors general ( igs ) in the federal government , including their structure , functions , and related issues for congress .

statutory inspectors general ( igs ) are intended to be independent , nonpartisan officials who prevent and detect waste , fraud , abuse , and mismanagement within federal departments and agencies .

to execute their missions , igs lead offices of inspector general ( oigs ) that conduct audits , investigations , and other evaluations of agency programs and operations and produce recommendations to improve them .

statutory igs exist in more than 70 federal entities , including departments , agencies , boards , commissions , and government - sponsored enterprises .

igs conduct reviews of government programs and operations .

the genesis and frequency of such reviews can vary .

an ig generally conducts a review in response to a statutory mandate , at the request of congress or other stakeholders ( eg , the president ) , or upon self - initiation .

reviews can occur once or periodically .

ig reviews can be grouped into three broad categories: ( 1 ) performance audits , ( 2 ) inspections or evaluations , and ( 3 ) investigations .

table 4 and the sections below discuss certain differences between the review types in terms of three characteristics: quality standards , scope of analysis , and type of analysis .

igs possess many authorities and responsibilities to carry out their respective missions , many of which aim to establish and protect ig independence from undue influence .

for example , the ig act grants covered igs with broad authority to conduct audits and investigations , which cannot be prohibited or prevented by the affiliated entity head ( except , in some cases , for national security reasons ) ; access directly the records and information related to the affiliated entity's programs and operations ; request assistance from other federal , state , and local government agencies ; subpoena information and documents ; administer oaths when conducting interviews ; independently hire staff and manage their own resources ; and receive and respond to complaints of waste , fraud , and abuse from agency employees , whose identity is to be protected .

the subsections below and appendix b compare selected statutory authorities and requirements by ig type: establishment , dfe , other permanent , and special .

however , the manner in which each ig interprets and implements these authorities and responsibilities can vary widely , thus potentially resulting in substantially different structures , operations , and activities across igs .

the discussion in this section focuses on ig authorities and requirements that are expressly mandated in the applicable authorizing statute .

although special igs and other permanent igs in the legislative branch are not created under the ig act , their authorizing statutes incorporate — and therefore make applicable — certain provisions of the ig act .

these "incorporation by reference" provisions are subject to some interpretation .

even when the authorizing statute for a special ig or other permanent ig in the legislative branch clearly and unequivocally incorporates a specific provision of the ig act , interpretation may vary regarding whether subsequent amendments to that incorporated provision apply to the igs if they occurred after the enactment of the ig's authorizing statute .

statutory igs play a key role in government oversight , and congress plays a key role in establishing the structures and authorities to enable that oversight .

the structure and placement of igs in government agencies allows oig personnel to develop the expertise necessary to conduct in - depth assessments of agency programs .

further , igs' dual reporting structure — to both agency heads and congress — positions them to advise agencies on how to improve their programs and policies and to advise congress on how to monitor and facilitate such improvement .

congress , therefore , may have an interest in ensuring that statutory igs possess the resources and authorities necessary to fulfill their oversight roles .

as the federal government continues to evolve , so too does the role of igs in government oversight .

agency programs and operations have increased in breadth , complexity , and interconnectedness .

consequently , igs may face increasing demand to complete statutorily mandated reviews of programs and operations that require ( 1 ) a broader focus on program performance and effectiveness in addition to waste , fraud , and abuse ; ( 2 ) analysis of specialty or technical programs , possibly in emerging policy areas ; and ( 3 ) use of more complex analytical methods and tools .

congress may consider several options regarding ig structures , functions , and coordination as the role of igs in government oversight evolves .

in serving congress with nonpartisan and objective analysis and research , crs does not make recommendations or take positions on particular options .

federal laws and administrative standards require igs to be independent of the entities and / or activities they evaluate .

there is no standard definition , however , for what constitutes ig independence .

rather , igs derive independence from a combination of statutory authorities and requirements , such as the requirement that igs be appointed on the basis of integrity and demonstrated ability in certain skill sets , and independence and transparency of ig budgets .

it could be argued that challenges remain to ensuring that igs possess the requisite independence to carry out their missions .

congress may consider several broad questions if it weighs further options related to ig independence , such as the following: what constitutes ig independence ? .

igs , agencies , and congress may perceive independence differently , and by extension , may interpret and exercise statutory authorities that affect independence in varied ( and possibly divergent ) ways .

a gao report that assessed an ig's level of independence stated the following: to a large extent , independence is a state of mind of the auditor .

the extent to which an auditor's independence has been affected by surrounding influences cannot be easily assessed by a third party .

any effort to assess auditor independence requires considerable subjective judgment , and reasonable people have room for disagreement .

what factors affect ig independence ? .

several internal and external factors may also affect an ig's independence .

examples of internal factors include self - interest , familiarity with agency personnel in units undergoing a review , and other "threats to independence" outlined in cigie's quality standards .

examples of external factors include ig statutory authorities — such as appointment and removal methods and access to agency records — structure and leadership of the affiliated entity , and political influence .

what is the appropriate balance between ig independence and agency management ? .

the ig act established a dual reporting structure that requires igs to report to both congress and their affiliated entity heads .

this structure creates potential tension between igs and their affiliated entity heads .

an ig , therefore , must maintain independence from the agency head to assess the agency's programs and operations objectively while also fostering a working relationship with agencies to ensure the effectiveness of those assessments .

as noted earlier in this report , igs can generally be appointed under one of three methods: ( 1 ) by the president , with the advice and consent of the senate ( pas ) ; ( 2 ) by the president alone ( pa ) ; or ( 3 ) by the affiliated entity head .

observers have asserted that appointment and removal methods affect an ig's independence and effectiveness — both directly and indirectly — though opinions vary regarding the level and type of impact .

direct impact .

some observers have argued that the pas appointment method strengthens ig independence .

for example , gao general counsel gary kepplinger suggested that pas - appointed igs experience greater organizational independence compared to agency - appointed igs , noting that "the further removed from the appointment source is from the entity to be audited , the greater the level of independence. .

others have asserted that pas appointments — including converting an ig from agency appointment to a pas appointment — might politicize the ig position and reduce ig effectiveness .

similar debates exist regarding ig removal methods .

some observers have expressed concern over potential politicization of the ig removal process , which may undermine ig independence .

some have suggested that limiting the removal of igs "for cause" could mitigate arbitrary removal ( such as for political reasons ) and enhance ig independence .

others have asserted that this limitation might prevent the president or agency heads from removing igs for legitimate reasons ( such as poor performance ) , thus diminishing ig accountability .

indirect impact .

ig appointment and removal methods may also indirectly affect independence by contributing to ig vacancies .

concerns exist that the ig vetting and confirmation processes ( particularly pas appointments ) take too long , leading to prolonged ig vacancies and use of acting igs .

it could also be argued that removal methods ( such as "for cause" removal and term limits ) might increase the number and length of ig vacancies .

some observers have argued that acting igs are inherently , or may be perceived as , less independent or effective compared to permanent igs for various reasons .

examples include not having gone through formal vetting processes , reduced ability to set long - term strategies and priorities , and perverse incentives to not report problems in agency operations or resist political pressure from agency heads — particularly for those seeking the permanent position .

for example , in a letter to the majority and minority leaders of the senate for the 115 th congress , cigie stated that no matter how able or experienced an acting inspector general may be , a permanent ig has the ability to exercise more authority in setting policies and procedures and , by virtue of the authority provided for in the ig act , inevitably will be seen as having greater independence .

other observers have asserted that acting igs are not inherently less independent , nor do they appear or are perceived as less independent , than permanent igs .

for example , in a gao report , some permanent igs and oig employees responding to a survey provided several reasons for why acting igs are not less independent than permanent igs .

examples include that acting igs have the same statutory authorities as permanent igs , are held to the same standards as permanent igs , and are typically career oig employees who prioritize independence .

while igs are authorized to develop recommendations to improve government programs and operations , they are not authorized to enforce them .

rather , agencies possess the authority to ensure the implementation of ig recommendations and resolve any disagreements on recommendations between the ig and the agency .

certain agencies must "take action to address deficiencies" identified in ig reports or to certify that no action is necessary or appropriate .

congress and other observers have expressed concern about the total number of unimplemented ig recommendations and potential barriers to resolving them , such as the quality and consistency of agency and ig audit follow - up procedures , tracking unimplemented recommendations , and determining the resolution of recommendations .

some observers have discussed options to improve audit follow - up and oversight of ig recommendations , such as standardized and enhanced audit follow - up procedures , including defined roles and responsibilities for igs and their affiliated agencies ; uniform terminology for the status of ig recommendations , including a standard definition for what constitutes an "open" recommendation ; systematic tracking of and reporting on the total number and status of ig recommendations ; prioritization of ig recommendations ; and a centralized , public database of all open recommendations .

oigs need personnel with an appropriate mix of skills to effectively pursue their statutory missions to prevent and detect government waste , fraud , and abuse .

traditionally , oig workforces have been primarily composed of auditors and investigators , though oig workforce professions and skills have diversified .

these positions generally require education and experience in audit and investigative procedures , such as assessing agency programs according to government auditing standards and compiling and analyzing evidence .

however , the qualification requirements for these positions may not require experience in certain specialty areas that oigs might evaluate , such as information technology ( it ) .

some have argued that oigs should further diversify their workforces , including by building expertise in specialty areas beyond auditing and investigations such as it , cybersecurity , and data analysis .

some observers have further argued that broadening the mix of oig personnel skills could improve the quality and utility of audits and inspections or evaluations .

for example , it could be argued that building it expertise within an oig might enhance audit findings and recommendations related to securing and modernizing legacy it systems — a key management and performance challenge facing multiple agencies .

some observers have asserted that ig reviews disproportionately focus on program compliance and outputs rather than program outcomes .

the partnership for public service characterized this dichotomy as "the difference between counting the number of people who show up at a job training program , versus examining the number of attendees who get and keep a job after participating in the program. .

observers have further argued that greater emphasis on program outcomes could better improve agency programs and operations and , by extension , increase ig effectiveness .

some igs already assess program outcomes in addition to outputs and compliance .

for example , a department of labor ig audit concluded that the job corps program could not demonstrate that it helped place participants in meaningful jobs related to their training due primarily to noncompliance with certain program policies and ineffective transition services .

in addition , some observers have argued that certain statutory requirements do not promote ig effectiveness .

for example , the project on government oversight argued that statutorily required metrics in ig semiannual reports focus on program outputs — such as the dollar value of disallowed costs — but not necessarily on program outcomes and that the ig peer review process focuses on compliance with applicable quality standards and does not evaluate the quality or effectiveness of an ig's work .

including an evaluation of ig performance and effectiveness as part of the peer review process might warrant consideration the potential impact on the way in which igs approach , conduct , and report on audits and investigations .

some observers have argued that cigie's structures and operations could be altered to strengthen coordination and oversight of the ig community .

examples include the following: strengthening oversight of the ig community .

examples include enhancing the peer review process , expanding the duties of the cigie integrity committee , and elevating the role of the cigie candidate recommendations panel in vetting ig candidates .

reforming reporting requirements .

examples include maintaining an index of ig reporting requirements , developing standardized templates for semiannual reports , statutorily altering required content in semiannual reports , and statutorily requiring maintenance of and participation in oversight.gov .

enhancing data analytics capabilities .

responsibilities could include systematic tracking and analysis of data across igs ( such as ig vacancies and budgets ) , strengthening analyses to identify cross - agency top management and performance challenges , and developing an open recommendations database .

enhancing coordination and resource sharing .

cigie could , for example , research and identify opportunities for igs to utilize shared services .

reforming the cigie funding model .

cigie and other stakeholders have recommended authorizing a direct appropriation for the council to help facilitate accomplishment of statutory duties as well as existing and proposed administrative duties ( such as further developing oversight.gov ) .

appendix a. statutory inspectors general by type the four tables below list statutory inspectors general ( igs ) by type — establishment , dfe , other permanent , and special .

the tables include the ig's affiliated entity , year of establishment , original authorizing statute , and relevant u.s. code citation .

the tables do not include igs that have been abolished or administratively established .

appendix b .

selected ig statutory authorities and requirements table b - 1 compares selected statutory authorities and requirements across the four different types of statutory igs in the federal government .

unless otherwise noted in bold , the listed authorities and requirements apply to all igs grouped under each type .

the table focuses on ig authorities and requirements that are expressly mandated in the applicable authorizing statute .

although special igs and other permanent igs in the legislative branch are not created under the ig act , their authorizing statutes incorporate — and therefore make applicable — certain provisions of the ig act .

these "incorporation by reference" provisions are subject to some interpretation .

even when the authorizing statute for a special ig or other permanent ig in the legislative branch clearly and unequivocally incorporates a specific provision of the ig act , interpretation may vary regarding whether subsequent amendments to that incorporated provision apply to the igs if they occurred after the enactment of the ig's authorizing statute .

the list below defines and explains recurring terms included in the table: identical requirement .

the requirement is identical to the corresponding requirement in the ig act .

the authorizing statutes for the listed igs explicitly state the identical requirement or clearly incorporate the sections of the ig act that contain the requirement .

applies to the listed igs .

similar requirement .

the requirement is similar , but not identical , to a corresponding requirement in the ig act .

the authorizing statutes for the listed igs explicitly state the similar requirement or clearly incorporate portions of the sections of the ig act that contain the requirement .

applies to the listed igs .

no similar requirement specified in authorizing statutes .

the authorizing statutes for the listed igs do not explicitly state the requirement , nor do they incorporate sections of the ig act containing the requirement .

does not apply to listed igs .

unclear requirement .

the authorizing statutes for the listed igs incorporate the ig act section that includes the requirement , but the requirement was added as an amendment to the ig act after enactment of the authorizing statutes for the listed igs .

may or may not apply to the listed igs .

