the impact aid program , administered by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) , was originally established in 1950 by p.l .

81-815 and p.l .

81-874 , 15 years prior to the enactment of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) .

impact aid compensates local educational agencies ( leas ) for a "substantial and continuing financial burden" resulting from federal activities .

these activities include federal ownership of certain lands , as well as the enrollments in leas of children whose parents work or live on federal property and children living on indian lands .

the federal government provides compensation because leas are unable to collect property or other taxes from these individuals ( eg , members of the uniformed services living on military bases ) or their employers , even though the leas are obligated to provide free public education to their children .

thus , impact aid is intended to compensate leas , in part , for the resulting loss of tax revenue .

in 1994 , the impact aid program was incorporated into title viii of the esea .

the esea was most recently reauthorized in 2015 by the every student succeeds act ( essa ; p.l .

114-95 ) .

as part of this process , the essa also reauthorized and revised the impact aid program and moved it into title vii of the esea .

changes to the impact aid program made by the essa generally took effect beginning in fy2017 .

the impact aid program authorizes several types of payments: federal property ( section 7002 ) , federally connected children: basic support payments ( section 7003 ( b ) ) , payments for children with disabilities ( section 7003 ( d ) ) , construction ( section 7007 ) , and facilities maintenance ( section 7008 ) .

in addition to the impact aid programs administered by ed , a smaller set of programs administered by the department of defense ( dod ) are often referred to as the "dod impact aid" programs .

these two programs include one that provides supplemental aid to leas serving children with a parent on active duty in the uniformed services , and one that provides assistance to leas serving children with severe disabilities with a parent on active duty in the uniformed services .

this report begins with a general overview of the various payments made under the impact aid program , followed by a detailed discussion of each section of title vii as amended by the essa .

this is followed by information about recent appropriations for impact aid .

the report concludes with an overview of the "impact aid" programs administered by dod .

tables included in appendix a provide appropriations data in constant 2018 dollars .

appendix b provides a glossary of acronyms used in the report .

the impact aid provisions discussed in this report reflect changes made to the program by the essa as well as those made through the annual national defense authorization acts ( ndaas ) and annual departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies ( l - hhs - ed ) appropriations acts that have been enacted through august 2018 .

the most substantial program changes made through all of these vehicles have been to provisions affecting payments for federal property ( section 7002 ) and basic support payments ( section 7003 ( b ) ) .

esea title vii authorizes several types of impact aid payments .

these include payments under section 7002 , section 7003 , section 7007 , and section 7008 , which are discussed briefly below .

grants to individual leas under these annual payments may range from less than $100 to several million dollars .

this part of the report provides a section - by - section analysis of esea title vii .

sections are generally discussed in order .

there is also a summary of the title vii sections that focus primarily on program administration and are not otherwise discussed in the section - by - section analyses , including section 7005 and sections 7010 through 7014 .

appropriations for the impact aid program are made through the annual l - hhs - ed appropriations act .

appropriations to provide additional funding to leas serving significant numbers of children whose parents are on active duty in the uniformed services and children with severe disabilities whose parents are on active duty in the uniformed services have also been made available through the department of defense ( see " department of defense "impact aid" programs " for more information ) .

this section provides detailed information about impact aid funding provided through l - hhs - ed appropriations acts from fy2010 through fy2019 in current dollars .

for appropriations data in constant 2018 dollars , see table a - 1 .

the first dod impact aid program , supplemental assistance , was established in the early 1990s to supplement the impact aid programs administered by ed .

a second dod impact aid program , for leas serving military dependent children with severe disabilities , has been funded since fy2002 .

the annual national defense authorization act provides the authorization of appropriations for these programs .

the authorizations of appropriations for these programs have been lower than those provided for the impact aid programs administered by ed .

funds for these programs are appropriated in the annual dod appropriations acts under operation and maintenance for department - wide activities .

this section provides an overview of the two impact aid programs administered by dod and funded in fy2019 and their appropriations in current dollars .

for appropriations data in constant 2018 dollars , see table a - 2 .

the supplemental assistance program ( also referred to as "dod supplemental impact aid" and "assistance to schools with significant numbers of military dependent students" ) provides funds to leas with significant numbers of military students .

funds are provided to eligible leas if , without the additional funding , an lea would be unable to provide students with a level of education equivalent to the minimum level available in the schools of other leas in the state .

leas are eligible for assistance if at least 20% of their students in ada during the preceding school year were military dependent students counted under section 7003 ( a ) ( 1 ) of esea ( categories b and d ( i ) in table 2 ) .

about 120 districts receive funds through supplemental assistance .

according to the u.s. department of defense education activity ( dodea ) , the funds provided under the program are "reimbursable in nature , therefore , they may be used by the lea without restriction. .

dod appropriations for children with severe disabilities whose parents are on active duty in the uniformed services are provided to reimburse leas for money previously spent on providing such children with a free appropriate public education .

section 363 of the floyd d. spence national defense authorization act for fy2001 ( p.l .

106-398 ) authorized payments for this purpose beginning in fy2002 .

an lea may receive funding if it serves at least two severely disabled students who have a parent on active duty in the uniformed services ( esea , section 7003 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) or ( d ) ( i ) ) or have a parent who is a foreign military officer ( esea , section 7003 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ( ii ) or ( d ) ( ii ) ) .

for the purposes of the program , children with severe disabilities are those whose cost of educational and related services exceed ( 1 ) the lesser of five times the national or state appe for a child who receives services in a program outside of the boundaries of the lea that pays for the services ; or ( 2 ) three times the state appe for a child receiving services through a program offered by the lea or provided within the boundaries of the lea .

the payment provided to an lea for each child with severe disabilities is based on the expenditures made by the lea on behalf of the child that are in excess of the appe in the state in which the lea is located , less the sum of funds received by the lea from the state to defray the costs of educational and related services for the child ; under the idea to defray the costs of services for the child ; and from any other source to defray the costs of services for the child provided specifically because the child has a severe disabling condition .

if the amount of funds appropriated is insufficient to pay the full amount for all eligible leas , the secretary of defense is required to ratably reduce payments to all eligible leas by an equal percentage .

approximately 40 to 50 leas are awarded funds through this program each year .

in recent years , total appropriations for the supplemental assistance and military students with severe disabilities programs have ranged from $30 million to $50 million .

table 6 shows the amount appropriated for each of these activities for fy2010 through fy2019 .

appendix a .

impact aid appropriations in constant 2018 dollars table a - 1 provides impact aid appropriations in constant 2018 dollars .

table a - 2 provides dod impact aid program appropriations in constant 2018 dollars .

appendix b. glossary of acronyms ada: average daily attendance appe: average per - pupil expenditure bsp: basic support payment ddess: domestic dependents elementary and secondary school dod: u.s. department of defense dodea: department of defense education activity ed: u.s. department of education esea: elementary and secondary education act essa: every student succeeds act idea: individuals with disabilities education act l - hhs - ed: departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies appropriations act lcr: local contribution rate lea: local educational agency lot: learning opportunity threshold ndaa: national defense authorization ac .

