the trickett wendler , frank mongiello , jordan mclinn , and matthew bellina right to try ( rtt ) act of 2017 became federal law on may 30 , 2018 .

over the preceding five years , 40 states had enacted related legislation .

the goal was to allow individuals with imminently life - threatening diseases or conditions to seek access to investigational drugs without the step of procuring permission from the food and drug administration ( fda ) .

another goal — held by the goldwater institute , which led the initiative toward state bills , and some of the legislative proponents — was focused more on the process: to eliminate government's role in an individual's choice .

the effort to publicize the issue and press for a federal solution involved highlighting the poignant situations of individuals who sought access .

for example , in march 2014 , millions of americans heard about the plight of a seven - year - old boy with cancer .

he was battling an infection no antibiotic had been able to tame .

his physicians thought an experimental drug might help .

because the food and drug administration ( fda ) had not yet approved that experimental drug , it was not available in pharmacies .

but fda did have the authority to permit the use of an unapproved drug in certain circumstances — a process referred to as expanded access or compassionate use .

for fda to grant that permission , however , the manufacturer must have agreed to provide the drug .

the manufacturer , which was still testing the drug that the boy sought , declined .

other stories often pointed toward fda as an obstacle .

until fda approves a drug or licenses a biologic , the manufacturer cannot put it on the u.s. market .

during this time , congress faced pressure to act , encouraged by the goldwater institute , which framed the issue as one of individual freedom — a right to try .

the institute , which news accounts frequently refer to as a libertarian think tank , circulated model legislation .

the bill's preface describes its scope: a bill to authorize access to and use of experimental treatments for patients with an advanced illness ; to establish conditions for use of experimental treatment ; to prohibit sanctions of health care providers solely for recommending or providing experimental treatment ; to clarify duties of a health insurer with regard to experimental treatment authorized under this act ; to prohibit certain actions by state officials , employees , and agents ; and to restrict certain causes of action arising from experimental treatment .

after 33 states enacted legislation reflecting the goldwater institute - provided model bill , in january 2017 , legislators introduced a bill ( s. 204 ) designed to address the issue .

their trickett wendler , frank mongiello , jordan mclinn , and matthew bellina right to try act of 2017 — named for several individuals facing amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( als , lou gehrig's disease ) or duchenne muscular dystrophy — sought to remove what proponents saw as fda obstacles to patient access .

on may 30 , 2018 , president trump signed the bill into law ( p.l .

115-176 ) .

this report discusses fda's expanded access program , which many refer to as the compassionate use program , through which fda allows manufacturers to provide to patients investigational drugs — drugs that have not completed clinical trials to test their safety and effectiveness ; obstacles — perceived as the result of fda or manufacturer decisions — to individuals' access to experimental drugs ; a summary of the provisions in the right to try ( rtt ) act and how they are meant to ease those obstacles ; a discussion of selected provisions in the rtt act and what questions remain unresolved ; and comments about the broader implications of the rtt act .

many highly publicized accounts of specific individuals' struggles with life - threatening conditions and efforts by activists influenced public debate over access .

another development was the model bill circulated in 2014 by the goldwater institute .

examples of public attitudes included news accounts of specific individuals' struggles with life - threatening conditions .

some found the process of asking fda for a treatment ind too cumbersome .

others question fda's right to act as a gatekeeper at all .

some point to manufacturers' refusal to provide their experimental drugs .

most critics , therefore , see solutions as within the control of fda or pharmaceutical companies .

this section lays out key perceived obstacles and issues — both fda - and manufacturer - related .

for the past several congresses , members have introduced bills with varying approaches to increasing patient access to investigational drugs .

some followed the goldwater institute model ( to take fda out of the process ) and some proposed requiring manufacturers to publicize their compassionate use policies and decisions or requiring that the government accountability office ( gao ) study the patterns of patient requests and manufacturer approvals and denials , barriers to drug sponsors , and barriers in the application process .

congress enacted two larger bills that each included sections on expanded access: the 21 st century cures act ( section 3032 , p.l .

114-255 ) and the fda reauthorization act of 2017 ( section 610 , p.l .

115-52 ) .

in december 2016 , the 21 st century cures act added a new section 561a to the ffdca: "expanded access policy required for investigational drugs. .

it required "a manufacturer or distributor of an investigational drug to be used for a serious disease or condition to make its policies on evaluating and responding to compassionate use requests publicly available. .

in august 2017 , the fda reauthorization act of 2017 amended the date by which a company must post its expanded access policies and required the secretary to convene a public meeting to discuss clinical trial inclusion and exclusion criteria , issue guidance and a report , issue or revise guidance or regulations to streamline irb review for individual patient expanded access protocols , and update any relevant forms associated with individual patient expanded access .

it also required gao to report to congress on individual access to investigational drugs through fda's expanded access program .

on january 24 , 2017 , senator johnson introduced s. 204 , the trickett wendler right to try act of 2017 , and the bill had 43 cosponsors at that time .

on august 3 , 2017 , the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions discharged the bill by unanimous consent .

the same day , the senate passed s. 204 , the trickett wendler , frank mongiello , jordan mclinn , and matthew bellina right to try act with a substantial amendment also by unanimous consent .

on march 13 , 2018 , representative fitzpatrick introduced a related bill , h.r .

5247 , the trickett wendler , frank mongiello , jordan mclinn , and matthew bellina right to try act of 2018 , and the bill had 40 cosponsors at that time .

on march 21 , the house passed the bill ( voting 267-149 ) .

the house accepted the senate bill on may 22 , 2018 ( voting 250-169 ) , and the president signed it into law on may 30 , 2018 .

this section of the report first summarizes the provisions in the right to try act .

it then discusses how those provisions address the obstacles described in the previous section .

what role could congress play now that the rtt act is law ? .

it could answer three questions at the core of measuring its effect on fda , drug manufacturers , and patients .

first: will more patients get investigational drugs ? .

the rtt act requires manufacturers to report each year on the number of doses supplied and patients treated as a result of the law .

it also reports on what the drugs were used for .

it might examine the effect on costs incurred by patients .

over time — and perhaps with requesting other data — congress could determine whether the law has had the effect its sponsors intended .

second: has the law removed the obstacles to access to investigational drugs ? .

while the rtt act achieves proponents' objective of removing the fda application step in a patient's quest for an investigational drug , it does not address many of the obstacles — such as a limited drug supply or limits on staff and facility resources — that could lead a manufacturer to refuse access to its drugs .

and it is not clear whether it sufficiently deals with the obstacles it does address — use of clinical outcomes data and liability protection .

the reporting required by the rtt act was not designed to answer those questions .

but congress could turn to the government accountability office for help .

it could also encourage manufacturers , patient advocates , and fda to collaborate in the search for answers .

third: how will this affect fda ? .

one news article referred to the rtt act's "bizarre twist," as fda must determine its role in implementing a law whose function is to remove fda from the situation .

commissioner of food and drugs gottlieb and senator johnson , the sponsor of the senate bill , have exchanged statements that potentially foretell conflict if fda issues rules that would limit the law's scope .

finally , is the rtt act a harbinger of reduced authority for fda ? .

writing in opposition to the bill , four former fda commissioners warned that it would "create a dangerous precedent that would erode protections for vulnerable patients. .

that is something future congresses may choose to address .

by trying to help one set of ill patients , does congress wear down the health of the institution meant to protect the public's health ? .

the rtt act concludes with a "sense of the senate" section that appears to acknowledge that this legislation offers minimal opportunity to patients .

it is explicit in asserting that the new law "will not , and cannot , create a cure or effective therapy where none exists. .

the legislation , it says , "only expands the scope of individual liberty and agency among patients. .

the drafters realistically end that phrase with "in limited circumstances. .

