science and technology ( s&t ) play an important role in our society .

advances in science and technology can help drive economic growth and meet national priorities in public health , environmental protection , agricultural productivity , defense , and many other areas .

federal policies affect scientific and technological advancement on several levels .

the federal government directly funds research and development ( r&d ) activities to achieve national goals or support national priorities , such as funding basic life science research through the national institutes of health ( nih ) or developing new weapons systems in the department of defense ( dod ) .

the federal government also establishes and maintains the legal and regulatory framework that affects s&t activities in the private sector .

in addition , federal tax , trade , and education policies can have effects on private sector s&t activity .

this report serves as a brief introduction to many of the science and technology policy issues that may come before the 116 th congress .

each issue section provides background information and outlines selected policy issues that may be considered .

each issue includes a heading entitled "for further information" that provides the author's name and the titles of relevant crs reports containing more detailed policy analysis and information .

cited reports are current as of their individual publication dates , but may not reflect developments that have occurred since their publication .

several issues of potential congressional interest apply to federal science and technology policy in general .

this section begins with a brief introduction to the roles each branch of the federal government plays in s&t policymaking , then discusses overall federal funding of research and development .

additional sections address issues related to the emergence of disruptive technologies ; the america competes act ; oversight of federally supported academic research ; technology transfer ; the adequacy of the science and engineering workforce ; science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) education ; and innovation - related tax policy .

the federal government supports billions of dollars of agricultural research annually .

the 116 th congress is likely to face issues related to funding this research , a proposed relocation of the department of agriculture's science and economic analysis agencies , and issues arising from advances in agricultural biotechnology , including the development of cell - cultured meat .

advances in science and technology related to biomedical research and development underpin improvements in medications and treatments .

some of the biomedical r&d issues that the 116 th congress may face include those related to the budget and oversight of the national institutes of health , the role the food and drug administration in approving new medicines and laboratory tests , and issues related to stem cell - based medicine and genomic editing .

the 116 th congress may consider whether and how the federal government might address climate change and issues related to water resources .

science and technology considerations permeate these deliberations and may be grouped into six interrelated topics: federal expenditures ; climate change science ; greenhouse gas ( ghg ) - related technology development and deployment ; investment in infrastructure ; anticipating , adapting to , and increasing resilience to the impacts of climate changes ; and carbon sequestration technology .

additionally , congress may face several issues related to ensuring reliable water quality and quantity .

science and technology play an important role in national defense .

the department of defense ( dod ) relies on a robust research and development effort to develop new military systems and improve existing systems .

issues that may come before the 116 th congress regarding the dod's s&t activities include budgetary concerns and the effectiveness of programs to transition r&d results into fielded products .

energy - related science and technology issues that may come before the 116 th congress include those related to reprocessing spent nuclear fuel , advances in nuclear energy technology , the development of biofuels and ocean energy technology , and international fusion research .

the federal government spends billions of dollars supporting research and development to protect the homeland .

some of the issues that the 116 th congress may consider include how the department of homeland security performs research and development ; federal efforts to develop and procure new medical countermeasures against chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear agents ; and federal efforts to ensure the safety and security of laboratories working with dangerous pathogens .

the rapid pace of advancements in information technology presents several issues for congressional policymakers , including those related to cybersecurity , artificial intelligence , broadband deployment , access to broadband networks and net neutrality , public safety networks , emergency alerting , 5g networks , the internet of things , federal networking r&d , and quantum information science .

some of the policy issues in the physical and material sciences that the 116 th congress may address include funding and oversight of the national science foundation and the multiagency initiative supporting research and development in the emerging field of nanotechnology .

congress has historically had a strong interest in space policy issues .

space topics that may come before the 116 th congress include the funding and oversight of the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) and issues related to the commercialization of space and to earth - observing satellites .

spaceflight has attracted strong congressional interest since the establishment of nasa in 1958 .

issues include the goals and strategy of nasa's human spaceflight program , the impact of constrained budgets on nasa's other missions , and the future of nasa's earth science program .

the 116 th congress may address these and other issues through nasa reauthorization legislation .

with the end of the space shuttle program in july 2011 , the united states lost the capability to launch astronauts into space .

since that time , nasa has relied on russian spacecraft for crew transport to the international space station ( iss ) .

for iss cargo transport , nasa - contracted u.s. commercial flights have been delivering payloads of supplies and equipment since october 2012 .

as directed by the nasa authorization act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-267 ) , nasa is pursuing a two - track strategy for human spaceflight .

first , for transport to low earth orbit , including the iss , nasa is supporting commercial development of a crew transport capability like the commercial cargo capability achieved in 2012 .

commercial crew transportation services are expected to become operational in late 2019 or 2020 .

second , for human exploration beyond earth orbit , nasa is developing a new crew capsule called orion and a new heavy - lift rocket called the space launch system ( sls ) .

the first crewed test flight of orion and the sls is scheduled for 2023 .

most details of the subsequent exploration missions of orion and the sls remain to be determined .

in february 2018 , nasa announced plans for a lunar orbital platform – gateway ( lop - g ) in lunar orbit , to be accessed via orion and the sls , that would serve as a platform for deep - space human exploration .

rapid developments in the commercial space sector may change the relationship between nasa and industry .

for example , spacex has announced plans for commercial flights carrying passengers around the moon and back as well as , in the longer term , to mars .

some observers see this sort of development as potentially competing with nasa's human spaceflight plans .

more broadly , the emergence of new commercial capabilities in space may present nasa with new opportunities for public - private partnerships or may shift its r&d priorities .

for example , nasa has announced plans to end direct funding for the international space station by 2025 , instead relying on a combination of public - private partnerships and commercial service contracts .

the 2010 authorization act authorized funding increases for nasa that were not subsequently appropriated .

in considering reauthorization , the 116 th congress may examine whether reduced budget expectations require corresponding changes to planned programs .

one common concern is that the cost of planned human spaceflight activities may mean less funding for other nasa missions , such as unmanned science satellites , aeronautics research , and space technology development .

nasa's earth science program , in which climate research is a major focus , is of particular congressional interest .

some in congress have argued that other nasa activities should have higher priority or that some or all of nasa's earth science responsibilities should be transferred to other agencies .

supporters counter that space - based earth observations are an integral part of nasa's science mission .

for further information daniel morgan , specialist in science and technology policy crs report r43419 , nasa appropriations and authorizations: a fact sheet , by daniel morgan crs in focus if10828 , the international space station ( iss ) and the administration's proposal to end direct nasa funding by 2025 , by daniel morgan crs in focus if10940 , the james webb space telescope , by daniel morga .

since the earliest days of spaceflight , u.s. companies have been involved as contractors to government agencies .

increasingly , though , space is becoming commercial .

a majority of u.s. satellites are now commercially owned , providing commercial services , and launched by commercial launch providers .

congressional and public interest in space is also becoming more focused on commercial activities , such as companies developing reusable rockets or collecting business data with fleets of small earth - imaging satellites .

some observers have identified a distinct "new space" sector of relatively new companies focused on private spaceflight at low cost .

one factor driving this trend is nasa's reliance on commercial providers for access to the iss , but "new space" companies are also focused on other markets .

these include the launch of national security satellites for the department of defense , the launch of commercial satellites for u.s. and foreign companies , the provision of commercial services such as earth imaging and satellite communications , and even space tourism .

multiple federal agencies regulate the commercial space industry , based on statutory authorities that were enacted separately and have evolved over time .

the federal aviation administration licenses commercial launch and reentry vehicles ( i.e. , rockets and spaceplanes ) as well as commercial spaceports .

the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) licenses commercial earth remote sensing satellites .

the federal communications commission licenses commercial satellite communications .

the departments of commerce and state license exports of space technology .

the 115 th congress considered , but did not enact , legislation to simplify and reform this regulatory framework .

in addition , in may 2018 , the administration called for changes to the regulation of commercial space in space policy directive – 2 , streamlining regulations on commercial use of space .

the 116 th congress may continue this focus on regulatory reforms .

how the federal government makes use of commercial space capabilities is also evolving .

nasa used to own and operate the space shuttles that contractors built for it , but since 2012 it has contracted with commercial service providers to deliver cargo into orbit using their own spacecraft .

dod has its own satellite communications capabilities , but it also procures communications bandwidth from commercial satellite companies .

agencies are considering a host of new opportunities , including acquisition of weather data from commercial satellites , acquisition of science data from commercial lunar landers , and expanded commercial utilization of the iss .

the 116 th congress may address these developments primarily through oversight of agency programs and decisions on agency budgets .

for more information daniel morgan , specialist in science and technology policy crs report r45416 , commercial space: federal regulation , oversight , and utilization , by daniel morgan crs report r44708 , commercial space industry launches a new phase , by bill cani .

the constellation of earth - observing satellites launched and operated by the u.s. government performs a wide range of observational and data collecting activities .

these activities include measuring the change in mass of polar ice sheets , wind speeds over the oceans , land cover change , as well as the more familiar daily measurements of key atmospheric parameters that enable modern weather forecasts and storm prediction .

satellite observations of the earth's oceans and land surface help with short - term seasonal forecasts of el niño and la niña conditions , which are valuable to u.s. agriculture and commodity interests ; identification of the location and size of wildfires , which can assist firefighting crews and mitigation activities ; as well as long - term observational data of the global climate , which are used in predictive models that help assess the degree and magnitude of current and future climate change .

congress continues to be interested in the performance of nasa , noaa , and the u.s. geological survey in building and operating u.s. earth - observing satellites .

congress is particularly interested in the agencies meeting budgets and time schedules so that critical space - based observations are not missed due to delays and cost overruns .

concerns have been raised in the past by some in congress about the possibility of a "data gap" in the polar - orbiting weather satellite coverage .

the successful launch of the first joint polar satellite system satellite jpss - 1 ( now noaa - 20 ) on november 18 , 2017 , has alleviated those concerns for the near - term .

congress provided full funding , $776 million for the second polar - orbiting satellite , jpss - 2 , in the fy2018 enacted appropriations .

on november 19 , 2016 , the geostationary operational environmental satellite - r ( goes - r ) weather satellite launched and was placed into orbit .

renamed goes - 16 , it is an advanced weather satellite with sensors that should help improve hurricane tracking and intensity forecasts , prediction and warning of severe weather events , and rainfall estimates that will lead to better flood warnings .

goes - 16 also carries the first operational lightning mapper in geostationary orbit , and will better monitor space weather — perturbations to the earth's magnetic field caused by intense bursts of energy from the sun .

on march 1 , 2017 , goes - s successfully launched carrying the same suite of instruments as its predecessor .

the satellite is in its final stage of calibration before transitioning to operation status in january 2019 .

renamed goes - 17 , the satellite experienced a problem with one of its key imaging instruments after launch , the advanced baseline imager ( abi ) , which impairs its functionality .

nasa has stated that despite the abi problem , goes - 17 will provide more and better data than currently available .

both satellites represent the first two in a series of four earth - orbiting weather satellites planned by noaa through 2036 .

the 116 th congress may continue to scrutinize budget and time schedules for polar - orbiting and geostationary satellites , as well as consider how the private sector could provide earth - observing satellite data to supplement the current nasa noaa , and usgs - operated satellite systems .

for further information peter folger , specialist in energy and natural resources policy crs report r44335 , minding the data gap: noaa's polar - orbiting weather satellites and strategies for data continuity , by peter folge .

