t he agriculture appropriations bill — formally known as the agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies appropriations act — funds the food and drug administration ( fda ) and the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , excluding the u.s. forest service .

this includes funding for fda and usda's food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) , the two primary federal agencies responsible for overseeing the safety of the nation's food supply .

in march 2018 , congress enacted the fy2018 agriculture appropriation as part of the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 , division a ) .

both the house and the senate appropriations committees have reported agriculture appropriations bills for fy2019 ( h.r .

5961 , s. 2976 ) .

the senate amended and passed its version as division c of a four - bill minibus ( h.r .

6147 ) .

the final appropriation for fy2019 is pending , and current funding is authorized under a continuing resolution ( p.l .

115-245 ) through december 7 , 2018 .

the enacted fy2018 appropriation and both the fy2019 house - reported bill and the senate - passed bill include funding for food safety programs and related activities at fda and usda .

this report provides a brief overview of the fy2018 and fy2019 appropriations that address food safety activities at fda and fsis .

it does not specifically address funding levels for other federal agencies or other usda agencies that may play a role in ensuring the safety of the nation's food supply .

for a more general analysis of the fy2018 appropriations for agriculture , see crs report r45128 , agriculture and related agencies: fy2018 appropriations ; and for fy2019 , see crs report r45230 , agriculture and related agencies: fy2019 appropriations .

numerous federal , state , and local agencies share responsibilities for regulating the safety of the u.s. food supply .

federal responsibility for food safety rests primarily with fda and fsis .

fda , an agency of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , is responsible for ensuring the safety of the majority of all domestic and imported food products ( except for meat and poultry products ) .

fsis , an agency at usda , regulates most meat , poultry , and processed egg products .

roughly speaking , fsis regulates about 10% - 20% of the u.s. food supply , while fda is responsible for the remaining 80% - 90% .

combined appropriations covering food safety activities at both fda and usda totaled nearly $2.1 billion in fy2018 , which is roughly split between the two agencies ( figure 1 , table 1 ) .

this funding distribution reflects greater increases in congressional appropriations for fda compared with fsis since fy2011 .

the enacted fy2018 appropriation for fda's food safety activities provided $1,041.6 million .

for fsis , the fy2018 appropriation provided $1,056.8 million .

annual appropriations for fda and usda are augmented by existing ( currently authorized ) user fees .

collected user fees differ between the two agencies: at fda , user fees authorized under the fda food safety modernization act ( fsma , p.l .

111-353 ) have generated between $10 million and $20 million annually in recent years ; at fsis , authorized user fees have generated between $180 million and $250 million annually ( figure 2 ) .

staffing levels also differ between the two agencies: fsis staff number around 9,200 full - time equivalents ( ftes ) , while fda's food - related staff ( whose activities extend beyond food safety ) number about 3,900 ftes ( table 1 ) .

in addition to setting budgetary amounts , agriculture appropriations bills may also include policy - related provisions that direct how the executive branch should carry out a specific appropriation .

these provisions may have the force of law if they are included in the text of the appropriation , but their effect is generally limited to the fiscal year indicated .

the explanatory statement that accompanies the final appropriation , and the house and the senate report language that accompanies the committee - reported bills , may also provide policy instructions .

these documents do not have the force of law but often explain congressional intent , which the agencies are expected to follow .

the committee reports and explanatory statement may need to be read together to capture all of the congressional intent for a given fiscal year .

according to the fy2018 explanatory statement , "the explanatory statement is silent on provisions that were in both the house report ( h.rept .

115-232 ) and senate report ( s.rept .

115-131 ) that remain unchanged by this agreement , except as noted in this explanatory statement... .

the house and senate report language that is not changed by the explanatory statement is approved and indicates congressional intentions .

the explanatory statement , while repeating some report language for emphasis , does not intend to negate the language referred to above unless expressly provided herein. .

fda food safety activities fda's foods program covers the agency's food safety activities , as well as certain other food - related programs .

the program plays a major food safety role , ensuring that the nation's food supply , quality of foods , food ingredients , and dietary supplements ( and also cosmetic products ) are safe , sanitary , nutritious , wholesome , and properly labeled .

fda's foods program budget accounts for roughly one - third of fda's total appropriation .

fda's total budget for food safety programs and activities extends beyond the agency's foods program to encompass other food and veterinary medicine programs at fda while also including aspects of other fda program areas covering food additives , antimicrobial resistance , and nutrition labeling .

usda's fsis is responsible for inspecting u.s. supplies of meat , poultry , and processed egg products to ensure that they are safe , wholesome , and properly labeled and packaged .

the agency's meat and poultry inspection program conducts continual inspections at federal meat and poultry plants .

fsis also ensures that meat and poultry products imported to the united states are produced under standards equivalent to u.s. inspection standards and facilitates the certification of regulated products .

 table 3 compares selected policy provisions that have been identified in the agriculture programs ( title i ) , the related agencies and food and drug administration ( title vi ) , and general provisions ( title vii ) titles of the fy2018 agriculture appropriations act and the fy2019 agriculture appropriations bills related to federal food safety activities at both fda and fsis .

many of these provisions have been included in past years' appropriations acts .

table 4 compares selected policy provisions in the fy2018 and the fy2019 agriculture appropriations report language or explanatory statements related to federal food safety activities at both fda and fsis .

many of these provisions have also been included in past years' appropriations acts .

