t he federal crop insurance program offers subsidized crop insurance policies to farmers .

historically , the federal crop insurance program has covered primarily traditional field crops such as wheat , corn , and soybeans .

in contrast , s pecialty crops — covering fruits , vegetables , tree nuts , and nursery crops — have not been a major part of the federal crop insurance program .

however , legislative changes , coupled with ongoing administrative efforts by the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , have expanded federal crop insurance coverage for specialty crops , and they now account for a small but growing number of federal crop insurance policies bought by farmers .

over the past few decades , total specialty crop insured liabilities rose from nearly $1 billion in 1989 to nearly $18.5 billion in 2017 .

federal crop insurance policies currently cover around 38 specialty crop categories , which include roughly 80 types of fruits , vegetables , tree nuts , and nursery crops .

many specialty crops , however , do not have crop - specific insurance policies .

currently , about one - half of all u.s. specialty crop acres are covered by federal crop insurance policies .

some specialty crops may be covered under a whole farm revenue protection ( wfrp ) insurance policy , intended to fill in coverage gaps for producers of uninsured crops that lack individual policy coverage and for producers marketing to local , farm - identity preserved , or direct markets .

despite this expansion , coverage for specialty crops remains below that for traditional crops .

combined , federal crop insurance for specialty crops and wfrp together accounted for about 17% of the entire federal crop insurance portfolio by liability during crop year 2017 .

this report focuses on how specialty crops are covered under the federal crop insurance program .

for detailed background and historical information on the federal crop insurance program as a whole , and on how the federal crop insurance program operates , see crs report r45193 , federal crop insurance: program overview for the 115th congress .

federal crop insurance policies for specialty crops ( and all other crops ) are generally either yield - based or revenue - based .

for most yield - based policies , a producer can receive an indemnity if there is a yield loss relative to the farmer's "normal" ( historical ) yield .

revenue - based policies protect against crop revenue loss resulting from declines in yield , price , or both .

the federal crop insurance act provides two methods for developing new crop insurance programs , including ( 1 ) internal products developed by rma or under contract and ( 2 ) external products submitted through procedures specified in section 508 ( h ) of the federal crop insurance act ( 7 u.s.c .

§1508 ( h ) ) .

even though new crop insurance product introductions for specialty crops have been increasing , usda and the industry continue to face a number of challenges when developing and making available new insurance policies for specialty crops that are not currently covered .

most challenges stem from the basic structure of the specialty crop industry , which is often characterized by relatively small acreages , multiple crop varieties ( often targeting niche markets ) , differences in farming practices ( which contribute to greater complexity and cost ) , quality and price discovery issues , grower interest , non - weather risks , and other coverage limitations .

factors such as these affect the potential marketability , actuarial soundness , and feasibility of an insurance policy .

a small market reduces sales incentive for companies selling insurance while contributing to higher per - unit costs for developing the product , training staff , modifying computer programs , and other activities .

small acreage also results in low market volume or the establishment of production contracts between producers and buyers .

crops grown and marketed in smaller quantities and / or targeting niche markets often command a price premium , resulting in often highly variable market prices , further complicating price discovery .

moreover , most specialty crops are intended primarily for sale in the higher - value fresh market versus the typically lower - value crops sold for further processing .

fresh product is highly perishable and non - storable , unlike the field crops that are more widely covered by federal crop insurance policies .

in general , lack of reliable pricing data for crops not traded on commodity exchanges has been an ongoing challenge for usda in the federal crop insurance program .

rma's price discovery for specialty crops largely relies on agricultural marketing service , nass , and other usda agency data and academic and industry sources .

in the absence of a well - developed cash market , such "thin market" conditions make it difficult to observe and forecast market prices .

for example , in 2015 fcic cancelled the dry bean revenue endorsement because usda did not have sufficient market data from processors to establish a harvest price from which to calculate whether indemnities would be triggered under the endorsement .

setting price guarantees correctly is critical for encouraging participation , the actuarial soundness of the program , and maintaining the overall market dynamics for the crop .

if the insurance is priced ( rated ) too high , producers who tend to have few losses might decide against purchasing insurance , leaving only high - risk farmers in the pool ( known as "adverse selection" ) .

if the insurance is priced too low , premiums may not cover expected indemnities , potentially inflating the federal cost of the program by providing a greater premium and higher administrative and operating subsidies than was intended .

artificially low premiums might encourage additional crop production , further contributing to weak market prices , thereby adversely affecting financial returns for producers .

another challenge for insuring specialty crops is the diversity and multitude of crop varieties and production practices .

compared with field crops , specialty crops tend to have a wider variety of farming practices that depend on the crop variety , adding complexity to the policy and its development cost .

for example , a vegetable crop may need to be grown on raised beds , use plastic , or have specific crop rotations .

various marketing claims made for products ( such as that they are organic or other production or sustainability claims ) can contribute to product complexity .

understanding how these factors affect potential yields is required for determining what practices can be insured and for developing and establishing underwriting standards .

variation across crops and variety within crop types also complicate the loss adjustment process ( i.e. , assessing the effect of weather on crop production ) .

finally , in some cases , usda has reportedly not pursued policies for particular commodities because some producers have expressed concerns that offering insurance could adversely affect the market ( i.e. , because an insurance policy reduces producer risk , farmers may plant more acreage , which could drive down prices and total crop revenue ) .

this has been a particular concern for producers of vegetable crops and explains in part lower levels of insured vegetable crop acreage compared with other crops .

producer interest in the availability of a new policy often starts at the local level and is channeled through rma's regional offices .

in general , for a policy to be viable , a crop must have established cultivars , defined farming practices , developed markets , and identified known perils .

significant producer interest ( demand for the policy ) is also critical .

perhaps more importantly , insurance policies are dependent on the availability of high quality data .

high quality data , from an insurance standpoint , refers to data being timely ( so that claims can be paid quickly ) , relevant ( so the product offers reliable protection ) , audited to international reinsurance standards , and available over a sufficiently long time horizon ( time series ) .

data availability and data quality often pose a challenge for crop insurance purposes .

usda offers several programs to help farmers recover financially from natural disasters , including droughts and floods .

these programs help to provide assistance to producers of noninsured crops or crops with no current individual policy coverage , including some specialty crops .

other supplemental disaster programs further provide assistance to some specialty crop producers from tree losses and the loss of bee colonies .

usda also provides low - interest emergency loans and land rehabilitation assistance to help farmers return land to production following natural disasters .

among the issues that may arise if congress continues to consider the role of the federal crop insurance options for specialty crop producers are: availability of crop - specific policies .

crop - specific policies have not been developed for a number of specialty crops , including artichokes , asparagus , blackberries , boysenberries , broccoli , cantaloupes , carrots ( fresh and for processing ) , cashews , cauliflower , chives , celery , dates , eggplants , garlic , guavas , hazelnuts , honeydews , kiwi fruit , lettuce , spinach , squash , tart cherries , watermelons , most leafy greens , most herbs and spices , some tropical plants , and most root crops .

private submitters proposing to develop new policies must present evidence of marketability to fcic and rma .

congress might consider whether there are opportunities for usda to facilitate market research and publish market data to assist with the development of new policies and spur greater competition among private submitters .

development cost benchmarks .

section 11120 of p.l .

115-334 modifies the definition of reasonable research and development costs related to policies that have been approved by the fcic board for reimbursement .

costs are to be deemed reasonable if based on ( 1 ) for employees or contractors , wage rates equal to not more than two times the bureau of labor statistics hourly wage rates , plus benefits ; and ( 2 ) other actual documented costs incurred by the applicant .

that section also limits the fcic board's review of user fees .

given that congress reinstated rma's authority to develop new products in the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) , congress might inquire whether costs incurred for rma - developed policies could provide a benchmark for the reasonableness of private sector requests for reimbursement of development costs .

limited participation in wfrp policies .

wfrp is available in every county of every state .

its premium subsidies range from 55% to 80% , and coverage levels range from 50% to 85% .

in crop year 2017 the average premium subsidy for wfrp was 70% , whereas the average premium subsidy across the entire crop insurance portfolio was 63% .

that year wfrp policies accounted for about 3% of all federal crop insurance liabilities .

some speculate that part of the reason that wfrp participation is not higher is that producers are reluctant to provide tax return data .

these policies require producers to provide five consecutive years of schedule f from their federal tax forms .

given the benefits of risk pooling achieved by insuring a whole farm's revenue and the fraud prevention benefits from requiring tax returns to set historical revenue guarantees , congress might consider whether there are efficiencies to be gained from incentivizing greater participation in wfrp .

determining a " market price" for commodities not sold on exchanges .

lack of reliable pricing data for crops that are not traded on commodity exchanges has been an ongoing challenge for usda in the federal crop insurance program .

rma's price discovery for specialty crops largely relies on agricultural marketing service , nass , and other usda agency data and academic and industry sources .

in the absence of a well - developed cash market , such "thin market" conditions make it difficult to observe and forecast market prices , which affects rma's ability to set the appropriate level of price guarantees .

setting price guarantees correctly is critical to the actuarial soundness of the program and for maintaining overall market dynamics for the crop .

increased farm - level price data for commodities not sold on exchanges could also assist producers of those commodities in negotiating contracts and in their financial planning .

congress might consider whether there is a role for the federal government in supporting data collection of farm prices of commodities that are not sold on exchanges .

coverage of quality losses .

many crops are vulnerable to lower prices or to becoming unmarketable due to quality losses .

small markets for specialty crops that are not sold on commodity exchanges may be particularly price - sensitive to variations in quality ( eg , herbs and spices , certain fruits and vegetables , honey ) .

certain federal crop insurance policies cover some quality losses , but the range of such coverage is limited .

congress might consider ( 1 ) whether the current coverage for quality losses is available for all crops that are vulnerable to quality losses , ( 2 ) whether loss adjustment procedures for quality losses accurately assess the variations in quality and the effects on marketability and prices , and ( 3 ) whether the procedures for assessing quality losses properly balance cost efficiency and fraud prevention .

effect of ad h oc payments on demand for crop insurance .

one of the stated policy goals of federal crop insurance has been to reduce the agricultural sector's reliance on supplemental or "ad hoc" disaster assistance payments .

however , according to the congressional budget office , it is difficult to assess whether this policy goal has been achieved .

the 115 th congress authorized ad hoc disaster assistance , and usda has separately implemented a "trade aid" package , both of which apply to some specialty crops .

given the lower participation levels for certain specialty crop insurance policies as compared to non - specialty crops , congress might consider whether repeated ad hoc payments in response to adverse events may have an effect on demand for federal crop insurance for crops generally and for specialty crops in particular .

