the last several years have seen renewed debate over the role that race plays in higher education — a debate over "affirmative action. .

a high - profile lawsuit challenging harvard university's consideration of race in admitting its incoming classes , and the recent withdrawal of obama administration - era guidance addressing similar race - conscious policies , have focused the debate on "affirmative action" in perhaps its more familiar sense: the voluntary consideration of student applicants' race as a way of increasing the participation of racial minorities in higher education .

meanwhile , a recent lawsuit involving maryland's university system has brought renewed attention to "affirmative action" in its other , original sense: the mandatory use of race by public higher education systems to eliminate the remnants of state - imposed racial segregation .

this report addresses "affirmative action" in each of these two senses and discusses how the federal courts have analyzed them under the fourteenth amendment's guarantee of "equal protection. .

the report first considers "affirmative action" in its original sense: the mandatory race - conscious measures that the federal courts have imposed on de jure segregated public university systems .

the supreme court has made clear that a state that had a segregated system of education must eliminate all "vestiges" of that system , including through expressly race - conscious remedies .

in its consequential 1992 decision united states v. fordice , the court charted a three - step inquiry for assessing whether a state has fulfilled that constitutional obligation , examining whether a current policy is traceable to the de jure segregated system , has continued discriminatory effect , and can be modified or practicably eliminated consistent with sound educational policy .

outside this de jure context , "affirmative action" has come to refer to a different category of race - conscious policies .

these involve what the court once called the "benign" use of racial classifications — voluntary measures designed not directly to remedy past governmental discrimination , but to increase the representation of racial minorities previously excluded from various societal institutions .

and in the context of higher education the court has addressed one type of policy in particular: the use of race as a factor in admissions decisions , a practice now observed by many public and private colleges and universities .

as this report explains , the federal courts have come to subject these voluntary "affirmative action" policies to a particularly searching form of review , known today as strict scrutiny .

and they have so far upheld those policies under a single theory: that the educational benefits that flow from a diverse student body uniquely justify some consideration of race when deciding how to assemble an incoming class .

to rely on that diversity rationale , however , the court now requires universities to articulate in concrete and precise terms what their diversity - related goals are , and why they have chosen those goals in particular .

and even once those goals are established , a university must still show that its admissions policy achieves its diversity - related goals as precisely as possible , while ultimately "treat[ing] each applicant as an individual. .

because both lines of cases discussed here have their roots in the equal protection clause , this report focuses primarily on public universities , all of which are directly subject to constitutional requirements .

but those same requirements apply equally to private colleges and universities that receive federal funds pursuant to title vi of the civil rights act of 1964 ( title vi or the act ) , which similarly prohibits recipients of federal dollars from discriminating on the basis of race .

this report concludes by discussing the role that title vi plays in ensuring equal protection in higher education , both public and private , including several avenues for congressional action under the act .

a finding of a state entity's intent to segregate students by race in the higher education context is critical to showing a violation of the equal protection clause , and has significant legal consequences .

in such cases of de jure — that is , intentional , state - imposed — segregation , the state has an affirmative duty under the equal protection clause to eliminate all vestiges of its de jure system by dismantling the infrastructure and other mechanisms that produced the discriminatory segregation .

according to the supreme court's 1992 fordice decision , this duty commands more than just the repeal of state laws sanctioning racial segregation in higher education .

the state must also uproot or reform any policy or practice "traceable" to its formerly de jure system that continues to have discriminatory effect .

in fordice , the state's intent to racially segregate its higher education system was plain: with the founding of the university of mississippi in 1848 , mississippi explicitly set out to create a public university "dedicated to the higher education exclusively of white persons," and racially segregated its public university system over the next 100 years through the creation of other "exclusively white institutions" and "solely black institutions. .

nor was mississippi's system unique in this regard .

"[d]ual system[s]" of public higher education — one for black students , another for white — were codified in other state and local laws throughout the country .

thus far , federal courts that have addressed de jure segregation in higher education have done so in the context of such codified segregation , as in fordice .

the absence of a codified dual system of higher education , however , may not mean that a university system was not or is not intentionally segregated .

as reflected in the supreme court decision keyes v. school district no .

1 , denver , colorado , even when state authorities have not segregated their public schools by statute , they may still have engaged in unconstitutional racial segregation .

thus , in the k - 12 context , federal courts have found de jure segregation based on evidence reflecting a state actor's impermissible segregative intent .

this line of cases would appear to apply in the context of higher education as well .

as the court noted in fordice , where a plaintiff is unable to show that a policy or practice is a vestige of prior de jure segregation , she may nonetheless prove a "new" constitutional violation with evidence of a present - day intent to racially segregate students "under traditional principles" governing discriminatory intent .

this would be consistent with the court's application of brown and its progeny broadly across "the field of public education," including higher education , as reflected in fordice .

because the supreme court has yet to address segregative intent in higher education , it is unclear what intent evidence would be sufficient to establish a de jure segregated public university or institution , apart from a law codifying such segregation .

as a general matter , though , a court's determination of discriminatory intent is a fact - intensive , "sensitive inquiry. .

and the supreme court has observed that this is even more so in cases alleging de jure segregation in public education .

where the evidence indicates , for example , that a state actor undertook a policy or practice knowing that doing so would have the "foreseeable" effect of segregating students by race , that evidence may support an inference of de jure segregation .

in addition , at least in the k - 12 context , a finding of a state entity's segregative intent in one part of a school system creates a rebuttable presumption that segregation found in other parts of the same system was also intentional .

de jure segregation proved by such nonstatutory evidence generally triggers the same affirmative obligation on the state to eliminate the vestiges of its state - imposed segregation , as when de jure segregation is shown through state or local laws .

though segregative intent analyses at the k - 12 level may be instructive , the guidance these decisions provide may be limited by the nature of the evidence at issue in those particular cases: the method of student assignment to elementary or secondary schools , for example , or the drawing of attendance zones to create racially segregated schools .

it appears unlikely that such evidence would be at issue or directly applicable in cases alleging segregative intent at the collegiate or graduate level .

nonetheless , these decisions generally suggest that categorical distinctions — between evidence indicative of de jure segregation and evidence of existing segregation insufficiently linked to state intent — are difficult to draw .

indeed , given the difficulties that can arise in a court's analysis of "segregative intent," over the years a number of justices have called into question the rationale and basis for the distinction between de jure and so - called de facto segregation , though the majority of the court has recognized and continues to recognize this distinction .

whatever the open questions may be regarding the evidence sufficient to show segregative intent , particularly in the higher education context , fordice instructs that a plaintiff need not provide evidence of new discriminatory intent when alleging that a state has failed to eliminate vestiges of a prior de jure segregated system .

and with respect to remedying intentional racial segregation , the court has repeatedly held that a state not only may use a broad array of explicit race - conscious policies and practices to remedy its constitutional violation , but often must do so .

by themselves , race - neutral measures simply may not be enough , the court has explained , to provide equitable , make - whole relief for intentionally segregative acts .

this affirmative obligation to consider race arises , however , only in the context of de jure segregation .

outside that de jure context , institutions of higher education subject to the equal protection clause have no such duty to remedy racial segregation .

nor may they — or the federal courts , for that matter — use the same broad array of race - conscious measures available for remedying de jure segregation .

de jure segregation , however , is not the only context in which race - conscious measures in higher education may be used .

for over forty years colleges and universities have considered race as a way of increasing the racial diversity of their student bodies , independent from a legal basis relating to de jure segregation .

thus far , however , the supreme court has addressed only one type of discretionary race - conscious measure in the higher education context: admissions policies .

and when evaluating these discretionary policies , the court reviews them under a notably different analytical lens , looking to their precision in achieving certain concretely defined and "compelling" educational interests , as explained more fully below .

"affirmative action" in its original sense grew out of the states' affirmative obligation under the equal protection clause to rid their public institutions of the lingering vestiges of de jure segregation .

but "affirmative action" has also come to refer to race - conscious policies developed outside this de jure context .

these are policies voluntarily adopted by institutions to help racial minorities overcome the effects of their earlier exclusion .

and unlike the measures ordered by the courts to right the wrongs of de jure segregation , these policies are strictly voluntary , with their legality consequently turning on constitutional considerations unlike those involved in the de jure context .

"affirmative action" in this more familiar , voluntary sense has also been among the most contentious subjects in constitutional law .

in the forty years since regents of the university of california v. bakke , when the court first addressed those programs' constitutionality , the justices have divided sharply over when or whether such programs can survive constitutional scrutiny .

and a major point of disagreement among the justices — lingering to this day — is how strictly to review those policies and what the government or other state entity must do to justify its use of "benign" racial classifications .

in recent decisions , the court has reviewed such classifications under a seemingly "elastic" regime of strict scrutiny , accepting those classifications only where they have been narrowly tailored to serve compelling government interests .

strict scrutiny may typically be fatal in fact , but affirmative action policies in higher education have been a notable exception .

partly this has to do with the equal protection clause itself , and the often crucial difference that a particular context makes in deciding cases under that "broad provision[]. .

and for several justices the context of affirmative action , involving the arguably "benign" use of race , has seemed particularly distinctive .

yet , despite this contextual difference , the court has made it clear that its scrutiny of race - conscious admission policies is still every bit as strict .

or , as justice kennedy put the point in the first fisher case , even though "[s]trict scrutiny must not be 'strict in theory , but fatal in fact,'" it must also "not be strict in theory but feeble in fact. .

this seeming tension — between the strictness of the court's scrutiny and its approval of race - conscious admissions policies — has led the court to adjust its framework for scrutinizing similar policies over the years .

and since bakke that framework appears to have shifted in two significant respects , corresponding to each of the two prongs of strict scrutiny .

first , the court now requires public universities that adopt affirmative action admissions policies to explain in increasingly "concrete and precise" terms what diversity - related educational goals those policies serve and why the university has chosen to pursue them .

anything less , the court has held , would fail to present an interest sufficiently compelling under strict scrutiny .

second , the court also now expects universities to prove that their policies achieve those "concrete and precise goals" in an appropriately "flexible" way , as most clearly exemplified by the harvard plan that justice powell singled out in bakke .

that model has yielded "five hallmarks" of an appropriately tailored affirmative action policy , criteria that have since guided lower courts in assessing other affirmative action plans .

race has come to play two major doctrinal roles in higher education today , mirroring the two senses of "affirmative action" discussed in this report: the mandatory role , rooted in the affirmative obligation states have to eliminate the vestiges of de jure segregation , and the voluntary role , particularly in admissions decisions at selective colleges and universities .

in the context of higher education , the court has so far considered these two forms of "affirmative action" only in relation to public universities , and then primarily as a matter of constitutional law , under the fourteenth amendment's equal protection clause .

but many of those cases have also involved claims brought under title vi of the civil rights act of 1964 ( title vi or the act ) .

and while the court has read title vi's protections to overlap with the equal protection clause , congress still has a significant say over the substantive scope of title vi as well as its enforcement .

race has come to play two major doctrinal roles in higher education today , reflecting the two senses of "affirmative action" discussed in this report .

"affirmative action" in its original sense grew out of the affirmative obligation imposed on the states by the equal protection clause to eliminate the vestiges of de jure segregation from their public schools .

and in that sense , "affirmative action" involves the mandatory use of race - conscious measures in higher education to right the enduring wrongs of state - sanctioned segregation .

but "affirmative action" has also come to refer to race - conscious policies outside this de jure context — policies voluntarily adopted by institutions to help racial minorities overcome the effects of their earlier exclusion .

in higher education , none has been more salient — or stirred more debate — than the race - conscious admissions policies that colleges and universities across the country have used to diversify their student bodies .

thus far , remedial measures addressing de jure segregation , and voluntary measures designed to promote student - body diversity , have been the only race - conscious measures that the court has approved under the equal protection clause .

and both remain areas of active litigation and administrative enforcement .

over the years , however , the court has made it clear that it will subject voluntary "affirmative action" policies to especially close scrutiny , approving them only when they can be shown to be narrowly tailored to serve compelling educational goals .

it has approved such polices twice already , most recently in 2016 .

still , several justices have suggested that the rationales supporting these voluntary race - conscious measures will one day run out .

but for the time being , at least , these two lines of authority nevertheless provide a place for affirmative action in higher education today .

this authority , however , leaves questions as of yet unexplored .

it appears to be an open question , for example , whether a public institution of higher education can cite its own history of intentional exclusion , or else its "past discrimination," as a basis for adopting a race - conscious admissions policy , among other measures .

whether — and how — the courts might assess such untested arguments would likely turn on a range of factors , including the further development of the two lines of authority addressed in this report .

regardless of those and other possible developments , however , congress still has a significant say in in this area , through its authority not just to revise title vi but to oversee the act's enforcement .

