the emergency food assistance program ( tefap ; previously the temporary emergency food assistance program ) provides federally purchased commodities and a smaller amount of cash support to food banks , food pantries , soup kitchens , shelters , and other types of emergency feeding organizations serving low - income households and individuals .

commodities include fruits , vegetables , meats , and grains , among other foods .

in addition to serving needy individuals , tefap's domestic commodity purchases support the agricultural economy by reducing supply on the market , thereby increasing food prices .

tefap is administered by the u.s. department of agriculture's food and nutrition service ( usda - fns ) .

tefap was established under the emergency food assistance act of 1983 in an effort to dispose of government - held agricultural surpluses and alleviate hunger in the wake of a recession and declining food stamp benefits .

since then , tefap has evolved into a permanent program with mandatory , annually appropriated funding that operates in all 50 states , the district of columbia , and several u.s. territories .

the program was most recently reauthorized by the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) and has been included in farm bill reauthorization efforts in the 115 th congress .

at the federal level , tefap is administered by usda - fns in collaboration with usda's purchasing agencies , the agricultural marketing service ( ams ) and commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) .

at the state level , tefap is administered by a "state distributing agency" designated by the governor or state legislature: generally the state department of health and human services , agriculture , or education .

federal commodities and funds may flow through the state or directly to feeding organizations ( called "recipient agencies" ) based on how the state agency structures the program .

states will often task food banks with processing and distributing food to local feeding organizations .

food banks typically operate regional warehouses and distribute food to other organizations rather than to households directly .

figure 1 depicts the flow of commodities and funds through tefap .

tefap is part of a larger web of food assistance programs .

some of these programs provide cash assistance while others primarily distribute food .

tefap foods may reach individuals who do not qualify for other food assistance programs or supplement the assistance that individuals receive through other programs .

with nearly $354 million in appropriated funding in fy2018 , tefap is the largest source of federal support for emergency feeding organizations .

other related federal programs include the federal emergency management agency's ( fema's ) emergency food and shelter program , funded at $120 million in fy2018 , which , among its other services for homeless individuals , provides food through shelters , food banks , and food pantries .

in addition , usda's commodity supplemental food program , funded at $238 million in fy2018 , distributes monthly food packages to low - income elderly individuals through local organizations , which can include food banks and pantries .

this report begins by describing the population using emergency food assistance .

it goes on to discuss the tefap program , including its administration at the federal , state , and local levels , eligibility rules , and funding structure .

the report concludes by summarizing tefap's role in disaster response and recent reauthorization efforts .

appendix a lists tefap expenditures from the program's inception in 1983 to present ; appendix b provides a brief legislative history of tefap ; and appendix c lists tefap funding by state .

according to an analysis of current population survey ( cps ) data by usda's economic research service ( ers ) , an estimated 5.9 million households ( 4.7% ) utilized food pantries ( see figure 2 ) and at least 726,000 households ( 0.6% ) utilized soup kitchens in 2017 .

however , this is likely an underestimate of the population using emergency food assistance because the sample did not include certain households over 185% of poverty and the cps does not fully capture households who are homeless or in tenuous housing arrangements .

for comparison , a survey by feeding america , a nonprofit membership and advocacy organization , estimated that approximately 15.5 million households accessed its network of feeding organizations in 2013 ( the same year , ers estimated that 6.9 million households used food pantries and soup kitchens ) .

the feeding america network represents a large segment of emergency feeding organizations nationwide .

data on the number of tefap recipients specifically are not available , in part because tefap commodities are mixed in with other commodities provided by emergency feeding organizations and because of "the transient nature of participation. .

under broad federal guidelines , states set eligibility rules for individuals and households participating in tefap .

eligibility rules differ for organizations distributing commodities directly to households ( eg , food pantries ) and organizations providing prepared meals ( eg , soup kitchens ) .

states must develop income - based standards for households receiving foods directly , but cannot set such standards for individuals receiving prepared meals .

however , organizations serving prepared meals must serve predominantly needy persons , and states "may establish a higher standard than 'predominantly' and may determine whether organizations meet the applicable standard by considering socioeconomic data of the area in which the organization is located , or from which it draws its clientele. .

income eligibility rules for households receiving tefap foods directly vary by state .

many states limit income eligibility to household incomes at or below 185% of poverty .

some states also confer household eligibility based on participation in other federal and state programs ( "categorical eligibility" ) .

states may also create other eligibility rules for households' receipt of tefap foods , such as requiring identification or proof of residency within the state .

however , according to federal regulations , length of residency cannot be a criterion .

federal assistance through tefap is primarily provided in the form of usda - purchased domestic agricultural products ( "usda foods" ) .

a smaller amount of assistance is provided in the form of cash support for administrative and distribution costs .

roughly half of the funding for tefap's commodities is an appropriated entitlement ( "entitlement" commodities ) , meaning that the authorizing law sets the level of spending but an annual appropriation is needed to provide funding .

the other half of tefap's commodity funding is not included in the tefap appropriation and is instead provided by separate usda budget authority .

these funds are used by usda for "bonus" commodity purchases for the program throughout the year .

tefap's administrative funds are discretionary spending , requiring an annual appropriation .

in fy2018 , the enacted appropriation provided $289.5 million for entitlement commodities and $64.4 million for administrative costs .

appropriations for tefap's entitlement commodities were contained in the snap account and appropriations for administrative costs were contained in the commodity assistance program ( cap ) account .

in fy2017 ( the most recent year with complete data ) , usda purchased and distributed $268.6 million worth of bonus commodities for tefap .

states have the authority to distribute existing inventories of usda foods to disaster relief organizations when the president issues a disaster declaration .

this includes foods from tefap inventories and other food assistance programs such as the national school lunch program .

for example , foods intended for tefap were used for disaster response in florida , texas , and puerto rico following hurricanes irma , harvey , and maria in 2017 .

tefap foods used for disaster assistance are replenished by usda , so the overall level of commodities in the program is not affected and program operations continue in the aftermath of a disaster .

at times , congress may appropriate additional funds for tefap for the purposes of disaster relief .

recently , the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-123 ) provided $24 million in supplemental funding for tefap commodities and administrative funds to jurisdictions that received a major disaster or emergency declaration related to the consequences of hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria or wildfires in 2017 .

the house - and senate - passed 2018 farm bills ( two versions of h.r .

2 ) include tefap provisions .

both bills would extend tefap's $250 million ( plus inflation adjustment ) in mandatory funding for entitlement commodities through 2023 .

both bills would also continue the additional mandatory funding for entitlement commodities provided by the 2014 farm bill — the house bill ( §4032 ) to a greater extent than the senate bill ( §4115 ) .

in addition , both bills would authorize new aspects of tefap , taking similar but not identical approaches to incorporating new donated foods and reducing food waste .

the house bill would establish a "farm - to - food - bank fund" where , of the tefap entitlement commodity funds provided , usda would be required to distribute $20 million for states or food banks to procure excess fresh fruits and vegetables grown in the state or surrounding regions for distribution to recipient agencies .

meanwhile , the senate bill would establish "projects to harvest , process , and package donated commodities. .

this would provide $4 million in mandatory funding for each of fy2019-fy2023 for states and recipient agencies to harvest , process , or package "commodities donated by agricultural producers , processors , or distributors for use by emergency feeding organizations. .

federal funds may not exceed 50% of the cost of the projects .

the senate bill would also require state agencies to include , in their tefap state plans , a plan to provide emergency feeding organizations or recipient agencies with an opportunity to provide input on commodity preferences and needs .

it would also require the secretary to issue guidance outlining best practices to minimize food waste of commodities donated by non - usda entities .

finally , the bill would reauthorize discretionary funding of $15 million annually for tefap infrastructure grants through fy2023 .

appendix a. tefap expenditures , fy1983-fy2017 appendix b .

legislative history of tefap legislative history , 1981 to 2001 1980s .

tefap began in 1981-82 as a temporary expedient designed to dispose of stockpiles of government - held food commodities .

establishment of tefap occurred in the aftermath of noticeable reductions in the coverage of and benefits provided by federal food assistance programs ( eg , food stamps , school meal programs ) legislated in 1981 and 1982 , and in the midst of an economic recession and concern over hunger and homelessness .

the reagan administration began distribution of excess federally held food commodities in 1981-1982 .

these commodities , often termed "bonus" commodities , were in excess of those needed to fulfill other domestic and international federal commitments to provide food commodities ( eg , to schools operating school meal programs ) .

in 1983 , congress followed up with legislative authority that created what was known for more than a decade as the temporary emergency food assistance program ( tefap ) , as well as funding for grants to help with distribution costs .

establishment of tefap helped reduce federal commodity stocks ( and storage costs associated with holding them ) , provided an alternative source of food assistance for low - income individuals , and supported an expanding network of emergency food aid providers that also drew food and other resources from many nongovernmental sources .

in tefap's early years , the only significant federal expenditures involved were appropriations for the grants supporting providers' distribution costs ; the bonus commodities that were provided were acquired under separate usda programs to support the agricultural economy .

however , when commodity holdings began to drop substantially in the late 1980s because of changes in agricultural policies and the economy , congress established the practice of providing federal funds to buy food commodities specifically for donation through tefap ( in addition to continuing support for cash grants for distribution costs ) .

1988-1990 .

in 1988 , after the administration indicated plans to phase out tefap because of the lack of commodity inventories , congress mandated funding ( starting at $120 million for fy1989 ) in the hunger prevention act of 1988 to buy commodities for distribution through tefap , thereby "entitling" the program to a minimum level of support regardless of the level of federal commodity holdings .

the law also created a separate mandatory program to buy commodities for soup kitchens and other organizations not receiving tefap commodities ( mandating funding starting at $40 million for fy1989 ) .

while some soup kitchens and other entities could receive federal food donations through a small separate initiative to help charitable organizations and others could participate as local tefap providers , the separate program was established out of a concern that most commodities for emergency feeding were going to local agencies that distributed food packages directly to individuals and families ( eg , food pantries ) , rather than to shelters , soup kitchens , and other providers serving meals in congregate settings .

two years later , the 1990 omnibus farm bill made commodity and cash - grant funding authority for tefap and the soup kitchen program "discretionary" — that is , expenditures on commodities and distribution - cost grants were made dependent on annual appropriations decisions , not "mandated" by the authorizing law entitling the program to a specific minimum funding level .

1990s .

although the authorizing law for tefap , the emergency food assistance act ( efa ) of 1983 , has been amended a number of times and the word "temporary" has been dropped from the program's official title , perhaps the most significant changes since 1988 were made in 1996 .

the 1996 farm bill ( p.l .

104-127 ) extended the discretionary authority to appropriate money for commodities and distribution - cost grants for tefap and soup kitchen programs through fy2002 .

but , more significantly , the subsequent 1996 welfare reform law ( the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act ; p.l .

104-193 ) changed how these federal efforts are structured and funded .

the welfare reform law ( 1 ) consolidated tefap and the soup kitchen program in one statute ( the efa ) so that states could get a single tefap grant of commodities and distribution - cost funds for all types of emergency feeding organizations and ( 2 ) mandated funding of $100 million a year ( through fy2002 ) to purchase food commodities for the program .

this was in addition to any commodities that might be bought with money appropriated under discretionary authority in the efa and any bonus commodities that might be made available at usda's discretion .

this second change was intended to entitle the program to a minimum level of commodity support when regularly appropriated money is not made available to buy commodities or excess federal commodity holdings for tefap distribution are minimal or nonexistent .

it was accomplished through an amendment to the food stamp act ( now , the food and nutrition act ) effectively setting aside $100 million a year in "entitlement" appropriations under the act to purchase tefap commodities .

as a result , the majority of funding for tefap ( i.e. , for commodity purchases ) typically is now made available under the aegis of the food and nutrition act appropriation unless congress chooses to appropriate additional money for commodities under authority provided in the efa .

the minority of funding — funds for administrative and distribution costs — is appropriated under the authority of the efa .

appendix c. tefap funding by stat .

