t he consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) was enacted on march 23 , 2018 .

this omnibus bill included appropriations for the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , of which usda's domestic food assistance is a part .

prior to its enactment , the government had continued to operate for the first six months of the fiscal year under continuing resolutions ( crs ) .

this report focuses on usda's domestic food assistance programs ; their funding ; and , in some instances , policy changes provided by the enacted fy2018 appropriations law .

usda's domestic food assistance programs include the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , formerly the food stamp program ) , special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children ( wic ) , and the child nutrition programs ( such as the national school lunch program ) .

the domestic food assistance funding is , for the most part , administered by usda's food and nutrition service ( fns ) .

crs report r45128 , agriculture and related agencies: fy2018 appropriations provides an overview of the entire fy2018 agriculture and related agencies appropriations law as well as a review of the reported bills and crs preceding its enactment .

with its focus on appropriations , this report discusses programs' eligibility requirements and operations minimally .

see crs report r42353 , domestic food assistance: summary of programs for more background .

domestic food assistance — snap and child nutrition programs in the mandatory spending accounts , and wic and other programs in the discretionary spending accounts — represents over two - thirds of the fy2018 agriculture appropriations act ( figure 1 ) .

the federal budget process treats discretionary and mandatory spending differently .

discretionary spending is controlled by annual appropriations acts and receives most of the attention during the appropriations process .

the annual budget resolution process sets spending limits for discretionary appropriations .

agency operations ( salaries and expenses ) and many grant programs are discretionary .

mandatory spending — though carried in the appropriation — is controlled by budget rules during the authorization process .

appropriations acts then provide funding to match the parameters required by the mandatory programs' authorizing laws .

for the domestic food assistance programs , these laws are typically reauthorized in farm bill and child nutrition reauthorizations .

domestic food assistance funding ( table 1 ) largely consists of open - ended , appropriated mandatory programs — that is , it varies with program participation ( and in some cases inflation ) under the terms of the underlying authorization law .

the largest mandatory programs include snap and the child nutrition programs ( including the national school lunch program and school breakfast program ) .

though their funding levels are dictated by the authorizing law , in most cases appropriations are needed to make funds available .

the three largest discretionary budget items are wic , the commodity supplemental food program ( csfp ) , and federal nutrition program administration .

the enacted fy2018 appropriation would provide nearly $105 billion for domestic food assistance ( table 1 ) .

this is a decrease of approximately $3.2 billion from fy2017 .

declining participation in snap is responsible for most of the difference .

over 95% of the fy2018 appropriations are for mandatory spending .

table 1 summarizes funding for the domestic food assistance programs , comparing fy2018 levels to those of prior years .

in addition to the accounts' appropriations language , the enacted appropriation's general provisions include additional funding , rescissions , and / or policy changes .

these are summarized in this report .

domestic food assistance programs also receive funds from sources other than appropriations: usda provides commodity foods to the child nutrition programs using funds other than those in the child nutrition account .

these purchases are financed through post - transfer "section 32" funds .

for example , about $465 million out of a total of $1.9 billion in entitlement commodity support for the national school lunch program in fy2017 came from outside the child nutrition account .

the fresh fruit and vegetable program ( ffvp ) for selected elementary schools nationwide is financed with permanent , mandatory funding .

the underlying law ( section 19 of the richard b. russell national school lunch act ) provides funds at the beginning of every school year ( july ) .

in fy2017 and prior years , appropriations laws have delayed a portion of the funds ( generally $125 million ) to the start of the next fiscal year ( october 1 ) .

in the fy2018 appropriations law , this delay was not included , so for fy2018 usda received both the full amount for the fiscal year ( $172 million ) on july 1 , 2018 , and $125 million that fy2017 appropriations had delayed until october 1 , 2017 .

therefore , funding for ffvp in fy2018 is higher than in previous fiscal years .

the food service management institute ( technical assistance to child nutrition providers , also known as the institute of child nutrition ) is funded through a permanent annual appropriation of $5 million .

the senior farmers' market nutrition program receives nearly $21 million of mandatory funding per year ( fy2002-fy2018 ) outside of the regular appropriations process .

