exposure to ozone ( often referred to as "smog" ) , regardless of where that ozone originates , has been linked to negative human health effects , including respiratory ailments and premature death .

children , the elderly , and persons with respiratory illnesses are particularly susceptible to adverse health impacts from ozone exposure .

epa estimates that ozone exposure was responsible for more than 15,000 premature deaths in the united states in 2007 based on 2006-2008 average ambient ozone concentrations .

ozone has also been linked to plant damage and decreases in crop yield .

concentrations of ozone at the ground level , originally considered a local issue , is increasingly recognized as a global challenge .

ozone is not emitted directly but is formed in the atmosphere from chemical reactions of nitrogen oxides ( no x ) with volatile organic compounds ( vocs , a type of hydrocarbon ) in the presence of sunlight .

no x and vocs are known as "precursor" emissions , and their relative contributions to the formation of ozone depends on a number of factors , including weather conditions and concentrations of other pollutants .

the lifetime of ozone in the atmosphere ranges from hours to weeks , providing time — under the right conditions — for pollution emitted in one location to affect the health and welfare of populations far downwind ( see figure 2 ) .

while local emissions of ozone precursors are still the dominant source of ozone in many areas , state and local air quality agencies face ozone pollution arising from sources outside of their jurisdictional control ( "background ozone" ) .

as will be described and discussed in this report , potential long - range transport of air pollutants presents a challenge to downwind communities .

it can also be an opportunity for cooperation among localities , states , and countries .

the clean air act ( caa ) directs the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) to establish national ambient air quality standards ( naaqs ) to protect public health ( primary standards ) and welfare ( secondary standards ) .

the law directs that "the attainment and maintenance of [primary standards] are requisite to protect the public health. .

while the standards are set to limit adverse impacts , epa acknowledges that these standards do not suggest that concentrations below these levels present zero risk .

the naaqs set limits for the concentrations in ambient air of six common "criteria" pollutants: lead , nitrogen oxides , sulfur dioxide , carbon monoxide , particulate matter , and ozone .

there is no evidence of a safe level of ozone exposure below which no adverse health effects occur .

however , uncertainty between exposure and health response increases at very low ozone concentrations — that is , below 20 parts per billion ( ppb ) .

air quality monitoring stations in the united states measure concentrations of the six criteria pollutants , and these measurements are used to determine whether locations meet the naaqs .

if a monitor measures concentrations above the standard for any of those six pollutants for an averaging time specified in the naaqs , the area around that monitor may face a "nonattainment" designation for that pollutant .

once designated nonattainment , the state containing that area must propose a plan to bring the area into attainment of the naaqs .

these state implementation plans ( sips ) require approval by epa .

state air quality regulators develop sips to attain naaqs for ambient air in their states , and they have jurisdiction only over the sources of emissions within their borders .

the levels of pollution flowing into nonattainment regions , generally referred to as "background pollution," may be making it more difficult for some areas of the united states to meet attainment .

congress recognized this challenge when it enacted the original caa , adding the "good neighbor provision," which addressed interstate transport of human - caused air pollution that contributes to nonattainment .

for detailed information about domestic air transport , see crs report r45299 , the clean air act's good neighbor provision: overview of interstate air pollution control , by kate c. shouse .

the caa also mandates epa to review the naaqs every five years and revise them as appropriate .

epa completed its most recent review of the ozone standard in 2015 , when it lowered the standard from 75 ppb to 70 ppb .

epa reported that it has begun the next ozone naaqs review and that it intends to complete it by 2020 .

the procedure for reviewing and setting the naaqs explicitly does not consider what sources contribute to total ozone , including background sources .

in 2018 , epa announced plans to streamline the naaqs review process and obtain clean air scientific advisory committee advice regarding background pollution and potential adverse effects from naaqs compliance strategies .

epa's "back - to - basics" memorandum described concerns that background levels of pollution pose a challenge to meeting naaqs standards .

the memorandum noted a call from certain state regulators for advice on how to treat background ozone , stating that "state environmental agencies have sought this advice , citing the 'absolute need for a valid source of information about background concentrations.' .

additionally , epa created a task force to develop "additional flexibilities for states to comply with the ozone standard. .

much of the focus of ozone transport and control has historically been on upwind domestic sources .

members of congress may have an interest in better understanding background ozone from natural and international sources , particularly as epa reviews the 2015 ozone standard .

contributions from sources of background ozone may become important as states with nonattainment areas develop sips that attempt to quantify these contributions and consider ways to address them .

to assist congress in understanding these issues , this report defines background ozone , focusing on natural and international sources , and describes what is currently known about these sources .

the report then goes on to discuss the limitations in the scientific community's understanding and options for deepening that understanding .

this report will discuss background air pollution primarily in the context of ground - level ozone .

as of 2018 , with the 2015 ozone standard set at 70 ppb , there are 52 areas in the united states designated "nonattainment" for ozone ( see figure 1 ) .

current research suggests that natural sources and sources outside the united states may contribute to total ozone in those areas at certain times .

many of the issues discussed here are not unique to ozone , however , and may apply to other pollutants covered by naaqs , and any potential actions taken to understand or reduce background ozone may also reduce background concentrations of other pollutants .

this report deals exclusively with ozone measured at ground level and its adverse health and material effects .

ozone transport 101 and figure 2 provide additional information about ozone in different layers of the atmosphere and how each layer may interact with , or contribute to , ozone at ground level .

the contribution of background ozone to total local ozone concentrations varies from location to location , day to day , and even hour to hour .

these variations are driven both by changes in pollutant emissions from sources and by changing weather patterns that influence the chemistry and physical transport of the pollutants .

there is also uncertainty associated with measuring or estimating these driving forces behind background ozone contributions .

as mentioned , estimates of source contributions to background ozone rely on computer models that simulate atmospheric chemistry and transport and the resulting pollution .

these models rely on large datasets of emissions inventories and meteorological data , both with detailed hourly and location - specific data .

these input data are often not available at the temporal and spatial resolution needed , and so estimates and / or simplifications must be made , which increases uncertainty .

atmospheric measurements of ozone concentrations are then compared to model output to evaluate how well the model is performing .

however , measurement data of the pollutants being modeled are also limited , which increases the challenge associated with evaluating the performance of the model in capturing ozone formation and movement .

modeling studies estimating background ozone and source attribution often present results as seasonal averages or represent time periods that may not be of specific use to regulators .

see text box "pollution exposure averaging metrics" for additional information about averaging metrics .

retrospective studies face all the challenges mentioned .

forecasting studies face the additional challenge of attempting to model the future based on historical patterns and current conditions , adding another level of uncertainty .

according to epa , no x emissions from electricity generating units have decreased 81% nationally compared to 1990 levels due in part to the acid rain program and ozone transport rules .

while these reductions have resulted in total ozone decreases across most of the united states , models suggest that temperature increases in many areas of the united states during that same time frame have negated what would have been additional ozone benefits .

decreasing trends in total ozone concentrations measured at regulatory monitors between 1990 and 2010 generally occur in the eastern united states .

many western monitors do not show similar trends in total ozone over the same time period despite similar reductions in no x from the power sector and individual personal vehicles .

the lack of a decreasing ozone trend at many monitors in the west could be due to a number of causes: increasing seasonal average temperatures , an increase in incidents of fire since 1986 , emissions from oil and gas development , increasing contributions from international transport of air pollution , and increasing global methane concentrations .

according to the 2017 u.s. national climate assessment , on average since 1986 in the united states , the number of wildfires and the burn duration have both quadrupled .

the number of acres burned has increased six - fold , compared to 1970 to 1986 .

the report also indicates that total no x emissions from fire events are expected to increase with fire temperature , duration , and area burned .

figure 3 shows the annual count , and total area burned of all wildfires larger than 1,000 acres from 1984 through 2015 .

while emission inventories from asia are highly uncertain — and outdated in some modeling cases — several sources of data suggest that asian emissions , and potentially their impact on u.s. air quality , have peaked .

projections of fossil fuel combustion in asian countries suggest uncertainty about peaking , although the chinese government recently announced a target of a 15% reduction in no x emissions by 2020 compared to 2015 emissions .

a review of measurements of baseline ozone taken at monitors along the western coast of north america show that , after two decades of increasing trends , ozone flowing into the continental united states from the west stopped increasing in the mid - 2000s and has begun to decrease .

however , since about 2000 , ozone levels measured at a rural site in alaska have been increasing , with the source suspected in part to be transport of east asian air .

several issues may arise for congressional deliberations with regard to background ozone pollution .

stakeholders suggest challenges with meeting the naaqs , in part due to the difficulty of reducing ozone in areas with potentially large contributions from background sources and in part due to lack of data availability to conduct demonstrations of those background contributions .

congress may seek to understand the progress of research on background ozone as epa revisits the naaqs for ozone .

epa released a state of the science background ozone white paper to stakeholders and requested feedback on major issues .

the house committee on science , space and technology revisited the issue when its subcommittee on environment held a hearing on background ozone on june 21 , 2018 .

the following four points summarize the opinions and policy and scientific challenges brought forth both by stakeholder responses to the epa white paper and by the testimony from invited stakeholders at the recent background ozone hearing: 1 .

some states , especially states in the western united states , have asserted that natural and non - u.s. sources of ozone and precursors have increased the ozone concentrations in their states .

2 .

current statutory and regulatory options to address natural and non - u.s. sources often require technical data , modeling , and analyses that may be cost prohibitive .

3 .

modeling results that attempt to quantify levels of contribution from sources are uncertain , and they represent historical , or average , impacts .

4 .

in most locations , especially urban locations , many studies ( including the whitepaper published by epa ) have shown that local sources contribute a large part to total local ozone .

most recently , the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit considered whether epa should take background ozone into account when setting naaqs .

the case has not been decided at the time this report was published .

a potential avenue for congress to address gaps in the scientific understanding of background ozone is through research and development .

therefore , congress may consider funding implications of the following recommendations , made by stakeholders in the scientific and regulatory communities , that are intended to improve the understanding of contributions from background ozone: international engagement and / or cooperation at the federal level and through research collaborations that may improve understanding of non - u.s. contributions to u.s. air quality and may increase cooperation for pollution reduction goals .

increased monitoring at ground level and at higher levels in the atmosphere , through state or federal regulatory air quality monitoring projects or research campaigns , to aid in analysis of background ozone trends and improve confidence in the performance of the models used to estimate background contributions .

additional research and development into model estimates of background ozone , representing additional weather patterns ( i.e. , el nino / la nina patterns can influence background ozone ) , and model simplification schemes to provide more information about the variability associated with background ozone contributions .

finally , congress may consider the role that methane plays in air quality .

methane is a precursor to ozone , and so methane emission reductions have been suggested as one option to reduce global background concentrations of ozone .

additionally , ozone itself is a strong greenhouse gas .

epa's review of the ozone naaqs is underway and set to be completed in 2020 , with background ozone contributions suggested as a topic to be addressed .

congress may conduct oversight as epa carries out this effort .

