telecommunication providers and technology companies around the world have been working together to research and develop new technology solutions to meet growing demands for mobile data from consumers and industrial users .

fifth - generation ( 5g ) mobile technologies represent the next iteration of mobile communications technologies that were designed to improve current ( eg , 3g , 4g ) mobile networks .

5g networks are expected to provide faster speeds , greater capacity , and the potential to support new features and services .

5g technologies were developed to accommodate the increasing demands for mobile data ( i.e. , more people using more data on more devices ) .

5g technologies are expected to serve current consumer demands and future applications ( eg , industrial internet of things , autonomous vehicles ) .

5g technologies are expected to yield significant consumer benefits ( eg , assisting the disabled , enabling telemedicine ) , industrial benefits ( eg , automated processes , increased operational efficiencies , data analytics ) , and economic benefits ( eg , new revenues , new jobs ) .

past experience has shown that companies first to market with new technologies capture the bulk of the revenues .

hence , companies around the world are racing to develop and deploy 5g technologies , and many countries ( eg , central governments ) , seeing potential for economic gain , are taking action to support 5g deployment .

this competition between companies and countries to lead 5g technologies and capture the bulk of the revenues is often called the "race to 5g. .

in the united states , congress has monitored the progress of 5g deployment , and the u.s. position in the race to 5g .

congress has made spectrum available for 5g use , and directed the federal government to identify additional spectrum for future 5g use .

congress has also streamlined processes for deploying 5g equipment ( also known as small cells ) on federal land ; additionally , in 2018 , legislation was introduced in the senate which would have streamlined processes for deploying 5g small cells .

to protect national security interests and to ensure the security of 5g networks , congress restricted federal agencies from purchasing certain foreign - made telecommunications equipment .

this report provides a background on mobile technologies , and addresses the race to 5g , focusing on three leading countries — the united states , china , and south korea .

this report discusses factors affecting 5g deployment , and u.s. actions to support 5g deployment , such as actions related to small cells and national security .

finally , this report discusses near - term policy considerations for congress related to the deployment of 5g networks , and future policy considerations , including the privacy and security of 5g networks and devices .

the first mobile phones appeared in the 1980s .

since then , mobile phone use has increased exponentially .

the number of smartphone users in the united states has grown from nearly 63 million in 2010 to an estimated 238 million in 2018 .

worldwide , there are an estimated 4.5 billion mobile phone users , 2.5 billion of which are smartphone users .

more people are using more data on more mobile devices ; as a result , demand for mobile data is rapidly increasing .

telecommunication companies continually invest in their networks to provide faster , more reliable service , expand the capacity of networks to meet growing demands for data , and support new technology uses .

approximately every 10 years , a new technology solution emerges from industry studies and research that offers vastly improved speeds , supports new features and functions , and creates new markets and new revenue for providers .

these technologies offer such significant improvements to networks and devices that they change the way people use mobile communications , and thus represent the next generation of mobile technology .

in mobile communications , there have been five generations of technology .

figure 1 provides an overview of the technologies .

first - generation ( 1g ) technologies brought consumers the first mobile phone .

the phone and the service were expensive , and the basic analog networks offered voice - only services , and limited coverage and capacity .

second - generation ( 2g ) technologies used digital networks , which supported voice and texting .

networks were expanded and phones were made more affordable , increasing adoption .

third - generation ( 3g ) technologies supported voice , data , and mobile access to the internet ( eg , email , videos ) .

smartphones were introduced , and people began using mobile phones as computers for business and entertainment , greatly increasing demand for data .

fourth - generation ( 4g ) technologies offered increased speeds , and true mobile broadband that could support music and video streaming , mobile applications , and online gaming .

providers offered unlimited data plans and mobile devices that could be used as hotspots to connect other devices to the network , further increasing demand for mobile data .

each generation was built to achieve certain levels of performance ( eg , certain levels of speed , higher capacity , added features ) .

to be called a "3g network" implied a specific network architecture and specific technologies were used , certain levels of speeds were offered , and new features were supported .

in earlier generations , companies and countries adopted different technical standards to achieve performance requirements .

in 3g and 4g , companies and countries began building networks to the same standards .

this enabled equipment to be used in many countries , enabled manufacturers to achieve economies of scale , and enabled carriers to speed deployment .

for example , for 4g , companies and countries adopted long - term evolution ( lte ) standards , which redefined the network architecture to offer greater speeds and capacity .

fifth - generation ( 5g ) networks utilize 5g standards , which use new technologies and deployment methods to provide faster speeds , greater capacity , and enhanced services .

5g networks are expected to meet the increasing demand for data from consumers , and to support new services .

5g was also designed to meet growing demands for data from industrial users , and to support the growing use of mobile communications technologies across multiple industries ( eg , crop management systems , public safety applications , new medical technologies ) .

during the deployment of 4g networks , u.s. companies took the lead in developing new technologies .

u.s. companies drove industry standards , brought products to market , gained first - mover advantage , and achieved significant economic gains for themselves and the united states .

analysts conclude that "u.s. leadership on 4g added nearly $100 billion to [the u.s.] economy and brought significant economic and consumer benefits. .

industry analysts predict 5g will generate new revenue for technology companies and for the countries where those companies are located .

for example , in a study commissioned by the cellular telecommunications and internet association ( ctia ) , ihs markit estimated that 5g could produce up to $12.3 trillion in global sales across multiple industries by 2035 .

in another analysis , accenture reports that u.s. telecommunication providers are expected to invest approximately $275 billion in 5g infrastructure , which could create up to 3 million new jobs in the united states and add up to $500 billion to the nation's gdp .

past experience has shown that companies that are first to market capture the bulk of the economic benefits from new technologies .

hence , companies around the world are racing to bring 5g products to markets .

technology companies ( eg , network equipment manufacturers , chip makers , smartphone manufacturers , and software companies ) are producing 5g equipment and devices for providers .

telecommunications providers are deploying 5g infrastructure and marketing new 5g products to gain domestic market share and increase revenues .

countries around the world ( i.e. , central governments ) are supporting 5g efforts to ensure their companies are first to deploy 5g products and services , and positioned to capture the bulk of the economic benefits from the new technology — to "win the race to 5g. .

there are several factors affecting all 5g deployments , including international decisions on standards and spectrum ; the management of spectrum ( eg , auctioning spectrum , reconfiguring users to accommodate 5g , establishing agreements to share spectrum ) ; the availability of 5g equipment and devices ; and the installation of small cells needed to provide 5g services .

on december 18 , 2017 , the trump administration released its first national security strategy ( nss ) .

in the context of the nss's broader discussion of "rejuvenating" domestic economic competitiveness as one pillar of u.s. national security , the administration identified the enhancement of american infrastructure as a priority action , to include "[improving] america's digital infrastructure by deploying a secure 5g capability nationwide. .

congress and other u.s. policymakers are faced with deciding how to address both interest in promoting u.s. competitiveness in the global race to 5g , and an efficient domestic 5g deployment .

congress may consider the role of the federal government in industrial policy and promotion , and the role of the federal government in domestic deployment of 5g technologies .

in the rollout of previous technologies , u.s. telecommunications companies invested in research and development , participated in international projects to test the technologies , contributed to standards , and planned business strategies .

this market - based approach sparked competition and innovation that gave the united states an edge in previous technologies .

for 5g , other countries ( i.e. , central governments ) have engaged in centralized planning and coordination with industry to gain a lead in the race to 5g .

congress may monitor u.s. progress on 5g deployment and technologies , consider whether there is a need for more planning and coordination with industry , and assess whether additional government involvement would help or hinder the efforts of u.s. companies in the global race to 5g .

in terms of domestic deployment , congress may be asked to consider the benefits and risks of 5g deployment .

nationally , 5g technologies are expected to create new revenues and new jobs .

5g technologies have also raised national security concerns , individual privacy concerns , and questions about how to assess the security of foreign - made equipment .

congress may consider policies that protect u.s. telecommunications networks , including policies that impose trade restrictions or economic sanctions on foreign technology providers , or policies limiting foreign participation in 5g build - outs .

congress may weigh how various policy approaches address threats to national security ( eg , threats to telecommunications networks , industrial systems , critical infrastructure , and government networks ; cybersecurity threats ; threats to privacy ) .

congress may also consider how trade policies may alter the ability of u.s. companies to deploy networks domestically , and to purchase and sell equipment abroad .

5g technologies are also expected to offer new services for consumers ( eg , telehealth to rural areas , new services for the disabled ) .

however , localities have raised concerns regarding the siting of 5g small cells ( eg , authorities to make decisions about public rights - of - way , fees , ensuring rural access , health and safety ) .

while some stakeholders are seeking u.s. government support to speed 5g deployment , others are calling on the u.s. government to assess 5g risks and concerns before deploying .

congress may consider how to weigh these competing interests and concerns .

congress may consider policies to allocate additional spectrum for future 5g use .

congress may weigh the spectrum needs of 5g and the spectrum needs of other users ( eg , other commercial , federal , and educational users ) to ensure essential users will have adequate access to the nation's spectrum .

congress may also consider future spectrum needs — spectrum needed for advanced 5g technologies , and industrial iot systems — when developing spectrum policies .

congress may consider policies related to the future use of 5g and iot devices .

as 5g and iot technologies are integrated into various industries and applied to everyday life , congress may consider new policies related to the privacy and security of data being transmitted across millions of iot devices and through 5g networks .

congress may consider policies implementing security measurements ( i.e. , best practices ) in devices , systems , and networks to ensure security of data .

to retain u.s. leadership in telecommunications technologies , congress may consider supporting or encouraging investment in research and development of new telecommunications technologies ( eg , iot applications , 6g technologies ) .

the challenge with new technologies is that while the free and open exchange of information ( eg , in the international standards process ) promotes innovation , it also presents risks ( eg , sharing intellectual capital ) .

as global standards emerge , and equipment is built to a common standard , companies around the world may use equipment and component parts from other countries .

policies and processes that assess and address security risks with 5g supply chains may enhance the security of u.s. telecommunications networks .

the deployment of 5g technologies is just beginning .

countries around the world are striving to be first to market with 5g technologies and services to capture the bulk of the economic benefits from this new technology .

in the united states , private industry is leading deployment efforts .

the u.s. government is supporting 5g deployment by identifying and allocating spectrum for 5g use and streamlining rules related to siting of 5g small cell .

however , there are factors that may hinder 5g deployment in the united states , including the complex spectrum allocation process , local resistance to small cell rules , and limitations on trade that may affect the availability of 5g equipment and devices .

development and deployment of 5g technologies are expected to extend through 2035 .

the 116 th congress may be asked to consider both issues related to the immediate deployment of 5g networks , and issues related to future use of 5g devices ( including iot devices ) .

policy decisions made now , at the start of the deployment , could affect the u.s. position in the race to 5g and the future use of 5g in the united states .

the 115 th congress considered several policies related to 5g technologies .

congress enacted two pieces of legislation related to 5g spectrum: the repack airwaves yielding better access for users of modern services act of 2018 ( ray baum's act of 2018 ) ( p.l .

115-141 , division p ) , was incorporated into the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 , which was enacted on march 23 , 2018 .

this act includes provisions that improve and accelerate the spectrum auction process .

the making opportunities for broadband investment and limiting excessive and needless obstacles to wireless ( mobile now ) act ( p.l .

115-141 , division p , title vi ) , which was also incorporated into the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( enacted on march 23 , 2018 ) , requires federal agencies to make decisions on applications and permit requests for placing wireless infrastructure on federal property in a timely and reasonable manner ; this act also directs the federal government to conduct assessments of spectrum in the 3 ghz band and in the millimeter wave frequencies to determine whether authorizing licensed or unlicensed wireless broadband services in those bands is feasible , and , if so , which frequencies are best suited for such operations .

the 115 th congress considered legislation to allocate additional spectrum for mobile communications , and to expand wireless services in rural areas: the advancing innovation and reinvigorating widespread access to viable electromagnetic spectrum ( airwaves ) act ( s. 1682 ) was introduced in the senate on august 1 , 2017 , and would have created a national pipeline of spectrum for commercial use , to incentivize industry to expand wireless services .

if passed , the bill would have required the federal government to identify additional spectrum for commercial licensed and unlicensed use ( including 5g ) , and to allocate 10% of the proceeds from the designated spectrums to expand wireless infrastructure in rural areas .

the bill was referred to the committee on commerce , science , and transportation , where there was no further action on the bill .

a related bill ( h.r .

4953 ) was introduced in the house on february 6 , 2018 , and referred to the committee on energy and commerce , subcommittee on communications and technology , where there was no further action on the bill .

some members introduced resolutions in support of 5g technologies and services: s.res .

242 and h.res .

521 introduced in august and september 2017 , respectively .

the resolutions would have expressed the sense that the united states should commit to modernizing infrastructure policies to meet demand for wireless broadband services , to increase access , quality , and affordability of broadband services , and to promote economic development and digital innovation throughout the united states .

if passed , the resolutions would have shown congressional support for the deployment of 5g technologies in the united states .

legislation was introduced to address the challenges of small site deployment: the streamlining the rapid evolution and modernization of leading - edge infrastructure necessary to enhance ( streamline ) small cell deployment act ( s. 3157 ) , introduced on june 28 , 2018 , would have set criteria for state and local review of cell siting applications , deadlines for approvals of applications , and restrictions on fees that state and local governments may charge .

the bill was referred to the committee on commerce , science , and transportation , where there was no further action on the bill .

four bills were introduced that addressed cybersecurity issues: the securing the internet of things act of 2017 or securing iot act of 2017 ( h.r .

1324 ) , introduced on march 2 , 2017 , would have required equipment using certain frequencies to meet new cybersecurity standards defined by the fcc and the national institute of standards and technology .

the state of modern application , research , and trends of iot act or smart iot act ( h.r .

6032 ) was introduced on june 7 , 2018 .

the bill would have directed the department of commerce to conduct a study on internet - connected devices industry in the united states .

this bill passed in the house on november 28 , 2018 ; the bill was received in the senate on november 29 , 2018 , where it was referred to the committee on commerce , science , and transportation ; there was no further action on the bill .

the interagency cybersecurity cooperation act ( h.r .

1340 ) introduced on march 2 , 2017 , would have required the fcc to create a new interagency committee to examine security reports related to telecommunications and produce recommendations for preventing and mitigating against attacks .

it would have also defined communications networks as "critical infrastructure," subject to national security requirements .

the bill was referred to the committee on energy and commerce , subcommittee on communications and technology and the committee on oversight and government reform where there was no further action on this bill .

the cyber security responsibility act ( h.r .

1335 ) would have required the fcc to issue rules for securing communications networks and define communications networks as "critical infrastructure. .

the bill was referred to the committee on energy and commerce , subcommittee on communications and technology ; there was no further action on this bill .

congress also addressed national security concerns related to telecommunications: the john s. mccain national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year ( fy ) 2019 ( p.l .

115-232 ) , enacted on august 13 , 2018 , prohibited the heads of federal agencies from procuring telecommunications equipment or services from huawei , zte corporation , and other companies linked to the government of china that could pose a counterintelligence and national security threat to the united states .

hearings held during the 115 th congress that have discussed 5g and related topics have included "race to 5g: exploring spectrum needs to maintain u.s .

global leadership," senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation , july 25 , 2018 .

"realizing the benefits of rural broadband: challenges and solutions," house committee on energy and commerce , subcommittee on communications and technology , july 17 , 2018 .

"oversight of the federal communications commission," house committee on energy and commerce , subcommittee on communications and technology , july 18 , 2018 .

"race to 5g and its potential to revolutionize american competitiveness," house committee on energy and commerce , subcommittee on communications and technology , november 16 , 2017 .

"cybersecurity of the internet of things," house committee on oversight and government reform , subcommittee on information technology , october 3 , 2017 .

