the international oil market has influenced u.s. domestic and foreign policy decisions for decades .

the united states plays a significant role in the world oil market , not only as the top consumer of crude oil and petroleum products , but also as the largest producer .

the u.s. energy information administration ( eia ) estimated that the united states surpassed russia and saudi arabia as the world's number one crude oil producer in 2018 .

u.s. production is at an all - time high as a result of technological advancements and policy .

despite the recent surge in u.s. oil production , the united states remained a net importer of oil in 2018 .

oil availability associates with energy independence and energy security more than any other fuel .

supply , demand , the strength of currencies , and other factors link crude oil to the world market to determine the price .

because the united states is a top consumer and producer of oil , it has the ability to influence this world market .

trade agreements , regulation , sanctions , and unpredictable events all contribute to the flow of oil in the world market .

congress may consider policies that affect the world oil market , including sanctions , alternative fuel standards , emission controls , use of electric vehicles , and protection of international trade routes .

this report provides an introduction to the u.s. and world oil markets , with an overview of supply and demand , price considerations , and trade flows .

the report also includes analysis on selected examples of international conditions that in the past have affected policy decisions in the united states .

this report does not focus on trade associated with the entire crude oil and petroleum product value chain , the history of imports and exports , or provide an in - depth country trade balance analysis .

the potential impacts of the world oil market on the climate and the environment are not within the scope of this report .

the united states has abundant reserves of various natural resources , including crude oil in both conventional and unconventional deposits , such as shale .

technological advancements and new policies have changed the outlook for oil production in the united states from perceived scarcity to abundance .

the united states , both the top oil producer and the world's greatest consumer of crude oil and petroleum products ( eg , gasoline ) , remains a net oil importer .

in general , the world oil market determines the price and supply of oil and petroleum products for u.s. consumers , which may impact policy decisions by congress .

in january 2019 , the world bank projected world gross domestic product growth of 2.9% in 2019 and 2.8% in 2020-2021 .

as developing economies grow , so too does their demand for fuel and consumer goods , including paints , lubricants , and plastics — many dependent on crude oil .

meanwhile , many countries are also trying to reduce greenhouse gas emissions , diversify their fuel mix , and enhance energy security and independence .

the world oil market historically follows the world economy as it grows or declines .

supply generally does not follow demand smoothly , and this results in price volatility .

for example , supply bottlenecks can constrain open trade , which can conflate prices and access .

the government of alberta instituted a crude oil curtailment policy in january 2019 , as crude producers faced export infrastructure bottlenecks .

the inability to export excess production had caused storage to increase to 35 million barrels of crude oil ( nearly double the historical amount ) for the canadian province .

further , prices declined during this period of overproduction to $11.43 / bbl from $58.49 .

in addition to economic growth or decline , the world oil supply is influenced by a number of drivers , including project investments , the price of oil , demand forecasts , and geopolitics .

oil producers attempt to match world demand projections by making new production investments and replacing exhausted or uncompetitive production sites .

while the oil market directly affects the economy , oil - related policy has the power to influence geopolitics and can be utilized as a tool to influence other countries .

oil policy can be influential in a number of ways , for instance as a response to or in anticipation of undesirable international behavior or as a means to bring balance and stability to an otherwise volatile market .

decisions about energy conservation , environmental protection , and protection of strategic resources can also affect a country's oil supply and demand .

the united states plays a multifaceted role in the world oil market , which may affect congress's policy decisions .

this report has reviewed select policy issues from the full suite of legislative measures that may influence the world oil market .

domestically , for example , congress could enact legislation to increase or reduce production by opening areas or restricting certain technologies .

furthermore , emissions controls and emissions - related policies could play a pivotal role in the world oil market .

for instance , the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-123 ) expanded the 45q tax credit from $10 to $35 per ton of carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) for use in enhanced oil recovery .

the 45q tax credit demonstrated an interest in utilizing co 2 emissions , while at the same time expanding oil production in the united states .

furthermore , oil tends to affect many other sectors of the economy and vice versa .

policy changes in one sector could have intended or unintended consequences for the oil market .

for instance , tariffs on steel could affect production transportation costs .

other major policy considerations could include international trade policies , infrastructure , diversification of transportation fuels , and funding in research and development .

