the federal pell grant program , authorized by title iv - a - 1 of the higher education act of 1965 , ( hea ; p.l .

89-329 ) , as amended , is the single largest source of federal grant aid supporting undergraduate students .

the program provided approximately $29 billion in aid to approximately 7.2 million undergraduate students in fy2017 .

pell grants are need - based aid that is intended to be the foundation for all federal need - based student aid awarded to undergraduates .

in award year 2015-2016 , pell grants represented 72% of all federal undergraduate grant aid ; 53% of federal , state , and institutional undergraduate need - based grant aid ; and 28% of total grant aid for undergraduates coming from federal , state , institutional , and private sources .

the discretionary statutory authority for the pell grant program was authorized through fy2017 .

the discretionary authorization was extended through fy2018 under the general education provisions act ( gepa ) , although the program has continued to receive appropriations .

hea also provides permanent mandatory program appropriations .

this report provides descriptions of key elements of the pell grant program and information on recipient demographics , award levels , award value , program costs , and program funding .

the first section of the report addresses how the program works and describes the basic process for awarding pell grants including the application process , student eligibility requirements , award rules and calculations , and the role of the institution of higher education ( ihe ) in the process .

this section is followed by sections on recipient characteristics and the role the program plays in relation to other student aid .

the report explains the complex pell grant funding streams and their implications .

finally , program costs and estimates are presented .

in addition , the appendices provide historical pell grant award amounts ( appendix a ) , pell grant recipient counts ( appendix b ) , recent and future program funding ( appendix c ) , surplus and shortfall levels ( appendix d ) , and acronyms commonly used in the report ( appendix e ) .

this section of the report provides an overview of the structure of the pell grant program and the process through which grants are made to students .

it describes student eligibility , underlying concepts and award rules for determining students' grants , and the role played by postsecondary institutions in the program .

briefly , the pell grant program provides grants ( i.e. , aid that does not have to be repaid ) to financially needy undergraduates .

to apply for a pell grant or any hea title iv student aid , students must complete and submit the free application for federal student aid ( fafsa ) , providing requested financial and other information .

when the fafsa is processed , the individual's expected family contribution ( efc ) is calculated .

the efc is the amount expected to be contributed by the student and the student's family toward postsecondary education expenses for the upcoming academic year .

after processing , each applicant receives a student aid record ( sar ) .

each institution of higher education ( ihe ) designated by the applicant on the fafsa receives an institutional student information record ( isir ) .

the sar and isir contain the information submitted on the fafsa and the individual's efc .

institutions that receive valid sars or valid isirs for eligible pell grant applicants are required to disburse pell grant funds to students who successfully enroll in approved coursework .

pell grants are portable aid , that is , the grant aid follows students to the eligible postsecondary education institutions in which they enroll .

in addition , the pell grant program is often referred to as a quasi - entitlement because for the most part eligible students receive the pell grant award level calculated for them without regard to available appropriations ( for more on program funding , see the " program funding " section ) .

the size of each student's grant is based , principally , on efc , the total maximum pell grant for the award year , and the student's enrollment rate , but may not exceed the student's cost of attendance .

this section provides descriptive statistics of pell grant recipients ( numbers and characteristics ) and the institutions that they attend .

the data may inform discussion regarding the extent to which the program achieves the policy goal of improving access to higher education for financially needy individuals .

the pell grant is intended to function as the foundation of federal need - based aid for financially needy undergraduates .

as described earlier , other financial aid received by a student is not taken into account in determining a student's pell grant .

this section explores the role pell grants and other sources of aid play in helping students meet postsecondary costs .

this section of the report reviews the latest pell grant program funding trends and reviews pell grant funding sources and procedures .

as a quasi entitlement that makes grant payments to eligible students who apply for aid and enroll in eligible programs notwithstanding the appropriation level available in any one year , the program may operate with a surplus or shortfall of discretionary funding .

funding provided for the pell grant program is exempt from sequestration , pursuant to provisions included in section 255 ( h ) of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 ( bbedca , title ii of p.l .

99-177 , as amended ) .

given the somewhat unique funding characteristics of this program , this section of the report explores funding concepts , funding levels , and insight into how shortfalls and surpluses of discretionary funding in the program have been addressed .

the pell grant program since approximately fy2008 has been funded through three funding streams .

a discretionary appropriation is the primary source of funds for the discretionary award amounts .

there are two mandatory funding streams .

the smaller mandatory funding stream augments the discretionary appropriations to fund the discretionary award level .

therefore , a portion of the discretionary award level is funded through mandatory appropriations .

a larger mandatory appropriation funds the mandatory add - on award amounts .

recent and historical discretionary maximum award levels and mandatory add - on award levels are shown in table 1 and appendix a , respectively .

appendix c presents the three distinct funding streams and enacting legislation since fy2008 .

grant payments are made to eligible students who apply for aid and enroll in eligible programs notwithstanding the prescribed appropriation levels in any one year in such a way that some liken the program to a quasi entitlement .

costs for the pell grant program are award year - specific and are primarily affected by the number of eligible students who apply for aid and enroll in eligible programs , the total maximum award amount , and award rules .

the number of eligible students may be affected by economic conditions and legislative changes to the federal need analysis methodology and award rules .

as discussed earlier , the total maximum award amount is determined by both the annual appropriations act and the hea .

other factors that contribute to changes in program costs include the cost of higher education .

the congressional budget office reports and estimates program costs at least annually .

table 7 provides a summary of current and future estimated pell grant program costs from ay2012-2013 through ay2021-2022 , as of april 2018 .

costs associated with the discretionary base maximum award and costs associated with the mandatory add - on award are specified .

table 7 shows that the total program cost has declined from ay2012-2013 to ay2016-2017 and is estimated to increase thereafter .

from ay2012-2013 to ay2015-2016 , the number of pell grant recipients decreased annually ( table 2 ) although the total maximum award amount increased annually since ay2013-2014 ( table a - 1 ) .

declining undergraduate enrollment in degree - granting postsecondary institutions from 28.2 million in ay2011-2012 to 26.3 million in ay2015-2016 is reflected in a reduction of pell grant recipients .

the decrease in the number of pell grant recipients from ay2012-2013 to ay2015-2016 , which is particularly evident in the decrease in costs related to the discretionary award level , outweighs the increase in the total maximum award , which is demonstrated in increased costs associated with mandatory award levels .

program costs after ay2016-2017 are estimated to increase ( table 7 ) .

the increase would primarily be a result of an estimated increase in the number of pell grant recipients and the awarding of year - round pell grants .

the cbo baseline does not account for any potential a change in the total maximum pell grant award after the ay2018-2019 discretionary maximum award increase included in the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) .

appendix a .

historical pell grant award amounts appendix b .

federal pell grant recipients , ay1973-1974 to ay2015-2016 appendix c. program funding: fy2008-fy2021 appendix d. annual and cumulative discretionary funding shortfalls and surpluses in the pell grant program , fy1973-fy2018 appendix e. glossary / acronym .

