s everal countries have placed tariffs on u.s. agricultural and food products in 2018 to retaliate against trade actions taken by the trump administration earlier in the year to protect u.s. aluminum and steel producers from imports and in response to china's intellectual property rights ( ipr ) and technology policies .

china , canada , mexico , the european union ( eu ) , and turkey have each placed tariffs on a range of u.s. agricultural and food products in response to the decision to levy tariffs on u.s. imports of steel and aluminum .

china has also imposed tariffs on additional u.s. agricultural products in retaliation against tariffs the united states imposed on chinese goods that were in response to concerns about china's treatment of ipr .

in total , the retaliatory tariffs imposed by the five trading partners apply to more than 800 u.s. agricultural and food products , including meats , grains , dairy products , specialty and horticultural crops , seafood , and alcohol .

the export value of the targeted u.s. agricultural products to the retaliating countries amounted to $26.9 billion in 2017 , representing 18% of the value of u.s. agricultural and food exports globally .

any loss of agricultural exports would be a concern , since about 20% of u.s. farm income stems from exports , according to the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

these retaliatory tariffs may adversely impact u.s. farmers , ranchers , and food producers by eroding the competitiveness of u.s. commodities in these important markets .

mexico , canada , china , and the eu are among the top five export markets for agricultural products in value terms .

increased tariffs on u.s. exports to those markets — even for a short period of time — could mean reduced sales for u.s. farmers , ranchers , and food producers .

should the tariffs remain in place for the long term , u.s. producers could lose market share as buyers seek new suppliers in other countries .

while the retaliating countries have placed tariffs on a wide range of u.s. products , this report focuses only on agricultural and food products .

on march 23 , 2018 , the trump administration applied a 25% tariff to all u.s. steel imports and a 10% tariff to all u.s. aluminum imports , citing an investigation under section 232 of the trade expansion act of 1962 that showed national security concerns ( see text box below ) .

canada , china , mexico , the eu , and turkey retaliated with tariffs on imports of u.s. agricultural and food products and other goods ( see table 1 ) .

india has proposed retaliatory tariffs on u.s. apples , almonds , walnuts , chickpeas , and lentils , but it has delayed implementation pending ongoing negotiations with the trump administration .

china also placed retaliatory tariffs on more than 800 u.s. agricultural and food products in response to u.s. tariffs on hundreds of chinese products stemming from the section 301 investigation into china's ipr policies .

china's first retaliatory tariff list in response to the section 301 trade actions targeted about 510 u.s. food and agricultural products and became effective on july 6 , 2018 .

an additional list of retaliatory tariffs on more than 360 u.s. food and agricultural products went into effect on september 24 , 2018 .

all told , across the five retaliating trading partners , retaliatory tariffs have targeted more than 800 u.s. agricultural and food products .

exports of those products to these trading partners amounted to $26.9 billion in 2017 , or about 18% of global u.s. agricultural and food product exports of $150.8 billion that year .

the retaliating countries are also some of the leading u.s. agricultural and food export markets .

canada is the leading export market by value for u.s. agricultural and food products , while china ranks second , mexico third , and the eu fifth .

while canada is forecast to remain the top export market for u.s. agricultural and food products by value in fy2019 , usda expects that china's rank will drop from second to fifth .

mexico , the eu , and japan are forecast to rank , respectively , as the second - , third - , and fourth - leading export markets in fy2019 , according to usda .

the targeted countries and the eu are retaliating largely in proportion to the total value of their exports that have been subjected to section 232 and section 301 tariff actions of the trump administration .

china , which is subject to the largest number of new tariffs , has countered by placing tariffs on almost all of its agricultural and food imports from the united states ( see figure 1 ) .

turkey , canada , and mexico have each levied tariffs on between 10% and 14% of u.s. agricultural and food exports .

thus far , the eu has fixed retaliatory tariffs on 8% of u.s. agricultural and food exports .

some of the retaliatory tariffs have been placed on u.s. products that have not been exported to the retaliating country for the past several years or have been exported in small amounts .

for example , china has put a 50% retaliatory tariff on u.s. watermelons , even though it did not import more than $1,000 of u.s. watermelons in 2016 or 2017 .

in other cases , the effects have the potential to be more significant , as the retaliating markets represent leading export markets for certain u.s. products that are subject to new tariffs .

for example , in 2017 china , canada , mexico , the eu , and turkey accounted for about 20% or more by value of u.s. exports of pork , soybeans , sorghum , cheese , apples , cherries , seafood , ginseng , and whiskey ( see figure 2 ) .

this section highlights some of the u.s. agricultural and food product exports subject to retaliatory tariffs .

on july 24 , 2018 , secretary of agriculture sonny perdue announced that usda would be taking several temporary actions to assist farmers in response to what the trump administration has called "unjustified retaliation. .

specifically , usda authorized up to $12 billion in financial assistance — referred to as the "trade aid" package — for certain agricultural commodities under section 5 of the commodity credit corporation charter act ( 15 u.s.c .

714c ) .

most of the money will go to those farm sectors most directly impacted by the trade retaliation — that is , corn , cotton , soybeans , sorghum , wheat , hogs , and dairy — but some funding will also be used for the purchase , distribution , and trade promotion of affected commodities .

usda estimates that approximately $9.6 billion would be distributed in mfp payments for corn , cotton , sorghum , soybeans , wheat , dairy , hogs , fresh sweet cherries , and shelled almonds , with over three - fourths ( $7.3 billion ) of direct payments provided to soybean producers .

it also plans to use $1.2 billion to purchase excess supplies of 29 different commodities .

another $200 million will be spent on trade promotion efforts similar to the existing market access and foreign market development programs .

those programs provide money to eligible groups to help develop foreign markets for various commodity and food products .

for details on the amounts for the payments and purchases under the trade aid package , see crs report r45310 , farm policy: usda's trade aid package .

many agricultural groups have expressed concerns about the retaliatory tariffs .

exports account for about 20% of u.s. farm income , according to usda , so u.s. farmers and ranchers have an interest in both maintaining and expanding export markets .

farm groups are concerned about the immediate loss of export sales and the prospect of losing access to markets , or losing market share , over the long term .

over time , importers may identify new suppliers for a given product , as china has done for soybeans .

compounding that problem are new trade deals that are being discussed by the countries retaliating against the united states .

the eu - canada free trade agreement ( fta ) went into force in 2017 , and the eu has finalized an fta with mexico .

mexico and canada are signatories to the comprehensive and progressive agreement for trans - pacific partnership .

if this fta goes into force , mexico and canada would have improved access to nine other pacific rim markets .

this means u.s. agricultural exports could face stiffer competition on its exports to mexico and canada .

the asa has expressed "extreme disappointment" over ustr's escalating tariffs on china that have led to retaliation on soybeans .

the nppc has stated that the retaliatory tariffs are "threatening the livelihoods of thousands of u.s. pig farmers. .

the u.s .

dairy export council has warned that the retaliatory tariffs that china and mexico have imposed could result in billions of dollars of lost sales for u.s. dairy producers .

farmers for free trade — a coalition led by former senators max baucus and richard lugar that advocates for free trade and opposes tariffs that injure farmers , ranchers , and rural communities — has run radio , print , and television ads in key markets across the country expressing concern about the administration's trade policies and the potential economic fallout they may have on u.s. agriculture .

while president trump and members of his administration have met with officials from many of the retaliating markets , including chinese president xi jinping and european commission president jean - claude junker , usda's trade aid package is the trump administration's short - term effort to ease the retaliatory tariffs on u.s. agricultural products .

a number of producer groups have indicated that the trade aid package is inadequate to compensate growers for lost export sales .

for example , western growers , an association that represents specialty crop producers , has stated that the $12 billion plan falls "substantially short" of what many producers affected by the retaliatory tariffs need .

the american farm bureau federation , the largest general farm organization , concluded that the package provides "some breathing room" for farmers and ranchers but added that it will likely only help producers through a few months .

in general , numerous farmer and rancher organizations have urged the administration to resolve the trade concerns that have led to tariff retaliation against u.s. agriculture and food products in order to facilitate the removal of these tariffs .

because of the broad scope of farm products subject to the retaliatory tariffs and the importance of some of the markets involved , many farmers and ranchers are likely to experience some negative effects , such as lower prices or potentially lost market opportunities for their products .

the trade aid package that usda has introduced to help producers mitigate the potential loss of exports due to the tariffs is a limited set of initiatives that are not designed to address potential longer - term downside consequences that may arise , such as lower commodity prices and reduced farm income from lower export sales .

some agriculture industry stakeholders have suggested that the potential effects of the retaliatory tariffs could be longer lasting , because they have created uncertainty about u.s. trade policy behavior and because u.s. actions have called into question the reliability of the united states as a trading partner .

several bills introduced in the 115 th congress in both the house and the senate would have provided more export promotion money and additional adjustment assistance to farmers affected by the retaliatory tariffs , though none passed .

legislation that sought to address the effects of the retaliatory tariffs on agriculture included the following : s. 3258 ( heitkamp ) and h.r .

6483 ( blunt / rochester ) would have provided trade adjustment assistance to farmers adversely affected by reduced exports resulting from retaliatory tariffs .

s. 3407 ( heitkamp ) and h.r .

6699 ( bustos ) would have required that any duties collected as part of the section 232 or section 301 tariffs on u.s. imports be provided to the foreign market development program , the market access program , and the technical assistance for specialty crops program .

as u.s. farmers and ranchers look to regain or expand existing markets and establish new ones , members of congress may consider engaging the administration through their oversight activities to identify actions that would facilitate additional sales of agricultural products in domestic and export markets and enhance the long - term economic vitality of u.s. food and agricultural interests .

