economic sanctions provide a range of tools congress and the president may use to seek to alter or deter the objectionable behavior of a foreign government , individual , or entity in furtherance of u.s. national security or foreign policy objectives .

scholars have broadly defined economic sanctions as "coercive economic measures taken against one or more countries [or individuals or entities] to force a change in policies , or at least to demonstrate a country's opinion about the other's policies. .

economic sanctions may include limits on trade , such as overall restrictions or restrictions on particular exports or imports ; the blocking of assets and interest in assets subject to u.s. jurisdiction ; limits on access to the u.s. financial system , including limiting or prohibiting transactions involving u.s. individuals and businesses ; and restrictions on private and government loans , investments , insurance , and underwriting .

sanctions also can include a denial of foreign assistance , government procurement contracts , and participation or support in international financial institutions .

sanctions that target third parties — those not engaged in the objectionable activity subject to sanctions but engaged with the individuals or entities that are — are popularly referred to as secondary sanctions .

secondary sanctions often are constructed to deter sanctions evasion , penalizing those that facilitate a means to avoid detection or that provide alternative access to finance .

the united states has applied a variety of sanctions in response to objectionable russian activities .

most russia - related sanctions , including most sanctions established by executive order ( see " role of the president ," below ) , do not target the russian state directly .

instead , they consist of designations of specific individuals , entities , and vessels on the specially designated nationals and blocked persons list ( sdn ) of the treasury department's office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) .

sanctions block the u.s. - based assets of those designated as sdns and generally prohibit u.s. individuals and entities from engaging in transactions with them .

in addition , the secretary of state , in consultation with the secretary of homeland security and attorney general , is tasked with denying entry into the united states or revoking visas granted to designated foreign nationals .

sanctions in response to russia's invasion of ukraine also consist of sectoral sanctions .

often , sectoral sanctions broadly apply to specific sectors of an economy .

in the case of russia - related sanctions , sectoral sanctions have a narrower meaning ; they apply to specific entities in russia's financial , energy , and defense sectors that ofac has identified for inclusion on the sectoral sanctions identifications ( ssi ) list .

these sectoral sanctions prohibit u.s. individuals and entities from engaging in specific kinds of transactions related to lending , investment , and / or trade with entities on the ssi list , but they permit other transactions .

another major category of russia - related sanctions consists of a presumption of denial to designated end users for export licenses .

the department of commerce's bureau of industry and security ( bis ) places entities subject to export restrictions on the entity list ( supplement no .

4 to part 744 of the export administration regulations ) .

the united states imposes sanctions on russia in accordance with several laws and executive orders .

in 2012 , the united states introduced a new sanctions regime on russia in response to human rights abuses .

in 2014 , the united states introduced an extensive new sanctions regime on russia in response to russia's invasion of ukraine .

in 2016 , the united states imposed sanctions on russian individuals and entities for election interference .

in 2017 , congress introduced and the president signed into law legislation that strengthened existing sanctions authorities and established several new sanctions in response to russia's invasion of ukraine , malicious cyber - enabled activities , human rights abuses , and corruption .

the united states also has imposed sanctions on russian individuals and entities in response to the use of a chemical weapon , weapons proliferation , trade with north korea in violation of u.n. security council requirements , support for the syrian government , transnational crime , and terrorism .

for an overview of russia - related sanctions authorities and designations , see appendix b .

the russian government has responded to u.s. and other sanctions by imposing a variety of retaliatory measures , also known as countersanctions .

the day the senate passed the sergei magnitsky act in december 2012 , the russian government announced new restrictions on imported beef , pork , and poultry that , within a few months , led to a major decline in u.s. meat imports to russia .

several days after president obama signed the act into law , the russian parliament voted to ban u.s. adoptions of russian children .

it also introduced a visa ban against u.s. citizens whom russia characterized as being involved in human rights violations or crimes against and persecution of russian citizens .

the day after ofac issued its first designations under the sergei magnitsky act in april 2013 , the russian government issued a list of u.s. citizens prohibited from entering russia .

russia also imposed countersanctions in response to ukraine - related sanctions .

these measures included additional travel prohibitions and a ban on the import of agricultural products from countries that had imposed sanctions on russia .

russia imposed countersanctions related to crieea in anticipation of the act being signed into law .

the day after congress passed the legislation in july 2017 , and while the bill awaited the president's signature , the russian government ordered a reduction of u.s. mission personnel in russia to no more than 455 , which it said was equal to the number of russian personnel in the united states .

it also suspended u.s. use of storage and resort facilities in moscow .

some observers viewed these measures as a response to crieea but also , belatedly , to the obama administration's december 2016 decision to declare certain russian diplomatic personnel persona non grata and to deny access to two russian government - owned compounds .

in response , on august 31 , 2017 , the trump administration closed russia's consulate general in san francisco , a chancery annex in washington , dc , and a consular annex that functioned as a trade office in new york city .

in march 2018 , in response to a nerve agent attack on british citizen and former russian military intelligence officer sergei skripal and his daughter , the trump administration expelled 60 russian diplomats and closed the russian consulate in seattle .

in response , russia expelled 60 u.s. diplomats and closed the u.s. consulate general in st. petersburg .

after the united states' imposition of new designations of russian government officials and politically connected billionaires and their holdings in april 2018 , president putin signed into law an act authorizing , but not requiring , restrictions related to trade with the united states and other unfriendly states , as well as foreign access to russian public procurement and privatization .

like the united states , the eu has imposed sanctions — or restrictive measures in eu parlance — against russia since 2014 for its annexation of ukraine's crimea region and its subsequent fostering of separatism in eastern ukraine .

the eu imposed ukraine - related sanctions largely in cooperation with the united states .

eu sanctions are similar , although not identical , to u.s. sanctions .

many in the eu welcomed efforts by congress in 2017 to ensure that the trump administration maintained u.s. sanctions on russia .

at the same time , new sanctions that congress introduced in crieea raised some concerns in europe about the continued alignment of u.s. - eu sanctions and cooperation on ukraine policy more broadly .

unlike the united states , the eu has not imposed sanctions on russian individuals or entities for actions related to human rights violations , malicious cyber activity , corruption , transnational crime , or support to syria or north korea .

however , the march 2018 nerve agent attack in the united kingdom on former russian intelligence officer sergei skripal and his daughter helped spur the eu to agree to a broad new sanctions regime targeting individuals and entities involved in the development and use of chemical weapons .

a degree of momentum also appears to be building within the eu for new eu - wide restrictive measures against people and organizations that carry out cyberattacks , as well as human rights violations .

imposing eu sanctions requires the unanimous agreement of all 28 eu member states .

most eu sanctions are imposed for a defined period of time ( usually six months or a year ) to incentivize change and provide the eu with flexibility to adjust the sanctions as warranted .

unanimity among eu member states also is required to renew ( i.e. , extend ) eu sanctions .

debates about the effectiveness of u.s. and other sanctions on russia continue in congress , in the administration , and among other stakeholders .

after more than four years of escalating sanctions , russia has not reversed its occupation and annexation of ukraine's crimea region , nor has it stopped fostering separatism in eastern ukraine .

on the contrary , it has extended military operations to the black sea and the azov sea bordering ukraine and russia .

the united states and its allies have documented multiple instances of russian cyber - enabled malicious activities .

they also have determined that russian agents used a lethal nerve agent to attack an opponent in the united kingdom .

in addition , russia remains an influential supporter of the syrian government .

nonetheless , many observers argue that sanctions help to restrain russia or that the imposition of sanctions is an appropriate foreign policy response regardless of immediate effect .

since the introduction of sanctions , multiple reports suggest russian government officials and their supporters pay close attention to sanctions developments and express concern about their real and potential impact .

observers also note that sanctions have led the russian government to make policy adjustments , including diverting resources to affected businesses and sectors .

there exists a wide range of options moving forward .

some argue it is necessary to introduce more sanctions on russia , including more comprehensive and / or more targeted sanctions .

others contend that the administration should first focus on fully implementing the range of existing sanctions authorized by law .

some observers stress the need to coordinate new sanctions with europeans and other allies .

others are skeptical that sanctions can produce desired changes in russian behavior , especially without also using other foreign policy tools .

some express concerns that sanctions , particularly those that are imposed unilaterally , hurt u.s. businesses and cede economic opportunities to firms in other countries .

in the 115 th congress , several bills were introduced to increase the use of sanctions to address russia's malign activities .

members of congress may continue to debate the establishment and implementation of u.s. sanctions on russia in the 116 th congress .

potential new sanctions on russia in legislation range widely .

in the 115 th congress , they included measures to expand the types of targeted individuals , entities , and sectors ( s. 3336 , h.r .

6437 , s. 2313 / h.r .

4884 , h.r .

5428 , h.r .

5216 ) ; expand the range of prohibited transactions , including with regard to russian sovereign debt ( s. 3336 , h.r .

6437 , s. 2313 / h.r .

4884 , h.r .

6423 , h.r .

5428 ) ; make mandatory previously discretionary secondary sanctions on russian pipeline investment ( s. 3229 , h.r .

6384 ) ; expand the scope of sanctions in response to malicious cyber - enabled activities ( h.r .

5576 / s. 3378 ) ; determine whether the government of russia supports acts of international terrorism ( which would expand sanctions on russia ) ( s. 3336 , s. 2780 , h.r .

6573 , h.r .

6475 ) ; and expand congressional review procedures to the sergei magnitsky act ( s. 3336 , s. 3275 ) .

appendix a .

legislative abbreviations and short titles caatsa: countering america's adversaries through sanctions act ( p.l .

115-44 ) cbw act: chemical and biological weapons control and warfare elimination act of 1991 ( p.l .

102-182 , title iii ; 22 u.s.c .

5601 et seq. ) .

crieea: countering russian influence in europe and eurasia act of 2017 , as amended ( p.l .

115-44 , title ii ; 22 u.s.c .

9501 et seq. ) .

global magnitsky act: global magnitsky human rights accountability act ( p.l .

114-328 , title xii , subtitle f ; 22 u.s.c .

2656 note ) ieepa: international emergency economic powers act ( p.l .

95-223 ; 50 u.s.c .

1701 ) inksna: iran , north korea , and syria nonproliferation act , as amended ( p.l .

106-178 , 50 u.s.c .

1701 note ) nea: national emergencies act ( p.l .

94-412 ; 50 u.s.c .

1621 ) sergei magnitsky act: the sergei magnitsky rule of law accountability act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-208 , title iv ; 22 u.s.c .

5811 note ) ssides: support for the sovereignty , integrity , democracy , and economic stability of ukraine act of 2014 , as amended ( p.l .

113-95 ; 22 u.s.c .

8901 et seq. ) .

ufsa: ukraine freedom support act of 2014 , as amended ( p.l .

113-272 ; 22 u.s.c .

8921 et seq. ) .

appendix b. u.s. sanctions on russia appendix c. u.s. and eu sectoral sanctions appendix d. russian firms and u.s. sanction .

