the pregnancy assistance fund ( paf ) seeks to improve the educational , health , and social outcomes for vulnerable individuals who are expectant or new parents and their children .

paf is administered by the office of adolescent health ( oah ) in the department of health and human services' ( hhs' ) office of the assistant secretary for health ( oash ) .

the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) established the program and provided $25 million in annual mandatory funding for a 10-year period from fy2010 through fy2019 .

paf funding is awarded competitively to the 50 states , district of columbia ( dc ) , u.s. territories , and tribal entities that apply successfully .

the grantees may use the funds for any of the following purposes: providing subgrants to institutions of higher education ( ihes ) , high schools , or community service providers to enable these subgrantees to establish , operate , or maintain pregnancy or parenting services for the expectant and parenting population ; providing , in partnership with the state attorney general's office , certain legal support , hotline , and other supportive services for women who experience domestic violence , sexual assault , or stalking while they are pregnant or parenting an infant ; and supporting , either directly or through a subgrantee , public awareness about paf services for the expectant and parenting population , including individuals who are victims of domestic violence and sexual violence .

through fy2018 , hhs has awarded paf funding to 30 states , dc , and 5 tribal entities .

generally , these grantees have provided paf subgrants to high schools , community service organizations , and ihes .

subgrantees reported most frequently using the funds to support case management , referrals to other supports , group workshops on specific topics ( eg , pregnancy prevention ) , and home visiting services .

congress may consider extending program funding beyond fy2019 , when mandatory spending authority lapses .

this report provides background to congress about the program's implementation .

it first discusses the history of paf's enactment , the challenges facing vulnerable expectant and new parents who are eligible for paf , and an overview of how program funding is distributed to meet those challenges consistent with the authorizing statute .

next , the report discusses selected program requirements .

data on participants and services provided in fy2016 are also presented , along with findings from an early evaluation showing the services to be effective in at least a limited context .

the report then discusses the role of paf in the context of other federal programs with certain overlapping or related goals , and it concludes with a brief discussion of considerations for congress if it chooses to extend the program .

hhs distributes paf funding on a competitive basis to address the vulnerabilities of the expectant and parenting populations and their children .

the 50 s tates , dc , territories , and tribal entities may apply for paf funding ( hereinafter , "state grantees" ) .

state grantees must specify how they intend to use the funds and identify the lead agency to administer such funds .

in the most recent cohort of grantees , the state public health department was the most frequently designated lead agency .

state departments of education or human services and other entities also served as lead agencies .

state grantees determine how to use their paf funding to serve the expectant and parenting population and their children within four purpose areas: providing subgrants to high schools and community service centers , providing subgrants to institutions of higher education ( ihes ) , partnering with offices of state attorneys general , and supporting public awareness activities , as provided either by state grantees directly or by their subgrantees and partners .

figure 1 shows how paf funding flows from the federal government to state grantees , and then on to subgrantees that directly support participants .

it also includes examples of the types of supports that have been provided with paf funding .

in general , these supports can be grouped as education , social services , health , or public awareness activities .

each purpose area specifies certain activities .

the activities are generally the same for the high schools / community service centers and ihes , and therefore are grouped together in the subsequent discussion .

 ( figure a - 1 summarizes the four purpose areas , the populations they target , and the activities supported in each of the categories. ) .

the paf statute and the program grant announcements include requirements for state grantees and subgrantees in carrying out activities under the paf program .

for the purposes of this section , "grantees" generally means applicants ; however , some of the requirements discussed apply only to applicants who were selected to receive paf funding .

through fy2018 , oah has awarded five rounds ( or "cohorts" ) of funding to 30 states , dc , and five tribes across these cohorts ( see figure 2 ) .

 ( table a - 1 lists each of the grantees for each cohort. ) .

funding levels have generally ranged from $380,000 to $1,500,000 annually , with a mean of approximately $1,200,000 .

the grant periods have ranged from 1 year ( cohort 4 , fy2017 ) to 4 years ( cohort 2 , fy2013-fy2016 ) .

hhs shortened the grant period for cohort 3 grantees from 5 years to 3 years .

hhs expects to provide funding for two to three additional grantees with fy2019 funding .

hhs has contracted with mathematica policy research , a social policy research organization , to conduct a process evaluation of how the paf program is carried out and an impact evaluation about the effectiveness of the program in shaping youth outcomes .

as discussed , the process evaluation provided background information on the design and implementation of the paf programs in the second and third cohorts .

the impact evaluation is measuring selected outcomes of paf participants in california and dc .

the outcomes vary depending on the site , and include those related to subsequent pregnancy , sexual risk behaviors , school engagement , educational attainment , or parenting skills .

findings are available for the program in dc , where paf - funded services were provided in nine high schools through a voluntary program known as new heights .

case coordinators from the program were embedded at the schools to provide ( 1 ) one - on - one case management to help youth meet their educational goals ; ( 2 ) weekly educational workshops held three times a week to provide supplemental education on relevant topics ; and ( 3 ) in - kind incentives that students earn when they attain personal goals and use for purchasing items such as maternity and baby supplies .

researchers found that teen mothers in the program improved in school engagement and credits earned per year compared to teen mothers who attended the high schools immediately before the program was introduced .

the participants were significantly more likely to have excused absences ( and significant less likely to have unexcused absences ) , to attend more days of school per semester , and to graduate .

because of its cross - cutting approach to meeting the needs of the expectant and parenting population , paf may overlap with activities of other programs serving the needs of broader populations .

paf can also play a role in referring expectant and parenting individuals to the other programs as appropriate , though the authorizing law does not reference these programs .

some examples of such programs in education , social services , and health are discussed in this section .

if congress considers reauthorizing the paf program beyond fy2019 , it may look to the impact evaluation discussed above to determine how well the program is meeting participants' needs .

early evidence indicates that the program may be helping to keep pregnant and parenting students in the district of columbia attending and graduating from high school .

additional findings are forthcoming , and could help to inform policymakers further about paf's efficacy .

relatedly , congress may also consider whether the program should play a role in building the evidence base for programming that supports participants .

in nearly all paf funding announcements , hhs has specified that grantees should provide services that are evidence - informed or evidence - based .

a study of paf grantees in the second and third cohorts found that nearly all grantees used evidence - based models , most commonly those for home visiting and parenting education ; however , some grantees reported challenges with finding programming more narrowly tailored to the expectant and parenting population , even among existing evidence - based models .

one potential reauthorization question is whether the paf statute should have more parameters for how the program is to be carried out .

as written , the statute requires each grantee to submit a report to hhs that includes information on subgrantee expenditures and performance , based on performance standards established by the grantee .

the law does not provide further directives about how subgrantees should be monitored , and whether subgrantees or grantees are to meet specified performance outcomes for individuals or the program more broadly .

while hhs has provided instructions about oversight via the grant announcements , these could change from one grant cycle to the next .

congress may consider whether the statute should have more explicit guidance about how hhs and grantees are to conduct oversight .

further , given the variety of services that can be provided in the program — from health and education supports to case management — congress might examine whether the program should have uniform definitions of service categories and whether hhs should establish criteria for determining whether grantees and subgrantees have met the goals of the program .

congress may also consider whether to establish guidelines for how the paf program should interact with other , similar federal programs .

as part of the process evaluation for the program , paf recipients reported that they have used assessments from other programs and have attempted to coordinate with other programs to avoid duplication .

in addition , some grantees reported in the process evaluation that they leveraged other public and private supports to bolster their paf programming .

examples include funding from a governor's infant mortality budget , state general funds , and training and technical assistance provided through other federal programs , such as the miechv program .

given the similarities with other federal programs , congress might consider whether the paf law should require or encourage more formal linkages with such programs ( eg , through referrals to these programs , or needs assessments that are coordinated across programs ) and whether the program should include directives about coordinating and reporting on funds from other federal programs .

finally , congress may be interested to learn more about whether paf has assisted grantees in expanding and sustaining support for participants , or whether services were discontinued after the paf funding period ended .

this might be especially relevant for cohort 3 grantees , whose funding period was shortened from five to three years .

hhs' research on a sample of former paf grantees found that they have generally been able to continue services even after paf funding ended .

these grantees reported that they diversified their federal and other funding sources and created strong partnerships with other key stakeholders in their communities .

