from its headwaters in colorado and wyoming to its terminus in the gulf of california , the colorado river basin covers more than 246,000 square miles .

the river runs through seven u.s. states ( wyoming , colorado , utah , new mexico , arizona , nevada , and california ) and mexico .

pursuant to federal law , the bureau of reclamation ( reclamation , part of the department of the interior [doi] ) plays a prominent role in the management of the basin's waters .

in the lower basin ( i.e. , arizona , nevada , and california ) , reclamation also serves as water master on behalf of the secretary of the interior , a role that elevates the status of the federal government in basin water management .

the federal role in the management of colorado river water is magnified by the multiple federally owned and operated water storage and conveyance facilities in the basin , which provide low - cost water and hydropower supplies to water users .

colorado river water is used primarily for agricultural irrigation and municipal and industrial ( m&i ) purposes .

the river's flow and stored water also are important for power production , fish and wildlife , and recreation , among other uses .

a majority ( 70% ) of basin water supplies are used to irrigate 5.5 million acres of land ; basin waters also provide m&i water supplies to nearly 40 million people .

much of the area that depends on the river for water supplies is outside of the drainage area for the colorado river basin .

storage and conveyance facilities on the colorado river provide trans - basin diversions that serve areas such as cheyenne , wy ; multiple cities in colorado's front range ( eg , fort collins , denver , boulder , and colorado springs , co ) ; provo , ut ; albuquerque and santa fe , nm ; and los angeles , san diego , and the imperial valley in southern california ( figure 1 ) .

colorado river hydropower facilities can provide up to 42 gigawatts of electrical power per year .

the river also provides habitat for a wide range of species , including several federally endangered species .

it flows through 7 national wildlife refuges and 11 national park service ( nps ) units ; these and other areas of the river support important recreational opportunities .

precipitation and runoff in the basin are highly variable .

water conditions on the river depend largely on snowmelt in the basin's northern areas .

observed data ( 1906-2018 ) show that natural flows in the colorado river basin in the 20 th century averaged about 14.8 million acre - feet ( maf ) annually .

flows have dipped significantly during the current drought , which dates to 2000 ; natural flows from 2000 to 2018 averaged approximately 12.4 maf per year .

in 2018 , reclamation estimated that the 19-year period from 2000 to 2018 was the driest period in more than 100 years of record keeping .

the dry conditions are consistent with prior droughts in the basin that were identified through tree ring studies ; some of these droughts lasted for decades .

climate change impacts , including warmer temperatures and altered precipitation patterns , may further increase the likelihood of prolonged drought in the basin .

pursuant to the multiple compacts , federal laws , court decisions and decrees , contracts , and regulatory guidelines governing colorado river operations ( collectively known as the law of the river ) , congress and the federal government play a prominent role in the management of the colorado river .

specifically , congress funds and oversees reclamation's management of colorado river basin facilities , including facility operations and programs to protect and restore endangered species .

congress has also approved and continues to actively consider indian water rights settlements involving colorado river waters , and development of new and expanded water storage in the basin .

in addition , congress has approved funding to mitigate drought and stretch basin water supplies and has considered new authorities for reclamation to combat drought and enter into agreements with states and colorado river contractors .

this report provides background on management of the colorado river , including a discussion of trends and agreements since 2000 .

it also discusses the congressional role in the management of basin waters .

in the latter part of the 19 th century , interested parties in the colorado river basin began to recognize that local interests alone could not solve the challenges associated with development of the colorado river .

plans conceived by parties in california's imperial valley to divert water from the mainstream of the colorado river were thwarted because these proposals were subject to the sovereignty of both the united states and mexico .

the river also presented engineering challenges , such as deep canyons and erratic water flows , and economic hurdles that prevented local or state groups from building the necessary storage facilities and canals to provide an adequate water supply .

because local or state groups could not resolve these "national problems," congress considered ideas to control the colorado river and resolve potential conflicts between the states .

thus , in an effort to resolve these conflicts and prevent litigation , congress gave its consent for the states and reclamation to enter into an agreement to apportion colorado river water supplies in 1921 .

the below sections discuss the resulting agreement , the colorado river compact , and other documents and agreements that form the basis of the law of the river , which governs colorado river operations .

due to the basin's large water storage projects , basin water users are able to store as much as 60 maf , or about four times the colorado river's annual flows .

thus , storage and operations in the basin receive considerable attention , particularly at the basin's two largest dams and their storage reservoirs: glen canyon dam / lake powell in the upper basin ( 26.2 maf of storage capacity ) and hoover dam / lake mead in the lower basin ( 26.1 maf ) .

the status of these projects is of interest to basin stakeholders and observers and is monitored closely by reclamation .

glen canyon dam , completed in 1963 , provides the linchpin for upper basin storage and regulates flows from the upper basin to the lower basin , pursuant to the colorado river compact .

it also generates approximately 5 billion kilowatt hours ( kwh ) of electricity per year , which the western area power administration ( wapa ) supplies to 5.8 million customers in upper basin states .

other significant storage in the upper basin includes the initial "units" of the crsp: the aspinall unit in colorado ( including blue mesa , crystal , and morrow point dams on the gunnison river , with combined storage capacity of more than 1 maf ) , the flaming gorge unit in utah ( including flaming gorge dam on the green river , with a capacity of 3.78 maf ) , and the navajo unit in new mexico ( including navajo dam on the san juan river , with a capacity of 1 maf ) .

the upper basin is also home to 16 "participating" projects which are authorized to use water for irrigation , municipal and industrial uses , and other purposes .

in the lower basin , hoover dam , completed in 1936 , provides the majority of the lower basin's storage and generates about 4.2 billion kwh of electricity per year for customers in california , arizona , and nevada .

also important for lower basin operations are davis dam / lake mohave , which regulates flows to mexico under the 1944 treaty , and parker dam / lake havasu , which impounds water for diversion into the colorado river aqueduct ( thereby allowing for deliveries to urban areas in southern california ) and cap ( allowing for diversion to users in arizona ) .

further downstream on the arizona / california border , imperial dam ( a diversion dam ) diverts colorado river water to the all - american canal for use in california's imperial and coachella valleys .

construction of most of the colorado river's water supply infrastructure predated major federal environmental protection statutes , such as the national environmental policy act ( nepa ; 42 u.s.c .

§§4321 et seq. ) .

and the endangered species act ( esa ; 87 stat .

884 , 16 u.s.c .

§§1531-1544 ) .

thus , many of the environmental impacts associated with the development of basin resources were not originally taken into account .

over time , multiple efforts have been initiated to mitigate these effects .

some of the highest - profile efforts have been associated with water quality ( in particular , salinity control ) and the effects of facility operations on endangered species .

twenty - two federally recognized tribes in the colorado river basin have quantified water diversion rights that have been confirmed by court decree or final settlement .

these tribes collectively possess rights to 2.9 maf per year of colorado river water .

however , as of 2015 , these tribes typically were using just over half of their quantified rights .

additionally , 13 other basin tribes have reserved water rights claims that have yet to be resolved .

increased water use by tribes with existing water rights , and / or future settlement of claims and additional consumptive use of basin waters by other tribes , is likely to exacerbate the competition for basin water resources .

the potential for increased use of tribal water rights ( which , once ratified , are counted toward state - specific allocations where the tribal reservation is located ) has been studied in recent years .

in 2014 , reclamation , working with a group of 10 tribes with significant reserved water rights claims on the colorado river , initiated a study known as the 10 tribes study .

the study , published in 2018 , estimated that , cumulatively , the 10 tribes could have reserved water rights ( including unresolved claims ) to divert nearly 2.8 maf per year .

of these water rights , approximately 2 maf per year were decreed and an additional 785,273 af ( mostly in the upper basin ) remained unresolved .

the report estimated that , overall , the 10 tribes are diverting ( i.e. , making use of ) almost 1.5 maf of their 2.8 maf in resolved and unresolved claims .

table 1 shows these figures at the basin and sub - basin levels .

according to the study , the majority of unresolved claims in the upper basin are associated with the ute tribe in utah ( 370,370 af per year ) , the navajo nation in utah ( 314,926 af ) , and the navajo nation in the upper basin in arizona ( 77,049 af ) .

when the colorado river compact was originally approved , it was assumed based on the historical record that average annual flows on the river were 16.4 maf per year .

according to reclamation data , from 1906 to 2018 , observed natural flows on the river at lee ferry , az — the common point of measurement for observed basin flows — averaged 14.8 maf annually .

natural flows from 2000 to 2018 ( i.e. , during the ongoing drought ) averaged considerably less than that — 12.4 maf annually .

while natural flows have trended down , consumptive use in the basin has grown and has regularly exceeded natural flows since 2000 .

from 1971 to 2015 , average total consumptive use grew from 13 maf to over 15 maf annually .

combined , the two trends have caused a significant drawdown of basin storage levels ( figure 3 ) .

from 2009 to 2015 , the largest consumptive water use occurred in the lower basin ( 7.5 maf per year ) , while upper basin consumptive use averaged about 3.8 maf annually .

use of treaty water by mexico ( 1.5 maf per year ) and evaporative loss from reservoirs ( approximately 2 maf per year ) in both basins also factored significantly into total basin consumptive use .

notably , consumptive use in the lower basin , combined with mandatory releases to mexico , regularly exceeds the mandatory 8.23 maf per year that must be released from the upper basin to the lower basin and mexico pursuant to reclamation requirements .

this imbalance between lower basin inflows and use , known as the structural deficit , causes additional stress on basin storage .

the current drought in the basin has included some of the lowest flows on record .

according to reclamation , the 19-year period from 2000 to 2018 was the driest period in more than 100 years of record keeping .

observers have pointed out that flows in some recent years have been lower than would be expected given the amount of precipitation that has occurred , and have noted that warmer temperatures appear to be a significant contributor to these diminished flows .

based on these and other observations , some have argued that colorado river flows are unlikely to return to 20 th century averages , and that future water supply risk is high .

drought conditions throughout the basin have raised concerns about potential negative impacts on water supplies .

concerns center on uncertainty that might result if the secretary of the interior were to determine that a shortage condition exists in the lower basin , and that related curtailments were warranted .

some in upper basin states are also concerned about the potential for a c ompact call of lower basin states on upper basin states .

drought and other uncertainties related to water rights priorities ( eg , potential tribal water rights claims ) spurred the development of several efforts that generally attempted to relieve pressure on basin water supplies , stabilize storage levels , and provide assurances of available water supplies .

some of the most prominent developments since the year 2000 ( i.e. , the beginning of the current drought ) are discussed below .

ongoing drought conditions and the potential for water supply shortages prompted discussions and negotiations focused on how to conserve additional basin water supplies .

after several years of negotiations , on march 19 , 2019 , reclamation and the colorado river basin states finalized dcps for both the upper basin and the lower basin .

these plans required final authorization by congress to be implemented .

following house and senate hearings on the dcps in early april , on april 16 , 2019 , congress authorized the dcp agreements in the colorado river drought contingency plan authorization act ( p.l .

116-14 ) .

each of the basin - level dcps is discussed below in more detail .

the principal role of congress as it relates to storage facilities on the colorado river is funding and oversight of facility operations , construction , and programs to protect and restore endangered species ( eg , glen canyon dam adaptive management program and the upper colorado river endangered fish program ) .

in the upper basin , colorado river facilities include the 17 active participating units in the colorado river storage projects , as well as the navajo - gallup water supply project .

in the lower basin , major facilities include the salt river project and theodore roosevelt dam , hoover dam and all - american canal , yuma and gila projects , parker - davis project , central arizona project , and robert b. griffith project ( now southern nevada water system ) .

congressional appropriations in support of colorado river projects and programs typically account for a portion of overall project budgets .

for example , the lower colorado region's fy2017 operating budget was $517 million ; $119.8 million of this total was provided by discretionary appropriations , and the remainder of funding came from power revenues ( which are made available without further appropriation ) and nonfederal partners .

in recent years , congress has also authorized and appropriated funding that has targeted the colorado river basin in general ( i.e. , the pilot system conservation plan ) .

congress may choose to extend or amend these and other authorities specific to the basin .

while discretionary appropriations for the colorado river are of regular interest to congress , congress may also be asked to weigh in on colorado river funding that is not subject to regular appropriations .

for instance , in the coming years , the lower colorado river basin development fund is projected to face a decrease in revenues and may thus have less funding available for congressionally established funding priorities for the development fund .

congress has previously approved indian water rights settlements associated with more than 2 maf of tribal diversion rights on the colorado river .

only a portion of this water has been developed .

congress likely will face the decision of whether to fund development of previously authorized infrastructure associated with indian water rights settlements in the colorado river basin .

for example , the ongoing navajo - gallup water supply project is being built to serve the jicarilla apache nation , the navajo nation , and the city of gallup , new mexico .

congress may also be asked to consider new settlements that may result in tribal rights to more colorado river water .

for example , in the 116 th congress , h.r .

244 would authorize the navajo nation water settlement in utah .

in addition to development of new tribal water supplies , some states in the upper basin have indicated their intent to further develop their colorado river water entitlements .

for example , in the 115 th congress , section 4310 of america's water infrastructure act ( p.l .

115-270 ) authorized the secretary of the interior to enter into an agreement with the state of wyoming whereby the state would fund a project to add erosion control to fontenelle reservoir in the upper basin .

the project would allow the state to potentially utilize an additional 80,000 acre - feet of water storage on the green river , a tributary of the colorado river .

congress may remain interested in implementation of the dcps , including their success or failure at stemming further colorado river cutbacks and the extent to which the plans comply with federal environmental laws such as nepa .

similarly , congress may be interested in the overall hydrologic status of the colorado river basin , as well as future efforts to plan for increased demand in the basin and stretch limited basin water supplies .

