the house of representatives has standing rules that govern how bills and resolutions are to be taken up and considered on the floor .

however , to expedite legislation receiving floor action , the house may temporarily set aside these rules for measures that are not otherwise privileged for consideration .

this can be done by agreeing to a special order of business resolution ( special rule ) or by adopting a motion to suspend the rules and pass the underlying measure .

in general , special rules enable the consideration of complex or contentious legislation , such as major appropriations or reauthorizations , while the suspension of the rules procedure is usually applied to broadly supported legislation that can be approved without floor amendments or extensive debate in the chamber .

most bills and resolutions that receive floor action in the house are called up and considered under suspension of the rules .

the suspension procedure allows nonprivileged measures to be raised without a special rule , waives points of order , limits debate , and prohibits floor amendments .

motions to suspend the rules and pass the measure require a two - thirds vote , so the procedure is typically reserved for bills and resolutions that can meet a supermajority threshold .

decisions to schedule bills for consideration under suspension are generally based on how widely supported the measures are , how long members wish to debate them , and whether they want to propose floor amendments .

these decisions are not necessarily related to the subject matter of the measure .

accordingly , measures brought up under suspension cover a wide range of policy areas but most often address government operations , such as the designation of federal facilities .

this report describes the suspension procedure , which is defined in clause 1 of house rule xv , and provides an analysis of measures considered under suspension during the 114 th congress ( 2015-2016 ) .

figures 1- 8 display statistical data , including the prevalence and form of suspension measures , sponsors of measures , committee consideration , length of floor debate , voting , and resolution of differences between the chambers .

table 1 summarizes the final legislative status of measures initially considered in the house under the suspension of the rules .

finally , figure a - 1 depicts the use of the suspension procedure from the 110 th through the 114 th congresses ( 2007-2016 ) .

the suspension of the rules procedure is established by clause 1 of house rule xv .

bills , resolutions , house amendments to senate bills , amendments to the constitution , conference reports , and other types of business may be considered under suspension , even those "that would otherwise be subject to a point of order … [or have] not been reported or referred to any calendar or previously introduced. .

suspension motions are in order on designated days .

as rule xv states , "the speaker may not entertain a motion that the house suspend the rules except on mondays , tuesdays , and wednesdays and during the last six days of a session of congress. .

suspension measures , however , may be considered on other days by unanimous consent or under the terms of a special order of business ( special rule ) reported by the committee on rules and agreed to by the house .

a motion to suspend the rules is a compound motion to suspend the house rules and pass a bill or agree to a resolution .

when considering such a motion , the house is voting on the two questions simultaneously .

once recognized , the member making the motion will say , "mr. [or madam] speaker , i move to suspend the rules and pass___. .

the house rules that are suspended under this procedure include those that "would impede an immediate vote on passage of a measure … such as ordering the previous question , third reading , recommittal , or division of the question. .

a measure considered under the suspension procedure is not subject to floor amendment .

the motion to suspend and pass the measure , though , may provide for passage of the measure in an amended form .

that is , the text to be approved may be presented in a form altered by committee amendments or by informal negotiations .

suspension measures that are passed with changes incorporated into the text are passed "as amended. .

there are no separate votes on the floor approving such amendments .

suspension motions are "debatable for 40 minutes , one - half in favor of the motion and one - half in opposition thereto. .

however , in most instances , a true opponent never claims half the time , and most speakers come to the floor to express support for the measure .

debate time is controlled by two floor managers , one from each party , who sit on a committee of jurisdiction .

each manager makes an opening statement and may yield increments of the 20 minutes they control to other members to debate the measure .

once debate has concluded , a single vote is held on the motion to suspend the rules and pass the measure .

the motion requires approval by "two - thirds of the members voting , a quorum being present. .

should the vote fall short of the two - thirds required for passage ( 290 , if all members vote ) , the measure is not permanently rejected .

before the end of the congress , the house may consider the measure again under suspension , or the committee on rules may report a special rule that provides for floor consideration of the measure .

as illustrated in figure 1 , the majority of measures considered on the house floor during the 114 th congress were called up under the suspension of the rules procedure .

sixty - two percent of all measures that received floor action were considered under suspension ( 743 out of the 1,200 ) , compared to those under the terms of a special rule ( 14% ) , unanimous consent ( 7% ) , or privileged business ( 16% ) .

figure 2 displays the form of suspension measures .

most of the measures considered under suspension during the 114 th congress ( 94% ) were bills .

house bills made up 83% of the suspension total , senate bills 11% .

as represented in figure 3 , most suspension measures were sponsored by members of the majority party during the 114 th congress .

house or senate majority - party members sponsored 69% of all bills and resolutions initially considered in the house under suspension , while house majority - party members sponsored 467 ( 71% ) of the 660 house - originated measures ( designated with an h.r. , h.res. , h.con.res .

or h.j.res .

prefix ) .

suspension is , however , the most common procedure used to consider minority - sponsored legislation in the house by a wide margin .

in the 114 th congress , 85% of the minority - sponsored measures that were considered on the house floor were raised under the suspension procedure .

members of the house or senate minority parties sponsored 31% of all suspension measures originating in either chamber , compared to 9% of legislation subject to different procedures , including privileged business ( 17 measures ) , unanimous consent ( 21 measures ) , and special rules ( one senate bill ) .

minority - party house members sponsored 193 ( 29% ) of the 660 house measures considered under suspension .

no minority - party house member sponsored a house - originated measure that was considered under a special rule .

although suspension measures generally receive broad support , measures that receive the requisite two - thirds majority in the house are not guaranteed passage in the senate .

as noted in table 1 , in the 114 th congress , the senate passed 197 of the 619 house bills initially considered under suspension ( 32% ) .

additionally , the senate agreed to 1 of the 2 house joint resolutions and 5 of the 11 house concurrent resolutions considered under suspension of the rules .

of the number of suspension measures that passed the house and senate , 60 required a resolution of differences between the chambers .

forty - four house measures and 15 senate bills were subject to an amendment exchange process , and on one occasion , a conference committee was used to resolve the differences between the house and senate versions of a house bill .

the senate passed three house bills , initially approved in the house under suspension , that did not become public law because the house did not agree to the final bill text , as amended by the senate .

in those instances , the house did not reconsider the bills once the senate returned the senate - amended versions to the house chamber .

thus , 194 house bills were presented to the president for signature .

of the measures initially considered under suspension during the 114 th congress , president obama was presented with 194 house bills , 82 senate bills , and 1 house joint resolution for signature or veto .

the president vetoed h.r .

1777 ( presidential allowance modernization act of 2016 ) and s. 2040 ( justice against sponsors of terrorism act ) .

the house chose not to attempt a veto override on h.r .

1777 , so the measure did not become public law .

both the senate and house voted to override the veto of s. 2040 , enabling it to become law without the president's signature ( p.l .

114-222 ) .

thus , of the 703 law - making measures ( bills and joint resolutions ) initially considered under suspension of the rules , 193 house bills , 82 senate bills , and 1 house joint resolution became public law ( see table 1 ) .

