the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( p.l .

93-288 , hereinafter the stafford act ) authorizes the president to issue a major disaster declaration in response to natural or man - made incidents that overwhelm state , local , or tribal capacities .

the declaration makes a wide range of federal activities available to support state and local efforts to respond and recover from the incident .

major disaster declarations also authorize the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) to provide grant assistance to state , local , and tribal governments , residences , and certain private nonprofit ( pnp ) facilities that provide critical services .

businesses that suffer uninsured loss as a result of a major disaster declaration are not eligible for fema grant assistance , and grant assistance from other federal sources is limited .

on some occasions , congress has provided assistance to businesses through the community development block grant ( cdbg ) program .

the cdbg program provides loans and grants to eligible businesses to help them recover from disasters as well as grants intended to attract new businesses to the disaster - stricken area .

in a few cases , cdbg has also been used to compensate businesses and workers for lost wages or revenues .

cdbg assistance , however , is not available for all major disasters .

rather , it is used by congress on a case - by - case basis in response to large - scale disasters .

the united states department of agriculture and the department of commerce are also authorized to provide assistance to certain types of businesses such as agricultural producers or fisheries .

while these programs are important sources of assistance following a disaster , they are generally limited in scope ( available for only certain types of businesses ) or provide limited grant amounts .

most businesses will need to apply for a small business administration ( sba ) disaster loan if they want assistance from the federal government for uninsured loss resulting from a disaster .

sba is authorized to provide grants to sba resource partners , including small business development centers , women's business centers , and score ( formerly the service corps of retired executives ) , to provide training and other technical assistance to small businesses affected by a disaster , but is not authorized to provide direct grant assistance to businesses .

as indicated above , federal assistance to businesses that suffer uninsured loss as a result of a disaster is mainly limited to sba disaster loans .

disaster loans address certain types of loss and fall into two categories: ( 1 ) business physical disaster loans , and ( 2 ) economic injury disaster loans ( eidl ) .

if congress were to replace sba business disaster loans with a grant program , it might consider providing grants for similar types of loss .

alternatively , congress might implement a small business disaster grant program and continue to provide loan assistance through the sba .

if that is the case , it might consider how the small business disaster grant program would complement the existing loan program .

the following sections describe sba business disaster loans in more detail .

the following sections outline some of the arguments for and against implementing a business disaster grant program including the rationale for keeping the current federal business disaster policy the same .

some question why the federal government provides grant assistance to individuals and households , state , local , and tribal governments , and nonprofit organizations , among others , but not to businesses .

a review of congressional hearings , bill reports , agency reports , academic journals , and other authoritative sources did not identify specific language explaining why congress distinguishes between the types of disaster assistance that should be provided to businesses while not applying the same restrictions to other sectors .

it appears that current federal policy on business disaster assistance first emerged in the 1930s .

at that time , the united states had no overarching federal disaster policy or permanent program in place to respond to major disasters .

response , repair , and recovery activities were generally organized and carried out under local auspices and financial assistance was typically provided by states , municipalities , churches , and other nonprofit organizations such as the american red cross and the salvation army .

when congress did provide financial assistance , it was generally on an ad hoc basis .

further , congress wanted the measures limited to relieving "human distress and for such things as food , clothing , shelter , medicine and hospitalization" rather the reconstruction of buildings , businesses , or anything else .

the great depression also heightened concerns about federal costs .

thus , congress sought to keep federal costs to a minimum by limiting assistance to individuals and households , and , to the extent possible , returning the federal expenditures back to the treasury .

for example , in 1933 , congress debated whether to provide funding to the american red cross ( the main source of disaster assistance at that time ) in response to an earthquake in long beach california .

the red cross sought the funding because it could not meet assistance needs through its traditional fundraising efforts .

businesses , which were already struggling because of the great depression , suffered a great deal of damage as a result of the incident .

while sympathetic to struggling businesses , congress was resolute that federal assistance for the earthquake be limited to immediate needs such as food and clothing .

during a hearing before the subcommittee of house committee on appropriations , the vice chairman in charge of domestic operations for the american red cross clarified that red cross did not have a role in business recovery: there will always arise the question as to business rehabilitation , businesses and factories that have been affected .

then , there is the question of the solvency or insolvency of public corporations , schools , school boards , and so forth , and the replacement of their losses .

for that reason i made the statement at the outset delimiting the scope of red cross work to family problems as against those of business and government .

congress decided that it would make disaster loans available to nonprofit organizations with loan maturities not to exceed 10 years through the reconstruction finance corporation ( rfc ) .

the restriction that limited loans to nonprofit organizations was removed in 1936 , and rfc was "authorized to make disaster loans to corporations , partnerships , individuals , and municipalities or other political subdivisions of states and territories. .

the rfc continued to make disaster loans available until congress dissolved the rfc and transferred its disaster loan authority to sba in 1953 ( p.l .

83-163 ) .

around the same time , congress passed the federal disaster relief act of 1950 ( p.l .

81-875 ) .

the disaster relief act established a permanent authority that committed the federal government to provide specific types of assistance to states and localities ( but not businesses ) following a major disaster declaration .

it appears that the creation of a separate authority to provide assistance to states and localities may have placed them on a separate policy trajectory from businesses .

though interlaced to a degree , assistance to businesses remained in the form of loans , while the scope and nature of federal assistance to other entities expanded as the disaster relief act was amended in the 1960s , 1970s , and replaced in the 1980s by the stafford act .

implementing a small business disaster grant program may address congressional concerns about disaster relief equity , protecting the economy and vulnerable businesses .

a business grant program , however , could have some unintended policy consequences .

some of the considerations congress may contemplate for a potential small business disaster grant program include: ( 1 ) preventing the duplication of administrative functions and benefits ; ( 2 ) the selection of the authorization statute ; ( 3 ) whether ( and what type of ) declarations and designations will put the disaster grant program into effect ; ( 4 ) what size businesses should be eligible for disaster grant assistance ; and ( 5 ) the types of activities eligible for grant assistance .

in addition , congress could explore alternative options to a small business disaster grant program that could also address business disaster recovery concerns including ( 1 ) loan forgiveness ; ( 2 ) reduced interest rates ; and ( 3 ) measures that could help small ( and large ) businesses develop continuity and disaster recovery plans to help them prepare for and recover from disasters .

congress has contemplated how to help businesses rebuild and recover from disasters for nearly a century .

historically , the federal policy for providing disaster assistance to businesses has primarily been limited to low - interest loans .

while disaster loans have been instrumental in helping business recover from incidents , over the years congress has considered whether grant assistance might be needed in addition to , or instead of business disaster loans .

changing the federal government's disaster policy approach to businesses could be complex and require careful decisionmaking .

steps would need to be taken to avoid and remedy potential grant and loan duplication .

congress would also have to determine under what circumstances and situations the grant program would be put into effect .

eligibility requirements would need to be developed to determine under what situations and circumstances grants would be provided as well as what types of business should be eligible to receive grants .

similarly , congress might consider whether grants could be used for rebuilding , mitigation , or economic loss , in addition to other recovery activities .

in addition to these concerns and others , congress may want to investigate the potential cost implications of a small business disaster grant program .

alternatively , congress could leave the current policy in place .

those advocating no change are generally supportive of the view that federal disaster assistance should be supplemental in nature and that private insurance and access to low - interest loans should remain the primary means of helping small businesses recover after a disaster .

public assistance factors estimated cost of the assistance estimated cost of assistance is perhaps the most important factor fema considers when evaluating whether a governor's or chief executive's request warrants pa because it is a strong indicator of whether 'the situation is of such severity and magnitude that an effective response is beyond the capacities of the state and affected local governments. .

fema generally relies on two thresholds to evaluate whether to recommend pa .

the first threshold is $1 million in public infrastructure damages .

this threshold is set "in the belief that even the lowest population states can cover this level of public assistance damages. .

the second threshold used by fema is determined by multiplying the state's population ( according to the most recent census ) by a specified statewide per capita impact indicator — currently $1.43 .

in general , fema will recommend a major disaster declaration that includes pa if public infrastructure damages exceed $1 million and meet or exceed $1.43 per capita .

the underlying rationale for using a per capita threshold is that tax revenues that support a state's disaster response capacity should be sufficient if damages and costs fall under the per capita amount .

localized impacts fema also considers impacts to localities ( eg , counties , parishes , boroughs ) .

while capacity to respond to , and recover from , an incident are evaluated on the state level , pa and ia are provided only to the specific counties designated in a declaration .

as specified in fema regulations the assistant administrator for the disaster assistance directorate also has been delegated authority to designate the affected areas eligible for supplementary federal assistance under the stafford act .

these designations shall be published in the federal register .

an affected area designated by the assistant administrator for the disaster assistance directorate includes all local government jurisdictions within its boundaries .

to this end , fema uses a countywide per capita impact indicator of $3.61 per capita in infrastructure damage to assess localized impacts .

in general , it is expected that a locality that meets or exceeds the $3.61 per capita threshold will be designated by fema for pa funding .

insurance coverage insurance coverage is considered in pa determinations when reviewing a governor's or tribal chief executive's request for major disaster assistance .

as part of the assessment of disaster related damage , fema subtracts the amount of insurance coverage that is in force or that should have been in force as required by law and regulation at the time of the disaster from the total estimated eligible cost of pa for units of government and certain private nonprofit organizations .

hazard mitigation fema encourages hazard mitigation efforts by considering how previous measures may have decreased the overall damages and costs following an incident .

this could include rewarding states that have a statewide building code .

if the requesting state can prove , by way of cost - benefit analyses or other related estimates , that its per capita amount of infrastructure damage falls short of the statewide per capita impact threshold due to mitigation efforts , fema will consider that favorably in its recommendation to the president .

in these instances , fema may also consider whether the mitigation work has been principally financed with previous fema disaster assistance funding through the hazard mitigation grant program ( hmgp ) , through the pre - disaster mitigation ( pdm ) program , or by state or local resources .

recent multiple disasters if a state or tribal nation has suffered multiple disasters — whether declared or not — in the previous 12 months , fema considers the financial and human toll of those recent incidents in its consideration of whether to recommend pa. for example , if a state has responded on its own to a series of tornadoes , fema may consider a request for a declaration more favorably than they would have otherwise .

programs of other federal assistance fema also considers whether other federal disaster assistance is available when reviewing a major disaster request .

in some cases , other federal programs are arguably more suitable for addressing the types of damage caused by an incident .

for example , damage to federal - aid roads and bridges are eligible for assistance under the emergency relief program of the federal highway administration ( fhwa ) .

other federal programs may have more specific authority to respond to certain types of disasters , such as damage to agricultural areas .

assistance may also be provided under authorities separate from the stafford act with or without a stafford act declaration .

for example , assistance for droughts is frequently provided through authorities of the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) and the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) can provide assistance to states in response to a public health threat without the president's involvement via stafford act authorities .

individual assistance factors concentration of damages according to fema regulations , highly concentrated damages "generally indicate a greater need for federal assistance than widespread and scattered damages throughout a state. .

the assumption that underlies this regulation is that the local support networks available to recover from an incident are increasingly undermined as more members of those local support networks become survivors of the incident .

the dispersion of damage , however , is not necessarily an indication of total individual and household needs .

rural incidents , in particular , can be more difficult to assess because damages tend to be geographically less concentrated .

as mentioned under the factors considered for pa , congress has sought to address the challenges posed by rural incidents in receiving major disaster declarations and assistance packages .

trauma fema regulations cite three conditions that indicate a high degree of trauma to a community: ( 1 ) large numbers of injuries and deaths ; ( 2 ) large - scale disruption of normal community functions and services ; and ( 3 ) emergency needs such as extended or widespread loss of power or water .

fema considers the trauma caused by injuries and loss of life in determining whether ia , or specific programs under ia , is warranted in an affected area .

for ia - eligible medical and funeral expenses under section 408 of the stafford act , this factor can carry some weight in making a determination .

large - scale disruption of normal community functions and emergency needs such as extended or widespread loss of power or water are also indicative of trauma and are considered when evaluating a governor's or chief executive's request .

assessing these indicators can be problematic because they are not currently defined in law or regulation .

consequently , discretionary judgments are significant aspects of the evaluation of ia needs for large - scale disruptions of normal community functions and extended or widespread emergency needs .

special populations fema considers the unique needs of certain demographic groups within an affected area when evaluating an ia request .

these "special populations" include low - income and elderly populations , and american indian and alaskan native tribal populations .

although special populations are a distinct factor in the consideration of a governor's or chief executive's request , special populations may also contribute to the overall number of ia - eligible households in an affected area .

voluntary agency assistance as with pa , fema considers whether state , local , or tribal governments "can meet the needs of disaster victims" prior to offering supplemental assistance through ia .

additionally for ia , fema considers the extent to which voluntary agency assistance can meet those needs .

insurance similar to insurance coverage of public and certain private , nonprofit facilities for pa , insurance coverage of private residences is an important consideration for ia .

per fema regulation , "by law , federal disaster assistance cannot duplicate insurance coverage . .

therefore , the calculation of ia - eligible losses must deduct those losses covered by insurance .

fema assumes owner - occupied homes with a mortgage are insured against many natural disasters under their homeowner insurance policies .

under that assumption , fema uses census data to determine homeowner insurance penetration .

further , if the home is located in a flood - prone area then purchasing insurance for those disasters is often a legal requirement if the owner h as a federally - backed mortgage .

fema administers the n ational f lood i nsurance p rogram ( nfip ) which allows officials to more directly determine the status of flood insurance in communities and the number of policies in place in an affected area .

average amount of individual assistance by state fema compares the total ia cost estimate from the preliminary damage assessment ( pda ) to the average amount of individual assistance by state .

more specifically , regulations published in 1999 include a table of the average amount of ia per disaster , by state population , from july 1994 to july 1999 ( reproduced as table a - 1 ) .

fema stresses that these averages are not to be used as thresholds but rather as a guide that "may prove useful to states and voluntary agencies as they develop plans and programs to meet the needs of disaster victims. .

it should be noted that some have questioned the relevance of this factor given the amounts have not been updated since 1999 and are based on 1990 census data .

