illegal aliens have exploited asylum loopholes at an alarming rate .

over the last five years , dhs has seen a 2000 percent increase in aliens claiming credible fear ( the first step to asylum ) , as many know it will give them an opportunity to stay in our country , even if they do not actually have a valid claim to asylum .

 — department of homeland security ( dhs ) press release , december 20 , 2018 the increased number of central americans petitioning for asylum in the united states is not because more people are "exploiting" the system via "loopholes," but because many have credible claims… .

there is no recorded evidence by any u.s. federal agency showing that the increased number of people petitioning for asylum in the united states is due to more people lying about the dangers they face back in their country of origin .

 — washington office on latin america ( wola ) commentary , march 14 , 2018 these statements and the conflicting views about asylum seekers underlying them suggest why the asylum debate has become so heated .

policymakers have faced a perennial challenge to devise a fair and efficient system that approves legitimate asylum claims while deterring and denying illegitimate ones .

changes in u.s. asylum po licy and processes over the years can be seen broadly as attempts to strike the appropriate balance between these two goals .

periods marked by increasing levels of asylum - seeking pose particular challenges and may elicit a variety of policy responses .

faced with an influx of central americans seeking asylum at the southern u.s. border , the trump administration has put forth policies to tighten the asylum system ( see , for example , the " 2018 interim final rule " and " dhs migrant protection protocols " sections of this report ) ; these policies typically have been met with court challenges .

this report explores the landscape of u.s. asylum policy through an analysis of current asylum processes , available data , legislative and regulatory history , recent legislative and presidential proposals , and selected policy questions .

in common usage , the word asylum often refers to protection or safety .

in the immigration context , however , it has a narrower meaning .

the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) of 1952 , as amended , provides for the granting of asylum to an alien who applies for such relief in accordance with applicable requirements and is determined to be a refugee .

the ina defines a refugee , in general , as a person who is outside his or her country of nationality and is unable or unwilling to return to , or to avail himself or herself of the protection of , that country because of persecution or a well - founded fear of persecution based on one of five protected grounds: race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion .

asylum can be granted by the department of homeland security's ( dhs's ) u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) or the department of justice's ( doj's ) executive office for immigration review ( eoir ) , depending on the type of application filed ( see " asylum application process " ) .

the ina distinguishes between applicants for refugee status and applicants for asylum by their physical location .

refugee applicants are outside the united states , while applicants for asylum are physically present in the united states or at a land border or port of entry .

after one year as a refugee or asylee ( a person granted asylum ) , an individual can apply to be become a u.s. lawful permanent resident ( lpr ) .

with some exceptions , aliens who are in the united states or who arrive in the united states , regardless of immigration status , may apply for asylum .

this summary describes the asylum process for an adult applicant .

as discussed in the next section of the report , asylum may be granted by a uscis asylum officer or an eoir immigration judge .

there are no numerical limitations on asylum grants .

in order to receive asylum , an alien must establish that he or she meets the ina definition of a refugee , among other requirements .

certain aliens , such as those who are determined to pose a danger to u.s. security , are ineligible for asylum .

an asylum applicant who is not otherwise eligible to work in the united states may apply for employment authorization 150 days after filing a completed asylum application and may receive such authorization 180 days after the application filing date .

an alien who has been granted asylum is authorized to work in the united states and may receive approval to travel abroad .

a grant of asylum does not expire , but it may be terminated under certain circumstances , such as if an asylee is determined to no longer meet the ina definition of a refugee .

after one year of physical presence in the united states as an asylee , an alien may be granted lpr status , subject to certain requirements .

there are no numerical limitations on the adjustment of status of asylees to lpr status .

special asylum provisions apply to certain aliens without proper documentation who are determined to be subject to a streamlined removal process known as expedited removal .

to be considered for asylum , these aliens must first be determined by a uscis asylum officer to have a credible fear of persecution .

those determined to have a credible fear may apply for asylum during standard removal proceedings .

 ( see " inspection of arriving aliens ." ) .

applications for asylum are either defensive or affirmative .

a different set of procedures applies to each type of application .

the ina , as originally enacted , did not contain refugee or asylum provisions .

language on the conditional entry of refugees was added by the ina amendments of 1965 .

the 1965 act authorized the conditional entry of aliens , who were to include those who demonstrated to doj's immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) that ( i ) because of persecution or fear of persecution on account of race , religion , or political opinion they have fled ( i ) from any communist or communist - dominated country or area , or ( ii ) from any country within the general area of the middle east , and ( ii ) are unable or unwilling to return to such country or area on account of race , religion , or political opinion , and ( iii ) are not nationals of the countries or areas in which their application for conditional entry is made .

in 1968 , the united states acceded to the 1967 united nations protocol relating to the status of refugees ( protocol ) .

the protocol incorporated the 1951 united nations convention relating to the status of refugees ( convention ) , which the united states had not previously been a party to , and expanded the convention's definition of a refugee .

the convention had defined a refugee in terms of events occurring before january 1951 .

the protocol eliminated that date restriction .

it also provided that the refugee definition would apply without geographic limitation , while allowing for some exceptions .

with the changes made by the protocol , a refugee came to be defined as a person who "owing to well - founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race , religion , nationality , membership of a particular social group or political opinion , is outside the country of his nationality and is unable or , owing to such fear , is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country. .

the protocol retained other elements of the convention , including the latter's prohibition on refoulement ( or forcible return ) , a fundamental asylum concept .

specifically , the convention prohibited states from expelling or returning a refugee "to the frontiers of territories where his life or freedom would be threatened on account of his race , religion , nationality , membership of a particular social group or political opinion. .

in the 1970s , ins issued regulations that established procedures for applying for asylum in the united states and for adjudicating asylum applications .

for example , a 1974 rule provided that an asylum applicant could include his or her spouse and unmarried minor children on the application and that ins could deny or approve an asylum application as a matter of discretion .

asylum is a complex area of immigration law and policy .

much of the recent debate surrounding it has focused on efforts by the trump administration to tighten the asylum system .

several key policy considerations about asylum are highlighted below .

some , such as the grounds for granting asylum , have been long - standing issues for policymakers , while others , such as safe third country agreements , have been garnering attention more recently .

the asylum provisions in the ina are unusual in providing a standard mechanism for eligible unauthorized aliens in the united states to apply for a legal immigration status .

this aspect of asylum also serves to make this form of relief particularly controversial , especially at times when large numbers of asylum seekers are arriving in the united states .

the high volume of asylum cases has elicited policy responses from the trump administration , as described in this report .

in october 2018 remarks at an immigration conference , uscis director cissna offered context for dhs's and doj's asylum - related actions from the administration's perspective when he referenced "challenges associated with surges at the u. s. southern border , where migrants know that they can exploit a broken system to enter the u.s. , avoid removal , and remain in the country. .

while the administration maintains that its policies adhere to the ina and are necessary to preserve the integrity of the immigration system , others argue that it is tightening the asylum process in contravention of the law .

it remains to be seen whether the administration will continue to try to reshape u.s. asylum policy and whether congress will take action , as it has at times in the past , to make legislative changes to the asylum system .

appendix a .

affirmative asylum applications table a - 1 provides the underlying data for figure 1 on new affirmative asylum applications filed annually with uscis since fy1995 .

table a - 2 expands on the data in table a - 1 to show the top 10 nationalities filing new affirmative asylum applications annually since fy2007 .

for each of the top 10 nationalities for each year , table a - 2 provides a rank and a percentage of all applications that were filed by applicants of that nationality .

the table also includes annual data on the total number of applications filed by all applicants ( the latter totals match the data in table a - 1 ) .

as shown in table a - 2 , the top four nationalities filing new affirmative asylum applications in fy2007 ( china , haiti , mexico , and guatemala ) remained in the top 10 throughout the period , with china holding the top spot in all years except fy2017 and fy2018 .

between fy2009 and fy2012 , chinese nationals filed one - third of all new affirmative asylum applications each year .

in fy2017 and fy2018 , however , china's rank fell to 2 nd and 4 th , respectively .

in each of those two years , venezuelans filed more new affirmative asylum applications than nationals of any other country , accounting for one - fifth of all applications filed in fy2017 and more than a quarter of the total in fy2018 .

since fy2015 , nationals of venezuela and four other latin american countries ( guatemala , el salvador , mexico , and honduras ) have accounted for five of the top six nationalities filing new affirmative asylum applications each year .

appendix b. uscis asylum decisions and credible fear findings table b - 1 provides the underlying data for figure 2 on uscis decisions on affirmative asylum applications issued annually from fy2009 through fy2017 .

it also includes an additional small outcome category ( cases dismissed ) .

these are cases where the applicant did not appear for fingerprinting / biometrics collection .

for the cases referred to an immigration judge ( which involve applicants without lawful status ) , table b - 1 distinguishes among three mutually exclusive subcategories: cases that were interviewed by uscis ; cases that were interviewed by uscis where the applicant did not meet the filing deadline ; and cases that were not interviewed by uscis .

 ( the referrals "total" column in table b - 1 matches the referrals data displayed in figure 2 . ) .

in addition to deciding affirmative asylum cases , uscis is tasked with assessing the credible fear of persecution claims made by individuals in expedited removal .

table b - 2 and table b - 3 provide the underlying credible fear - related data for figure 4 .

table b - 2 contains data on referrals of credible fear claims to uscis and uscis completions of these cases .

table b - 3 provides breakdowns of the table b - 2 "completions" data by case outcome .

it also provides the percentage of the completed cases in which credible fear was found .

appendix c. defensive asylum applications the "total applications" column in table c - 1 provides the underlying data for figure 3 on defensive asylum applications filed annually since fy2008 .

in addition , table c - 1 provides data on the two components of that total: ( 1 ) asylum applications originally filed as affirmative applications with uscis ( column 2 ) , and ( 2 ) asylum applications originally filed as defensive applications with eoir ( column 3 ) ( see " defensive asylum " ) .

as shown in table c - 1 , the growth in the total number of defensive asylum applications filed in recent years prior to fy2018 has been driven mainly by an increase in asylum applications first filed in immigration court .

appendix d. eoir asylum decisions eoir immigration judges decide defensive asylum cases .

an asylum application is defensive when the applicant is in standard removal proceedings in immigration court ( see " defensive asylum " ) .

table d - 1 provides the underlying data for figure 5 on defensive asylum cases decided annually since fy2009 .

table d - 2 provides data on a subset of eoir asylum decisions involving credible fear claims .

it is limited to decisions in defensive asylum cases that originated with an individual receiving a positive credible fear of persecution finding from uscis .

