t he term digital economy has fluid meaning in different policy contexts .

broadly speaking , this term can refer to any number of everyday economic activities that are connected over computers , mobile phones , or other internet - connected devices .

in the realm of international tax policy , though , certain types of activities and markets have been singled out for selective taxation by some jurisdictions — primarily in europe .

most of these digital economy business models operate in "two - sided markets" in which they provide services to individual users ( sometimes at zero charge ) and sell other services to businesses ( eg , advertising to users ) .

proponents of these "digital services taxes" ( dsts ) justify them on a number of grounds , including the goal of having multinational corporations ( mncs ) pay their "fair share" of taxes , taxing profits purportedly derived from consumers in their jurisdictions , or adapting traditional rules and systems of international taxation to account for new forms of "disruptive" business models that can be conducted virtually over the internet .

u.s. opposition to these unilateral taxes has been voiced by several government officials .

robert stack , while treasury deputy assistant secretary for international tax affairs under president obama , said that such efforts are primarily political efforts to target u.s. corporations .

more recently , treasury secretary steven mnuchin has issued multiple statements in opposition to unilateral taxation of digital economy businesses .

some members of the tax - writing committees in congress have also criticized these efforts .

this report analyzes dst proposals from an economic and policy perspective as they have been introduced , discussed , and adapted in european countries .

some commentators and policymakers argue that mncs in the digital economy are "undertaxed" or are not paying a "fair share" of taxes in their jurisdictions .

two issues that often underlie these sentiments are ( 1 ) the ability of digital economy mncs to provide services without establishing a physical presence ( or "permanent establishment" ) in the country in which their customers reside and ( 2 ) the ability of digital economy mncs to shift their profits away from countries where they conduct real economy activity ( eg , sales , development , production ) toward low - tax jurisdictions where the mncs are conducting little to no real economic activity .

even if a country is able to establish the right to tax an mnc's profits in the digital economy ( via permanent establishment rules ) , the profits subject to tax in that jurisdiction could be reduced via transfer pricing rules .

concerns over the ability for mncs to avoid corporate income taxes have led to much discussion within national governments and among developed countries in international economic settings .

as some of these discussions have met impasse , for various reasons , some countries have unilaterally proposed or implemented policies to tax digital economy mncs on specific grounds .

this section of the report provides a brief historical overview of these recent discussions and select unilateral dst proposals in europe .

while efforts to tax the digital economy have not been limited to european countries , efforts to develop policy principles and justifications in support of these specific taxes on digital economy markets have primarily been driven by politicians and commentators in europe , including the united kingdom .

this report will not provide a comprehensive account of each dst proposal or be updated to track the rapid pace of policy modifications and emerging proposals .

this section of the report first identifies the fundamentals of a corporate profits tax before addressing justifications that some have offered for dsts .

dsts have been characterized as extensions of different types of tax regimes ranging from a tax on corporate profits in the digital economy to something more like a selective or excise tax on specific types of activities that is standalone from income tax regimes .

based policy analysis , though , dsts resemble a selective tax on revenue ( akin to an excise tax ) and not as a tax on corporate profits .

this section analyzes dst proposals under the standard tax evaluation criteria used by economists .

these criteria are used to understand how a tax affects consumer demand and producer supply , whether a tax aligns with common notions of fairness , and administrative issues that could increase tax compliance costs for taxpayers or affect the ability of governments to collect revenue from a tax .

u.s. corporations are allowed to claim a tax credit against u.s. corporate income tax liability for income taxes paid to foreign jurisdictions .

the rationale is to prevent double taxation of foreign - source income .

dsts are taxes on revenue earned from specific business activities and should not be eligible for u.s. foreign tax credit treatment for several reasons .

first , such taxes are not income taxes under common bilateral tax treaty language .

statements from some countries imposing dsts , such as the uk , indicate that they do not intend dst payments to be creditable against taxes that an mnc might owe in its home country .

nor are dsts "in lieu of income taxes," as the countries imposing dsts do have a corporate income tax system .

the internal revenue service ( irs ) could clarify that u.s. bilateral income tax treaties do not provide for a foreign tax credit against u.s. tax for u.s. corporations that make dst payments to foreign jurisdictions .

if the irs does not do so , then congress could enact legislation denying a u.s. foreign tax credit for such payments .

denying a foreign tax credit could increase the total taxes paid by u.s. mncs in jurisdictions around the world , but allowing dst payments to be creditable would effectively force the u.s. treasury ( and u.s. taxpayers ) to subsidize tax rates imposed by foreign jurisdictions .

policymakers who sympathize with the premise that mncs in the digital economy are unfairly able to shift profits to low - tax jurisdictions could still disagree with the unilateral response of foreign countries to impose dsts .

the tax on gilti serves as an alternative policy tool intended to impose higher effective tax rates on u.s. firms in the digital economy .

for example , in the 115 th congress , the no tax break for outsourcing act ( h.r .

5108 ; s. 2459 ) would have increased the gilti tax rate to 21% and eliminated the deduction for the return on tangible assets derived by domestic corporations from serving foreign markets in computing gilti tax liability , among other provisions .

as discussed , above , dsts have the same economic effects as an excise tax .

it is not controversial for countries to levy excise taxes on imported as well as domestically consumed goods or services .

such taxes are considered to not distort trade .

however , some dst proponents have not explicitly labeled them as "excise taxes," making it unclear how these taxes should be viewed in terms of international agreements .

regardless of the label attached to them , some commentators argued that dsts violate restrictions on tariffs under the rules of the world trade organization .

for example , some scholars argue that the high - revenue thresholds for taxation and the exclusion of certain revenues earned by european firms effectively discriminate against the digital exports of u.s. firms .

many proponents of dsts argue that they are "interim measures" until the international community adopts broader reforms in international tax rules .

as mentioned in the discussion of the european commission's dst proposal , the commission prefers changes , both inside and outside of the eu , in the permanent establishment rules to incorporate some measure of "digital presence. .

this goal aligns with the eu's goal of a consolidated tax base among its members and formulary apportionment of corporate tax revenue based on a set of factors ( eg , sales , assets , employment ) , which would result in a shift away from tax allocation based on assets .

the form and rationale of dsts appear to better comport with a formulary apportionment tax being pursued in the eu than a traditional national corporate income tax .

the inability for consensus to impose a dst at the european commission level could lead more individual member states to unilaterally impose their own dsts .

even if the united states objects to unilateral dsts , these sovereign countries are generally able to impose their own tax systems ( within the boundaries of any other international agreements , such as eu membership ) .

congress could consider creating "carrots" or "sticks" affecting the policy choices of dst proponents .

tax policy and legal scholars have debated the merits of "potential compromises" that would not require fundamental rewrites of international tax rules .

some of these options would rely on the executive branch for day - to - day negotiations at a bilateral or multilateral level ( eg , at the oecd ) .

any modification to existing or new tax treaties , though , would require senate approval .

congress could also direct the executive branch to impose incentives ( and disincentives ) that would affect key sectors of the eu economy .

an evaluation of these emerging ideas and concepts is , however , beyond the scope of this report .

dsts are not structured as taxes on profits corporate profit is generally defined as: ( 1 ) π=tr - tc where π is profit , tr is total revenue , and tc is total cost .

this is before taxes .

after tax corporate profit , π t , for a firm after imposition of a percentage tax ( t ) on corporate profit , is defined as: 2 πt= ( 1-t ) ( tr - tc ) in contrast , a dst ( dst ) is levied as a percent of total , gross revenue yielding an after tax profit , π dst , of: 3 πdst= ( 1-dst ) tr - tc algebraically , equations ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) are not equivalent .

to further illustrate , the following amounts can be substituted: tr = $1,000 , tc = $500 , and t = 0.03 ( or a 3% tax rate ) .

using these parameters , πt based on a 3% profit tax would be: 4 πt= ( 1-0.03 ) ( $1,000-$500 ) 5 πt=$485 using these parameters , πdst based on a 3% dst revenue tax would be: 6 πdst= ( 1-0.03 ) $1,000-$500 7 πdst=$470 as shown above , after - tax profit for a corporation subject to a 3% income tax rate ( equation 5 ) is greater than after - tax profit for a corporation subject to a 3% dst ( equation 7 ) in lieu of an income tax .

the two taxes are not the same .

effects of a dst on supply - demand conditions in digital markets to analyze the economic effects of a dst , the different markets in which digital economy firms operate must be conceptualized .

in a general sense , the consumers or buyers in these markets are those that pay money to the supplier or seller for the provision of a service .

many firms in digital economies operate in "two - sided markets" in which they provide services to two different consumers: individual users and businesses .

while both sides of these markets could be relevant for calculating dst liability , the markets for the latter group of services are the starting point for analyzing the economic effects of a dst , because these business - to - business transactions are where the statutory incidence of a dst is typically first imposed .

for example , in the market for internet advertisements , a clothing company could be the consumer and google or facebook could be the seller or supplier .

in the market for marketplace sales , a vendor could be the consumer and amazon could be the seller or supplier .

in the market for user data sales , a data transfer firm could be the consumer and facebook , google , or fitbit could the supplier .

from an economic perspective , there are two extremes of market structure: perfect competition and monopoly .

most market structures lie somewhere in between .

monopolies rarely exist , and they are typically regulated .

for reasons explained below , there are specific reasons why monopolies are likely not to exist in the markets in which dsts apply .

however , firms could have market power if there are barriers to entry .

the following analyses examine how a dst would apply , over the long run , in the two extremes of market structure for a digital economy firm facing a downward sloping demand curve .

analysis of a dst in a competitive market in perfect competition , firms face a downward - sloping demand curve , and the supply curve is perfectly elastic ( horizontal ) as increases in output are achieved by new firms entering the industry over the long run .

each firm earns no economic profit , meaning that the opportunity cost of investing in alternative ventures is zero , and each is a price taker in the market ( i.e. , an individual firm cannot influence the price prevailing in the market ) .

in this scenario , when the government imposes an excise tax , firms must ultimately pass on the cost of the tax to their consumers or exit the market .

the market for services provided by firms in the digital economy could be depicted as "perfectly competitive. .

under this scenario , many firms are willing to provide a relatively similar service .

these markets can be outlined more narrowly to encompass only activities by other digital economy firms ( eg , internet advertising , marketplace sales , data transfer ) , or they can be outlined more broadly ( eg , consumer advertising , retail outlets , consumer marketing research ) .

in other words , although users typically associate facebook as primarily a social network and google as primarily a search engine , both firms may operate and compete in the same market for internet advertising .

additionally , both firms compete in the larger market for consumer advertising alongside television , print , and radio advertisers .

if a clothing seller is deciding where to spend his advertising budget , that seller can purchase advertising placements on facebook , google , etc .

 ( not to mention television , print , and radio ) .

similarly , a data transfer company looking to purchase and analyze user data then selling marketing services for another good or service not only has the choice to purchase data from facebook , google , etc .

 ; it can also collect data from other companies that collect data and surveys on consumer preferences .

figure a - 1 and figure a - 2 illustrate the long - run effects of a dst in a perfect competition scenario with demand curves of different slopes .

the demand curves are downward - sloping because consumers demand less of the taxed service as price increases .

the different slopes represent scenarios where consumer demand is more responsive , or elastic , to changes in price ( figure a - 1 ) and less responsive , or inelastic ( figure a - 2 ) .

the supply curves in both figures are flat , or "infinitely elastic" because suppliers , in the aggregate , are able to adjust their capacity to meet whatever level of consumer demand prevails in the market .

in both figures , the initial equilibrium ( e ) , before the tax , between the prevailing market price ( p ) and quantity ( q ) is denoted by an asterisk superscript ( * ) .

after the tax is applied , the change in equilibrium between price and quantity is denoted by a subscript ( t ) .

in both figures , the tax is also passed forward to consumers in the form of higher prices .

firms reduce output or some firms exit the market because participants earn zero economic profit .

if the dst rate is 3% , for example , then suppliers in a competitive market are assumed to increase price by 3% minus any tax savings ( i.e. , deductions for excise tax payments from any income tax owed to the jurisdiction imposing the dst ) .

in figure a - 1 , imposition of a dst causes prices to rise and quantity demanded to fall in the market .

the magnitude of the change in quantity is roughly similar to the change in price in the illustration below , but in a market with relatively elastic demand , the change in quantity can exceed the change in price .

one cause for this phenomenon is the availability of near - substitutes .

for example , if television advertisement is equally as effective as internet advertising , then a tax increasing prices of the latter will lead to a larger decline in demand as more companies purchase advertisements on television instead of the internet .

in figure a - 2 , imposition of a dst also causes prices to rise and quantity demanded to fall in the market .

with a relatively inelastic demand curve , though , the magnitude of the change in price exceeds the change in quantity .

this could be caused , for example , by a lack of substitutes ( eg , a strong preference for internet advertising or lack of alternative outlets to online marketplaces to sell goods and services ) .

in this case , the change in price is greater than the change in quantity demanded .

many of the services subject to a dst are intermediate inputs to the final sales of other goods and services .

this means that the method of analyzing the effects of the dst would be replicated for each stage in the supply chain .

for example , if a dst increases the price of advertising a clothing company's products over the internet , then that clothing company will likely increase the cost of the clothing that it charges its customers ( the retail consumer in the country levying the tax ) .

the exact magnitude of the effects will vary depending on elasticities of supply and demand in that downstream market for retail clothing sales .

in a perfectly competitive retail clothing market , though , it is anticipated that prices will increase and quantity demanded will decrease .

in addition to effects on price and quantity prevailing within a market , dsts can also have "welfare effects. .

under this method of analysis , economists consider changes to consumer surplus , producer surplus , and deadweight loss .

consumer surplus is the total benefit of value of a good or service that consumers receive beyond what they actually pay in the market .

it is depicted on a supply - demand graph as the area below the demand curve and above the price .

producer surplus is the benefit to producers from selling a good or service at a price higher than their marginal cost of producing one additional unit .

it is depicted on a supply - demand graph as the area above the supply curve and below the price .

deadweight loss is an inefficiency in the market that is typically introduced by government intervention , such as a tax , that results in a loss in economic activity and potential losses to consumer or producer surpluses .

in a supply - demand graph of a competitive market , like the ones above , deadweight loss is depicted as the center triangle created after the imposition of a tax .

welfare analyses of the dsts depicted in figure a - 1 and figure a - 2 indicate that they reduce consumer surplus , have no effect on producer surplus , and create deadweight loss inefficiencies .

before the imposition of a dst , consumer welfare is measured as the areas a + b + c in both figures .

this area indicates that consumers are receiving benefits from consuming goods or services subject to dsts in excess of the price they actually pay for them .

this could be in part because social media platforms , shopping on online marketplaces , or using search engines are free to consumers .

after the imposition of a dst , though , consumer welfare is reduced to the area a .

as producers increase the cost of goods and services subject to a dst , consumer welfare decreases due to higher costs .

the area b becomes revenue collected by the government and the area c becomes deadweight loss in economic activity discouraged by the dst .

there is no effect on producer surplus , because it does not exist in a perfectly competitive market .

in a perfectly competitive market , producers are price takers and earn no economic profit .

the main differences in figure a - 1 and figure a - 2 are due to the slope of the demand curve .

the relatively inelastic demand in figure a - 2 leads to greater reductions in consumer welfare , more tax revenue collected , and smaller deadweight losses .

this is because a relatively inelastic demand curve indicates that consumers are less responsive to changes in price .

if consumers are unable to substitute away from goods or services subject to dsts toward nontaxed activities , then they pay higher prices for taxed activities , and the government collects more revenue .

analysis of a dst in a monopoly market some argue that major firms in the digital economy have "monopoly power. .

proponents of this assertion could point out that facebook is the largest social media platform or that google is the predominant search engine .

others may say that digital economy platforms create network effects that prevent competition .

for example , facebook is able to maintain its status as the most popular social media platform because the value of interacting on a network with billions of users exceeds a new platform with only a few users .

similarly , amazon might be characterized as a monopoly because many customers shop and provide reviews on its website , so a vendor looking for exposure to the largest customer base will choose to pay for the service of listing its products on that site compared to a smaller internet marketplace .

these views may be seen , by others , as misguided because they are viewing the opposite side of the two - sided markets in the digital economy or defining the "market" too narrowly .

as explained in the perfect competition analysis , above , google and facebook can be viewed as competitors in the market for selling digital advertising space or data transfer services even if they have some degree of market power on the other side of the market ( eg , search engines and social networks ) .

additionally , digital economy firms also compete against "non - digital" competitors .

for example , in the larger markets for consumer product advertising , internet companies compete with advertising via television , print , and radio .

whether firms have supernormal profits or economic rents in an industry is often difficult to determine .

in general , the presence of high accounting profits ( total revenue minus total costs ) is not indicative of whether a firm has profits in an economic sense .

economic profits take into consideration the opportunity costs of investing in a different income - producing activity .

there is typically a risk - free portion of the return to any investment .

for example , in the corporate sector this could be the average rate of return of the stock market .

however , riskier investments generally require a higher potential return in order to attract capital ( also known as the "risk premium" ) .

the point of this distinction is that high accounting profits can be an indication of a higher risk premium .

for the sake of argument , figure a - 3 illustrates the effects of a dst in a hypothetical monopoly market where there is one producer .

an example of this phenomenon in the digital economy could be a single firm that sells internet advertising , marketplace sales , or data transfers to a potential buyer .

figure a - 3 illustrates a monopoly market before the imposition of a tax .

in a monopoly market , the seller still faces a downward - sloping demand curve .

however , the monopolist does not have a supply curve because it does not accept the price prevailing in the market ( like individual sellers in a competitive market ) .

instead , it sets price ( p m ) and output ( q m ) at the intersection of marginal revenue ( mr ) and marginal cost ( mc ) to arrive at a profit - maximizing equilibrium ( e m ) along the demand curve .

the upward - sloping mc represents the fact that the monopolist firm faces increasing marginal costs as it increases the quantity supplied in the market .

the monopolist also has an upward - sloping average total cost ( atc ) curve , which includes the upward - sloping function of the mc curve plus added fixed costs of production .

unlike producers in the competitive markets in figure a - 1 and figure a - 2 , the monopolist in figure a - 3 earns economic profits , or rents .

economic profit per unit sold is the difference between the price charged by the monopolist ( p m ) and the atc curve , or the distance bc .

that average profit per unit times the total number of units sold ( dc ) equals the total economic profit earned by the monopolist , as shown in the gray shaded box ( abcd ) .

the effects of a dst on a monopoly market are illustrated in figure a - 4 .

a dst shifts the demand curve in as consumers of taxed services respond to higher after - tax prices .

as a result of the reduced demand , the marginal revenue earned by the monopolist declines , and the mr curve shifts from mr m to mr t .

the equilibrium in the market shifts from e m to e t .

quantity decreases from q m to q t .

the price faced by the consumer in the market increases from p m to p t .

the price received by the monopolist , though , decreases from p m to p mt .

the economic profit earned by the monopolist under the new post - tax demand and mr t curves is represented by the gray shaded box ( fghi ) .

the revenue collected by the government is represented by the dashed - line area just above the monopolist's profit .

changes to deadweight loss is not illustrated on figure a - 4 , but they can be explained in qualitative terms .

the presence of a monopoly market creates deadweight loss relative to a competitive market because p m is set higher than the price where supply and demand intersect in the competitive market ( eg , in figure a - 1 and figure a - 2 ) .

when a tax is introduced on top of the distortions caused by the monopolist , the size of the deadweight loss in the market is further increased .

