during world war ii and then again after the outbreak of fighting in korea , congress found that the existence of thousands of small business concerns was being threatened by war - induced shortages of materials coupled with an inability to obtain defense contracts or financial assistance .

concerned that many small businesses might fail without government assistance , in 1953 , congress passed and president dwight eisenhower signed into law the small business act ( p.l .

83-163 ) , which authorized the small business administration ( sba ) .

the act specifies that it is the declared policy of congress to promote the interests of small businesses to "preserve free competitive enterprise. .

congress specified that one of the ways to preserve free competitive enterprise was to insure that small businesses received a "fair proportion" of federal contracts and subcontracts: it is the declared policy of the congress that the government should aid , counsel , assist , and protect , insofar as is possible , the interests of small - business concerns in order to preserve free competitive enterprise , to insure that a fair proportion of the total purchases and contracts or subcontracts for property and services for the government ( including but not limited to contracts or subcontracts for maintenance , repair , and construction ) be placed with small - business enterprises , to insure that a fair proportion of the total sales of government property be made to such enterprises , and to maintain and strengthen the overall economy of the nation .

congress indicated that its intent in supporting small businesses was not to "favor small business at the expense of its larger competitors .

our only purpose in supporting the creation and effective operation of the sba is to equalize the scales when necessary to guarantee the continued vigor of our competitive free enterprise system. .

more recently , a house committee report indicated that the primary rationale for small business contracting programs is the positive economic benefits they provide , as well as assisting small businesses overcome the complexities of the system .

the economic benefits of these programs can be seen in two primary areas — market competition and local economic development .

first , [these] programs … are designed to increase and diversify small contractors with the intent of expanding the federal supplier base .

this leads to increased competition , which results in higher quality , greater product variety , and lower prices .

second , these contracting initiatives lower barriers to entry in a wide range of markets for small businesses .

this provides greater market access for small firms' goods and services .

from an economic perspective , such access is critical to generating positive macroeconomic benefits , including higher job creation , wage growth , and greater income distribution .

over the years , congress has approved legislation to support small business in various ways .

for example , the sba administers several types of programs to support small businesses , including loan guaranty and venture capital programs to enhance small business access to capital ; contracting programs to increase small business opportunities in federal contracting ; direct loan programs for businesses , homeowners , and renters to assist their recovery from natural disasters ; and small business management and technical assistance training programs to assist business formation and expansion .

in recent years , congressional interest in these programs has increased , primarily because assisting small businesses is viewed as a means to stimulate economic activity and create jobs .

this report describes the various federal programs , requirements , procurement officers , and procurement offices involved in promoting federal contracting and subcontracting with small businesses , small disadvantaged businesses ( sdbs ) , sdbs participating the sba's "8 ( a ) program," historically underutilized business zone ( hubzone ) small businesses , women - owned small businesses ( wosbs ) , and service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses ( sdvosbs ) .

the sba administers many , but not all , of these programs .

it examines the following federal requirements and authorities in promoting contracting and subcontracting with small businesses: 1 .

the requirement that federal agencies generally reserve contracts that have an anticipated value greater than the micro - purchase threshold ( currently $10,000 ) but not greater than the simplified acquisition threshold ( currently $250,000 ) exclusively for small businesses unless the contracting officer is unable to obtain offers from two or more small businesses that are competitive with market prices and the quality and delivery of the goods or services being purchased .

2 .

the establishment of small business procurement goals , both government - wide and agency specific , to promote the awarding of contracts to small businesses .

3 .

the requirement that federal agencies generally set aside contracts that have an anticipated value exceeding the simplified acquisition threshold exclusively for small businesses when there is a reasonable expectation that offers will be obtained from at least two responsible small businesses offering the products of different small businesses ( rule of two ) and the award will be made at a fair market price .

4 .

the authority provided federal agencies to make sole source awards to small businesses when the award could not otherwise be made ( eg , only a single source is available , under urgent and compelling circumstances ) .

5 .

the authority provided federal agencies to set aside contracts for , or grant other contracting preference to , specific types of small businesses ( eg , 8 ( a ) small businesses , hubzone small businesses , wosbs , and sdvosbs ) .

it discusses the sba's oversight and responsibilities concerning the small business goaling program , small business mentor - protégé programs , the 7 ( j ) management and training program , and the surety bond guaranty program .

it also discusses the role of the office of small and disadvantaged business utilization ( osdbu ) , located in each federal agency , in promoting contracting with small businesses , and examines the role and responsibilities of various federal procurement officers , including procurement center representatives , commercial market representatives , and business opportunity specialists , in promoting small business contracting opportunities .

this report concludes with a brief discussion of the strong bipartisan support for small business contracting programs .

however , that does not mean that these programs face no opposition , or that issues have not been raised concerning the impact and operations of specific programs .

for example , small business advocates note that implementing regulations in the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) narrow the reach ( and impact ) of some small business contracting preferences by excluding specific types of contracts , such as those listed in the federal supply schedules , from far requirements pertaining to small business contracting .

advocates want the federal government to enact policies that reduce or eliminate exclusions that narrow the reach of small business contracting preferences .

critics have questioned some of these programs' effectiveness , in terms of promoting both small business opportunities to win federal contracts and a more diversified , robust economy .

the competition in contracting act of 1984 generally requires "full and open competition" for government procurement contracts .

however , various provisions of the small business act authorize or , in some cases , require federal agencies to provide for other than "full and open competition through the use of competitive procedures" when contracting with small businesses .

for example , as mentioned previously , federal agencies are generally required to reserve contracts that have an anticipated value greater than the micro - purchase threshold ( currently $10,000 ) , but not greater than the simplified acquisition threshold ( currently $250,000 ) exclusively for small businesses unless the contracting officer is unable to obtain offers from two or more small businesses that are competitive with market prices and the quality and delivery of the goods or services being purchased .

in addition , federal agencies are generally required to set aside contracts that have an anticipated value exceeding the simplified acquisition threshold exclusively for small businesses when there is a reasonable expectation by the contracting officer that offers will be obtained by at least two responsible small businesses offering the products of different small businesses ( rule of two ) and the award will be made at a fair market price ; may similarly set aside contracts exceeding the simplified acquisition threshold for competition reserved for specific types of small businesses ( eg , 8 ( a ) small businesses , hubzone small businesses , wosbs and sdvosbs ) ; may enter into negotiations directly with particular types of small businesses ( eg , a sole source award ) when the award could not otherwise be made ( eg , only a single source is available or under urgent and compelling circumstances ) ; and are required to grant hubzone small businesses a price evaluation preference of not more than 10% in open and unrestricted competitions .

several sba programs assist small businesses in obtaining and performing federal contracts and subcontracts .

these include various prime contracting programs ; subcontracting programs ; and other assistance ( eg , contracting technical training assistance and oversight of the federal small business goaling program and the surety bond guarantee program ) .

federal agencies may also set aside contracts or make sole source awards to small businesses not participating in any other program under certain conditions .

since 1978 , federal agency heads have been required to establish federal procurement goals , in consultation with the sba , "that realistically reflect the potential of small business concerns and small business concerns owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals" to participate in federal procurement .

each agency is required , at the conclusion of each fiscal year , to report its progress in meeting the goals to the sba .

in 1988 , congress authorized the president annually to establish government - wide minimum participation goals for procurement contracts awarded to small businesses and small businesses owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals .

congress required the government - wide minimum participation goal for small businesses to be "not less than 20% of the total value of all prime contract awards for each fiscal year" and "not less than 5% of the total value of all prime contract and subcontract awards for each fiscal year" for small businesses owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals .

each federal agency was also directed to "have an annual goal that presents , for that agency , the maximum practicable opportunity for small business concerns and small business concerns owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals to participate in the performance of contracts let by such agency. .

the sba was also required to report to the president annually on the attainment of the goals and to include the information in an annual report to congress .

the sba negotiates the goals with each federal agency and establishes a small business eligible baseline for evaluating the agency's performance .

the agency head is required to "make consistent efforts to annually expand participation by small business concerns from each industry category. .

if the sba and the agency cannot agree on the goals , the agency may submit the case to the office of management and budget ( omb ) office of federal procurement policy ( ofpp ) for resolution .

the small business eligible baseline excludes certain contracts that the sba has determined do not realistically reflect the potential for small business participation in federal procurement ( such as those awarded to mandatory and directed sources ) , contracts funded predominately from agency - generated sources ( i.e. , non - appropriated funds ) , contracts not covered by the far , acquisitions on behalf of foreign governments , and contracts not reported in the federal procurement data system – next generation , or fpds - ng ( such as government procurement card purchases and contracts valued less than $10,000 ) .

these exclusions typically account for 18% to 20% of all federal prime contracts each year .

the sba then evaluates the agencies' performance against their negotiated goals annually , using fpds - ng data , managed by the u.s. general services administration ( gsa ) , to generate the small business eligible baseline .

this information is compiled into the official small business goaling report , which the sba releases annually .

each agency that fails to achieve any proposed prime or subcontract goal is required to submit a justification to the sba on why it failed to achieve a proposed or negotiated goal with a proposed plan of corrective action .

agencies can take credit in every category that is applicable to the recipient of the contract .

for example , "when counting goaling achievements , a contract awarded to a service - disabled veteran - owned woman - owned small business would be counted toward the small business ( sb ) goal , the service - disabled veteran - owned small business ( sdvosb ) goal and the women - owned small business ( wosb ) goal .

however , these category counts are not summed to triple the total count .

the sum of parts does not equal the whole ( italics in original ) . .

over the years , federal government - wide procurement goals have been established for small businesses generally ( p.l .

100-656 , the business opportunity development reform act of 1988 , and p.l .

105-135 , the hubzone act of 1997 — title vi of the small business reauthorization act of 1997 ) ; small businesses owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals ( p.l .

100-656 ) ; women ( p.l .

103-355 , the federal acquisition streamlining act of 1994 ) ; small businesses located within a hubzone ( p.l .

105-135 ) ; and small businesses owned and controlled by a service - disabled veteran ( p.l .

106-50 , the veterans entrepreneurship and small business development act of 1999 ) .

the current federal small business procurement goals are at least 23.0% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards to small businesses for each fiscal year ; 5.0% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards and subcontract awards to small disadvantaged businesses ( including participants in the sba's 8 ( a ) program ) for each fiscal year ; 5.0% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards and subcontract awards to women - owned small businesses ; 3.0% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards and subcontract awards to hubzone small businesses ; and 3.0% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards and subcontract awards to service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses .

there are no punitive consequences for not meeting these goals .

however , the sba's small business goaling report is distributed widely , receives media attention , and serves to heighten public awareness of the issue of small business contracting .

for example , agency performance as reported in the sba's small business goaling report is often cited by members during their questioning of federal agency witnesses during congressional hearings .

as shown in table 1 , the fy2017 small business goaling report , using fpds - ng data , indicates that federal agencies met the federal procurement goal for small businesses generally , small disadvantaged businesses , and service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses in fy2017 .

table 1 also provides , for comparative purposes , the percentage of total reported federal contracts ( without exclusions ) awarded to those small businesses in fy2017 .

before awarding a federal contract , the contracting officer must affirmatively determine that the business is responsible to perform the contract .

if the contracting officer determines that an apparent successful small business offeror lacks certain elements of responsibility ( eg , is unable to fulfill the requirements of a specific government procurement because it lacks capability , competency , capacity , credit , integrity , perseverance , tenacity , or limitations on subcontracting ) , the officer is required to refer the matter in writing to the sba for review and a possible certificate of competency ( coc ) , even if the next acceptable offer is also from a small business .

the coc certifies in writing that the small business meets all required elements of responsibility for the purpose of receiving and performing a specific government contract .

the "coc program empowers the sba to certify to contracting officers as to all elements of responsibility of any small business concern to receive and perform a specific government contract .

the coc program does not extend to questions concerning regulatory requirements imposed and enforced by other federal agencies. .

as mentioned previously , the sba's commercial market representatives conduct periodic compliance reviews of contractors awarded contracts that require an acceptable small business subcontracting plan .

in addition , once the contract is completed , federal agencies are required to pay the contractor on a timely basis and pay interest penalties for late payments .

under specified circumstances , federal agencies may also pay contractors before the contract's payment's due date .

the small business contracting programs described in this report generally have strong bipartisan support .

however , that does not mean that these programs face no opposition or that issues have not been raised concerning the impact or operations of specific programs .

for example , small business advocates seek policies that reduce or eliminate exclusions that narrow the reach of small business contracting preferences , want the sba to use the total value of all prime contract awards in the small business goaling report , and want the sba to use a more discerning methodology for awarding performance grades to federal agencies in meeting its small business contracting goals .

critics have questioned some of these programs' effectiveness , in terms of both promoting small business opportunities to win federal contracts and a more diversified , robust economy .

many observers judge the relative success or failure of federal efforts to enhance small business contracting opportunities by whether the federal government and individual federal agencies meet the procurement goals in the annual small business goaling report .

in recent years , the federal government has generally succeeded in meeting the government - wide goals of awarding 23% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards to small businesses generally , 5% to sdbs , and 3% to sdvosbs .

however , it has had difficulty meeting the goals of 5% to wosbs and 3% to hubzone small businesses .

the small business goaling report is the most convenient measure available to compare federal small business contracting performance over time , but it has limitations .

for example , the report does not include all federal contracts , because some are not deemed to be small business eligible and others are not recorded in the fpds - ng .

in addition , the report does not evaluate the effect these contracts have on small businesses , industry competitiveness , or the overall economy .

as one group of researchers has argued , the entire goal - setting process … is geared to measuring the dollars and contracts awarded to small business , and pays little attention to the effect that access to government contracts has on small business starts , growth , and wealth generation .

results of the program are also hard to isolate , difficult to measure , and generally not judged against the next best or other alternative policies [emphasis in original] .

comprehensive studies examining the effect of small business contracting preferences on small business startups , growth , wealth generation , and industry competitiveness may prove useful for congressional oversight .

in the meantime , although the small business goaling report has its limitations , it can help policymakers identify programs most in need of examination .

for example , the sba has announced that it is focusing additional efforts on promoting the hubzone program to federal contracting officials , primarily due to the continuing difficulties federal agencies have had in meeting the 3% goal for hubzone small businesses .

