cross - border data flows underlie today's globally connected world and are essential to conducting international trade and commerce .

data flows enable companies to transmit information for online communication , track global supply chains , share research , and provide cross - border services .

one study estimates that digital commerce relying on data flows drives 22% of global economic output , and that global gdp will increase by another $2 trillion by 2020 due to advances in emerging technologies .

however , while cross - border data flows increase productivity and enable innovation , they also raise concerns around the security and privacy of the information being transmitted .

cross - border data flows are central to trade and trade negotiations as organizations rely on the transmission of information to use cloud services , and to send nonpersonal corporate data as well as personal data to partners , subsidiaries , and customers .

u.s. policymakers are considering various policy options to address online privacy , some of which could affect cross - border data flows .

for example , new consumer rights to control their personal data may impact how companies can use such data .

to enable international data flows and trade , the united states has aimed to eliminate trade barriers and establish enforceable international rules and best practices that allow policymakers to achieve public policy objectives , including promoting online security and privacy .

building consensus for international rules and norms on data flows and privacy has become increasingly important as recent incidents have heightened the public's awareness of the risk of personal data stored online .

for example , the 2018 cambridge analytica scandal drew attention because the firm reportedly acquired and used data on more than 87 million facebook accounts in an effort to influence voters in the 2016 u.s. presidential election and the uk referendum on continued european union ( eu ) membership ( "brexit" ) .

in addition , security concerns have been raised about data breaches , such as those that exposed the personal data of half a million google users or 500 million marriot hotel customers .

organizations value consumers' personal online data for a variety of reasons .

for example , companies may seek to facilitate business transactions , analyze marketing information , detect disease patterns from medical histories , discover fraudulent payments , improve proprietary algorithms , or develop competitive innovations .

some analysts compare data to oil or gold , but unlike those valuable substances , data can be reused , analyzed , shared , and combined with other information ; it is not a scarce resource .

however , personal data is considered personal private property .

individuals often want to control who accesses their data and how it is used .

experts suggest that data may therefore be considered both a benefit and a liability that organizations hold .

data has value , but an organization takes on risk by collecting personal data ; they become responsible for protecting users' privacy and not misusing the information .

data privacy concerns may become more urgent as the amount of online information organizations access and collect , and the level of global data flows , continue to expand .

countries vary in their policies and laws on these issues .

the united states has traditionally supported open data flows and has regulated privacy at a sectoral level to cover data , such as health records , rather than create a comprehensive policy .

u.s. trade policy has sought to balance the goals of consumer privacy , security , and open commerce , including eliminating trade barriers and opening markets .

other countries are developing data privacy policies that affect international trade as some governments or groups seek to limit data flows outside of an organization or across national borders for a number of reasons .

blocking international data flows may impede the ability of a firm to do business or of an individual to conduct a transaction , creating a form of trade protectionism .

research demonstrates not only the economic gains from digital trade and international data flows , but also the real economic costs of restrictions on such flows .

for many policymakers , the crux of the issue is: how can governments protect individual privacy in the least trade - restrictive way possible ? .

the question is similar to concerns raised about ensuring cybersecurity while allowing the free flow of data .

in recent years , congress has examined multiple issues related to cross - border data flows and online privacy .

in the 115 th congress , congressional committees held hearings on these topics , introduced multiple bills , and conducted oversight over federal laws on related issues such as data breach notification .

members are introducing new bills and holding hearings in the 116 th congress .

congress may consider the proposed u.s. - mexico - canada agreement ( usmca ) and examine the digital trade chapter as an example of how to address the issues through trade agreements .

there are no comprehensive multilateral rules specifically about privacy or cross - border data flows .

however , the united states and other countries have begun to address these issues in negotiating new and updated trade agreements , and through international economic forums and organizations such as the asia - pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) forum and the organisation for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) .

personal privacy has received increasing focus with the growth of digital trade encouraging global cooperation .

the united states has contributed to developing international guidelines or principles related to privacy and cross - border data flows , although none are legally binding .

countries vary in their privacy policies and laws , reflecting differing priorities , cultures , and legal structures .

according to one index , china is the most restrictive digital trade country among 64 countries surveyed , followed by russia , india , indonesia , and vietnam ( see figure 1 ) .

the united states ranks 22 in the index , less restrictive than brazil or france but more restrictive than canada or australia .

the relatively high u.s. score largely reflects financial sector restrictions .

the "restrictions on data" category covers data policies such as privacy and security measures ; this category is included in the composite index .

looking specifically at the 64 countries' data policies , russia is the most restrictive country , followed by turkey and china .

russia's policies include data localization , retention , and transfer requirements , among others .

turkey's comprehensive data protection law also establishes requirements in these areas .

in contrast , the united states ranks 50 for data policy restrictions .

two of the top u.s. trading partners ( the eu and china ) have established their data policies from different perspectives .

the eu's policies are driven by privacy concerns ; china's policies are based on security justifications .

both are setting examples that other countries , especially those with ( or seeking ) closer trading ties to china or the eu , are emulating ; thus , these policies have affected u.s. firms seeking to do business in those other countries as well .

the eu's emphasis on privacy protection and china's focus on national security ( and the countries that emulate their policies ) have led these countries to create data - focused policies that restrict international trade and commerce .

the united states has traditionally sought a balanced approach between trade , privacy , and security .

u.s. data flow policy priorities are articulated in ustr's digital 2 dozen report , first developed under the obama administration , and the white house's 2017 national security strategy .

both administrations emphasize the need for protection of privacy , the free flow of data across borders , and an interoperable internet .

these documents establish the u.s. position that the free flow of data is not inconsistent with privacy protection .

recent free trade agreements translate the u.s. position into binding international commitments .

the united states has taken a data - specific approach to regulating data privacy , with laws protecting specific information , such as healthcare or financial data .

the ftc enforces consumer protection laws and requires that consumers be notified of and consent to how their data will be used , but the ftc does not have the mandate or resources to enforce broad online privacy protections .

there is growing interest among some members of congress and in the administration for a more holistic u.s. data privacy policy .

finding a global consensus on how to balance open data flows and privacy protection may be key to maintaining trust in the digital environment and advancing international trade .

one study found that over 120 countries have laws related to personal data protection .

divergent national privacy approaches raise the costs of doing business and make it harder for governments to collaborate and share data , whether for scientific research , defense , or law enforcement .

a system for global interoperability in a least trade - restrictive and nondiscriminatory way between different national systems could help minimize costs and allow entities in different jurisdictions with varying online privacy regimes to share data via cross - border data flows .

such a system could help avoid fragmentation of the internet between european , chinese , and american spheres , a danger that some analysts have warned against .

for example , figure 2 suggests the potential of an interoperability system that allows data to flow freely between gdpr - and cbpr - certified economies .

the oecd guidelines , g - 20 principles , apec cbpr , cptpp , and usmca provisions demonstrate an evolving understanding on how to balance cross - border data flows , security , and privacy , to create interoperable policies that can be tailored by countries and avoid fragmentation or the potential exclusion of other countries or regulatory systems .

the various trade agreements and initiatives with differing sets of parties may ultimately pave the way for a broader multilateral understanding and eventually lead to more enforceable binding commitments founded on the key wto principles of nondiscrimination , least trade restrictiveness , and transparency .

congress may consider the trade - related aspects of data flows in trade agreements , including through close examination of these provisions during the congressional debate and consideration of legislation to implement the proposed usmca .

issues include whether the agreements make progress in meeting tpa's related trade negotiating objectives and if the provisions strike the appropriate balance among public policy objectives .

in addition , ustr's specific trade negotiating objectives for future agreements with the eu and japan include establishing rules to protect cross - border data flows .

these future trade negotiations present challenges and provide opportunities for congress to further engage ustr on the issues and to conduct oversight .

congress may further consider how best to achieve broader consensus on data flows and privacy at the global level .

congress could , for example , conduct additional oversight of current best practice approaches ( eg , oecd , apec ) or ongoing negotiations in the wto on e - commerce to create rules through plurilateral or multilateral agreements .

congress may consider endorsing certain of these efforts to influence international discussions and the engagement of other countries .

congress may want to examine the potential challenges and implications of building a system of interoperability between apec , cbpr , and the eu gdpr .

related issues are the extent to which the eu is establishing its system as a potential de facto global approach through its trade agreements and other mechanisms , and how u.s. and other trade agreements may ultimately provide approaches that could be adopted more globally .

congress may seek to better understand the economic impact of data flows and privacy regimes in other countries related to u.s. access to other markets and the extent to which barriers are being put in place that may discriminate against u.s. exporters .

congress may examine the lack of reciprocal treatment and limits on u.s. firms' access to some foreign markets .

congress may consider the implications of not having a comprehensive national data privacy policy .

will the eu gdpr and china cybersecurity policies become the global norms that other countries follow in the absence of a clear u.s. alternative ? .

congress may enact comprehensive privacy legislation .

in considering such action , congress could investigate and conduct oversight of the administration's ongoing privacy efforts , including requesting briefings and updates on the ntia , nist , and ita initiatives to provide congressional feedback and direction and ensure they are aligned with u.s. trade objectives .

congress may also seek input from other federal agencies .

in deliberating a comprehensive u.s. policy on personal data privacy , congress may review the gao report's findings and conclusions .

congress may also weigh several factors , including: how can u.s. trade and domestic policy achieve the appropriate balance to encourage cross - border commerce , economic growth , and innovation , while safeguarding individual privacy and national security ? .

how would a new privacy regime affect u.s. consumers and businesses , including large multinationals who must comply with different national privacy regimes and small - and medium - sized enterprises with limited resources and technology expertise ? .

do u.s. agencies have the needed tools to accurately assess the size and scope of cross - border data flows to help analyze the economic impact of different privacy policies , or measure the costs of trade barriers ? .

how should an evolving u.s. privacy regime align with u.s. trade policy objectives and evolving international standards , such as the oecd guidelines for privacy and cybersecurity , and should u.s. policymakers prioritize interoperability with other international privacy frameworks to avoid further fragmentation of global markets and so - called balkanization of the internet ? .

in addition , there are a host of other policy considerations not directly related to trade .

