the army's optionally manned fighting vehicle ( omfv ) is expected to be the third attempt to replace the m - 2 bradley infantry fighting vehicle ( ifv ) which has been in service since the early 1980s .

despite numerous upgrades since its introduction , the army contends the m - 2 is near the end of its useful life and can no longer accommodate the types of upgrades needed for it to be effective on the modern battlefield .

because the omfv would be an important weapon system in the army's armored brigade combat teams ( abcts ) , congress may be concerned with how the omfv would impact the effectiveness of ground forces over the full spectrum of military operations .

moreover , congress might also be concerned with how much more capable the omfv is projected to be over the m - 2 to ensure that it is not a costly marginal improvement over the current system .

a number of past unsuccessful army acquisition programs have served to heighten congressional oversight of army programs , and the omfv will likely be subject to a high degree of congressional interest .

in addition to these primary concerns , how the army plans to use the new congressionally - granted section 804 middle tier acquisition authority as well as overall program affordability could be potential oversight issues for congress .

in june 2018 , the army established the next generation combat vehicle ( ngcv ) program to replace the m - 2 bradley infantry fighting vehicle ( ifv ) , which has been in service since the early 1980s .

in october 2018 , army leadership reportedly decided to redesignate the ngcv as the optionally manned fighting vehicle ( omfv ) and add additional vehicle programs to what would be called the ngcv program .

under the new ngcv program , the following systems are planned for development: the optionally manned fighting vehicle ( omfv ) : the m - 2 bradley ifv replacement .

the armored multi - purpose vehicle ( ampv ) : the m - 113 vehicle replacement .

mobile protected firepower ( mpf ) : a light tank for infantry brigade combat teams ( ibcts ) .

robotic combat vehicles ( rcvs ) : three versions , light , medium , and heavy .

the decisive lethality platform ( dlp ) : the m - 1 abrams tank replacement .

two programs — ampv and mpf — are in low rate initial production ( lrip ) and prototype development , respectively .

reportedly , the ampv and mpf programs , which were overseen by program executive office ( peo ) ground combat systems , will continue to be overseen by peo ground combat systems , but the ngcv cross functional team ( cft ) will determine their respective operational requirements and acquisition schedule .

the army's preliminary basic operational requirements for the omfv include the following: optionally manned .

it must have the ability to conduct remotely controlled operations while the crew is off - platform .

capacity .

it should eventually operate with no more than two crewmen and possess sufficient volume under armor to carry at least six soldiers .

transportability .

two omfvs should be transportable by one c - 17 and be ready for combat within 15 minutes .

dense urban terrain operations and mobility .

platforms should include the ability to super elevate weapons and simultaneously engage threats using main gun and an independent weapons system .

protection .

it must possess requisite protection to survive on the contemporary and future battlefield .

growth .

it should possess sufficient size , weight , architecture , power , and cooling for automotive and electrical purposes to meet all platform needs and allow for preplanned product improvements .

lethality .

it should apply immediate , precise , and decisively lethal extended range medium - caliber , directed energy , and missile fires in day / night / all - weather conditions , while moving and / or stationary against moving and / or stationary targets .

the platform should allow for mounted , dismount , and unmanned system target handover .

embedded p latform t raining .

it should have embedded training systems that have interoperability with the synthetic training environment .

sustainability .

industry should demonstrate innovations that achieve breakthroughs in power generation and management to obtain increased operational range and fuel efficiency , increased silent watch , part and component reliability , and significantly reduced sustainment burden .

additional requirements include the capacity to accommodate reactive armor , an active protection system ( aps ) , artificial intelligence , and directed - energy weapons and advanced target sensors .

in the aftermath of the gcv program , the army embarked on a future fighting vehicle ( ffv ) effort in 2015 .

army officials — described as "cautious" and "in no hurry to initiate an infantry fighting vehicle program" — instead initiated industry studies to "understand the trade space before leaping into a new program. .

in general , army combat vehicle modernization efforts post - fcs have been characterized as upgrading existing platforms as opposed to developing new systems .

this was due in part to reluctance of senior army leadership , but also to significant budgetary restrictions imposed on the army during this period .

some in congress , however , were not pleased with the slow pace of army modernization , reportedly noting the army was "woefully behind on modernization" and was "essentially organized and equipped as it was in the 1980s. .

in june 2018 , in part due to congressional concerns , the army announced a new modernization strategy and designated ngcvs as the second of its six modernization priorities .

originally , the ngcv was considered the program to replace the m - 2 bradley .

development of the ngcv would be managed by the program executive officer ( peo ) ground combat systems , under the assistant secretary of the army ( asa ) , acquisition , logistics , and technology ( alt ) .

 figure 1 depicts the department of defense ( dod ) systems acquisition framework , which illustrates the various phases of systems development and acquisitions and is applicable to the procurement of army ground combat systems .

as part of the revised ngcv program , the army plans to develop three rcv variants: light , medium , and heavy .

the army reportedly envisions employing rcvs as "scouts" and "escorts" for manned omfvs .

rcvs could precede omfvs into battle to deter ambushes and could be used to guard the flanks of omfv formations .

initially , rcvs would be controlled by operators riding in ngcvs , but the army hopes that improved ground navigation technology and artificial intelligence will permit a single operator to control multiple rcvs .

the following sections provide a brief overview of each variant .

section 804 of the national defense authorization act for fy2016 ( p.l .

114-92 ) provides authority to the department of defense ( dod ) to rapidly prototype and / or rapidly field capabilities outside the traditional acquisition system .

referred to as "804 authority," it is intended to deliver a prototype capability in two to five years under two distinct pathways: rapid prototyping or rapid fielding .

one of the benefits of using 804 authority is that the services can bypass the joint requirements oversight council ( jroc ) and the joint capabilities integration development systems ( jcids ) , two oversight bodies that , according to some critics , slow the acquisition process .

under rapid prototyping , the objectives are to field a prototype that can be demonstrated in an operational environment , and provide for residual operational capability within five years of an approved requirement .

under rapid fielding , the objectives are to begin production within six months , and complete fielding within five years of an approved requirement .

for the omfv program , the army reportedly plans to use rapid prototyping under section 804 to permit the program to enter at the emd phase , thereby avoiding a two - to three - year technical maturation phase .

regarding the rcv program , the army's robotic campaign plan indicates that section 804 authority is an "option" for rcv development .

the army requested $378 million in research , development , test , and evaluation ( rdt&e ) funding for the omfv program and $109 million in rdt&e funding for the rcv in its fy2020 budget request .

in terms of the omfv , funding is planned to be used for , among other things , maturing technological upgrades for integration into the vehicle , including nondevelopmental active protection systems ( aps ) , the xm 913 50 mm cannon , and the 3 rd generation forward looking infrared radar ( flir ) .

fy2020 funding for rcvs is planned for finishing building prototypes of surrogate platforms and conducting manned - unmanned teaming evaluations .

the omfv is expected to be the army's third attempt to replace the m - 2 bradley ifv after two costly previous attempts were cancelled , perhaps casting doubt on the army's ability to design and field major ground combat systems .

while many factors contributed to the cancelled fcs and gcv programs , two common problems were ( 1 ) overreliance on too many immature technologies , as well as the failure of some critical technologies , and ( 2 ) frequently changing performance requirements from army leadership , resulting in increased program costs .

although the army suggests that an emphasis on prototyping and the creation of the army futures command ( afc ) may remedy such problems , it can be argued these remedies are , at best , too general and lack specific measures necessary to ensure that past problems do not recur .

to enhance program oversight and avoid potential problems in the omfv program , congress might consider requiring the army to articulate the specific measures it will employ to mitigate technological challenges and leadership - generated "requirements creep. .

in terms of requirements , it may be beneficial to have answers to the following questions: who in the army will have input into omfv performance requirements ? .

who in the army adjudicates the inputs for omfv performance requirements ? .

who in the army will be responsible for the final decision on omfv performance requirements ? .

understanding these standards could help policymakers conduct oversight in terms of overall omfv program accountability , especially if requirements change over the lifecycle of the program .

one of the reasons cited for the failure of the fcs program was a "complicated program management approach. .

program management of major defense systems typically involves a number of organizations and multiple authorities and processes .

even by those standards , however , program management of the omfv and rcv programs is arguably overly complicated and somewhat ill - defined ( see pages 6-7 ) .

determining afc's role in omfv and rcv program management , and how it will relate to the asa ( alt ) and peo ground combat systems and other organizations , may be a work in progress ; however , at some point , having a clearly established management structure with agreed authorities and responsibilities is likely to be essential for ultimate program success .

toward this end , congress might consider examining , in detail , the army's proposed program management structure and authorities and processes for omfv and rcv to help ensure that program management will be efficient and effective , and not a programmatic detriment ( as it was in the case of the fcs ) .

as previously noted , the army envisions employing rcvs as "scouts" and "escorts" for manned omfvs .

in addition to enhancing omfv survivability , rcvs could potentially increase the overall lethality of abcts .

army leadership has stated that the army's first priority is replacing the bradley with the omfv , that the rcv will mature on a longer timeline than the omfv , and that the omfv will later be joined by the rcv .

given technological challenges , particularly autonomous ground navigation and artificial intelligence improvement , the army's vision for rcv may not be achievable by the planned fy2026 fielding date or for many years thereafter .

the army describes the omfv and rcv as "complementary" systems , but a more nuanced description of both the systematic and operational relationship between the two could be beneficial .

while the omfv appears to offer a significant improvement over the m - 2 bradley — given weapon systems technological advances by potential adversaries — operating alone without accompanying rcvs , the omfv may offer little or marginal operational improvement over the m - 2 bradley .

recognizing the risks associated with a scenario where rcv fielding is significantly delayed or postponed due to technological challenges — along with a better understanding of the systematic and operational relationship between the omfv and the rcv — could prove useful for policymakers .

another potential oversight question for congress could be what is the role of army futures command ( afc ) in integrating requirements between omfv and rcvs ? .

to some , the use of section 804 authority offers great promise in developing and fielding qualifying weapon systems quickly and cost - effectively .

others note that rapid prototyping authorities under section 804 will not eliminate the complexities of technology development and that operational requirements also drive the complexity and technical difficulty of a project .

in acknowledging the potential benefits that section 804 authority could bring to the army's third attempt to replace the m - 2 bradley , as well as the risks associated with its use over a more traditional acquisition approach , policymakers might decide to examine the potential costs , benefits , and risks associated with using section 804 authority for the omfv program .

