election administration attracted significant attention in 2000 , when issues with the vote count delayed the results of the presidential race .

administrative issues have also been reported in subsequent election cycles .

for example , issues with voter registration were reported in multiple states in 2016 and 2018 .

some responses to such reports focus on the rules of elections .

the help america vote act of 2002 ( hava ; p.l .

107-252 ; 116 stat .

1666 ) , for example , requires states to establish a uniform standard of what counts as a vote for each voting system they use ( 52 u.s.c .

§21081 ( a ) ( 6 ) ) , and bills have been introduced in recent congresses to change how voter registration is handled .

other responses focus on the systems that apply election rules .

in the united states , that typically means state and local systems .

the administration of elections in the united states is highly decentralized .

elections are primarily administered by thousands of state and local systems rather than a single , unified national system .

understanding how those state and local systems work may be relevant to congress for at least two reasons .

first , the way state and local election systems work can affect how well federal action on election administration serves its intended purposes .

most federal action on election administration is carried out by state and local election systems .

interactions between the workings of those systems and federal actions can help determine how effective the federal actions are at achieving their objectives .

second , congress can require or encourage changes to the way state and local election systems work .

congress has a number of tools for influencing election administration policy .

the use of these tools can — either intentionally or unintentionally — affect the workings of the state and local systems that administer federal elections .

this report is intended to help congress understand how state and local election systems work and how their workings might relate to federal activity on election administration .

it starts by describing the distribution of election administration duties at the state and local levels and the structures of the state and local systems that conduct elections .

it then uses examples from past federal action on election administration to illustrate some of the ways the duties and structures of state and local election systems interact with federal activity .

it closes by introducing some considerations that may be relevant to members interested in election administration .

election administration involves making decisions about the rules of elections , such as whether voters should be able to register online , whether they should be required to show photo identification at the polls , and whether election results should be audited .

it also involves conducting elections in accordance with those decisions and paying for the activities and resources required to conduct them .

these three election administration duties can be described as policymaking , implementation , and funding .

this section describes some common patterns in the distribution of these duties at the state and local levels .

the structures of the state and local systems that conduct federal elections vary both between and within states .

common variations include differences related to the leadership of the election system ; relationship between local election officials and the state ; and population size and density of the jurisdiction served by the system .

this section describes these structural variations .

the duties and structures of state and local election systems can affect the implementation of federal election administration laws .

perhaps as a result , congress has specified how states and localities should distribute certain election administration duties and structure certain elements of their election systems .

changes to the duties and structures of state and local election systems have sometimes also been side effects of other federal activity on election administration .

congress has considered legislation — some of which has been enacted and some of which has not — that would change election rules or the state and local systems that implement them .

the interactions between the duties and structures of state and local election systems and past federal actions suggest some considerations that may be relevant to future congressional consideration of proposals that would affect the administration of federal elections .

the following questions may be of interest to members as they consider making changes to election administration or maintaining current rules and structures: how would any proposed change interact with the duties and structures of state and local election systems ? .

would the duties and structures of state and local election systems make a proposed change difficult to implement ? .

would the design of a proposed change need to be adjusted to accommodate variations between or within states ? .

which of the policy tools available to congress is best suited to achieving the purpose of a proposed change ? .

for example , would it be more effective to advance a proposed change with a federal requirement , or incentivize it via federal funding ? .

how might the nature of the state and local system inform a proposed change ? .

for example , if it is a federal requirement , who is charged with compliance ; who is responsible for the tasks required for compliance ; and what is the relationship between the two ? .

if it is federal funding , to whom should it be distributed , and who should be involved in making decisions about how to use it ? .

would a proposed change have the effect , either intentionally or unintentionally , of altering the duties or structures of state or local election systems ? .

if so , what are the advantages and disadvantages of such changes ? .

are there complications with a proposed change that are not specifically related to election administration ? .

for example , could there be federalism - related issues with intervening in the relationships between states and their political subdivisions ? .

