the federal government , through the department of energy , operates four regional power marketing administrations ( pmas ) , created by statute: the bonneville power administration ( bpa ) , the southeastern power administration ( sepa ) , the southwestern power administration ( swpa ) , and the western area power administration ( wapa ) .

each pma operates in a distinct geographic area of the coterminous united states ( see figure 1 ) .

congressional interest in the pmas has included diverse issues such as rate setting , cost and compliance associated with the endangered species act ( esa ; p.l .

93-205 ; 16 u.s.c .

§§1531 et seq .

 ) , and questions of privatization of these federal agencies .

in general , the pmas came into being because of the government's need to dispose of electric power produced by federal dams constructed largely for irrigation , flood control , or other purposes , and to achieve small community and farm electrification — that is , providing service to customers whom it would not have been profitable for a private utility to serve .

with minor exceptions , these agencies market the electric power produced by federal dams constructed , owned , and operated by the corps of engineers ( corps ) and the u.s. bureau of reclamation ( bor ) .

pmas must give preference to public utility districts and cooperatives ( eg , "preference customers" ) , selling their power at cost - based rates set at the lowest possible rate consistent with sound business principles .

the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) regulates pma rates to ensure that they are set high enough to repay the u.s. treasury on schedule for the portion of federal facility costs that have been allocated to hydropower beneficiaries .

since fy2011 , power revenues associated with the pmas have been classified as discretionary offsetting receipts ( i.e. , receipts that are available for spending by the pmas ) , thus the agencies are sometimes noted as having a "net - zero" spending authority .

only the capital expenses of wapa and swpa require appropriations from congress .

each pma also has unique elements and regional issues that affect its business .

they are discussed in alphabetical order .

created by the bonneville project act of 1937 ( 16 u.s.c .

§832 ) just before the completion of two large dams in the pacific northwest — bonneville dam in 1938 and grand coulee dam in 1941 — bpa was the first pma .

though it serves a smaller geographical area , bpa is on par with wapa ( which serves the largest area ) in the size of its transmission system .

the agency operates and maintains about 75% of the high voltage transmission lines in its service territory , which includes idaho , oregon , washington , western montana and small parts of eastern montana , california , nevada , utah , and wyoming .

bpa also markets wholesale electricity from 31 federally owned hydropower facilities in the northwest .

these generation facilities are owned both by the corps and bor .

bpa differs from the other three pmas in that it is self - financed: it receives no federal appropriations .

since passage of the federal columbia river transmission system act of 1974 ( 16 u.s.c .

§838 ) , bpa has covered its operating costs through power rates set to ensure repayment to the treasury of capital and interest on funds used to construct the columbia river power system .

bpa also has permanent treasury borrowing authority , which it may use for capital on large projects .

this money is repaid with interest , through power sales .

as of 2018 , bpa had $5.53 billion of bonds outstanding to the u.s. treasury , with bpa's current borrowing authority capped by congress at $7.70 billion .

bpa has also looked at other financing options as it approaches its debt limit , looking at nonfederal debt refinancing , lease - purchases , and other asset management strategies .

the southeastern power administration was created in 1950 by the secretary of the interior to carry out the functions assigned to the secretary by the flood control act of 1944 ( p.l .

78-534 ) in 11 states ( alabama , florida , georgia , illinois , kentucky , mississippi , north carolina , south carolina , tennessee , virginia , and west virginia ) .

sepa is unique among the four pmas in two ways .

it is the smallest pma , with just over 40 employees , and , unlike the other three agencies , sepa does not operate or maintain any transmission facilities , and thus contracts with other utilities for transmitting the federal power it markets to more than 12 million consumers .

section 5 of the flood control act of 1944 ( p.l .

78-534 ) established the southwestern power administration .

swpa markets hydroelectric power in arkansas , kansas , louisiana , missouri , oklahoma , and texas from 24 multipurpose corps dams with a combined capacity of 2,194 mw .

swpa serves more than 100 preference customer utilities with more than 8 million end - use customers .

the agency manages nearly 1,400 miles of high - voltage transmission lines .

swpa is the only u.s. electrical balancing area supported solely by hydroelectric generation , and its use of the reservoirs and river systems within the swpa marketing area must be balanced with flood control and other required uses so that the power needs of its customers can be met .

swpa states that it uses alternative financing and offsetting collection authorities to fund expenses and purchase power to help swpa meet its obligations while minimizing congressional appropriations .

created by the department of energy organization act of 1977 ( p.l .

95-91 ) , wapa is the newest and largest of the pmas in terms of service area .

wapa's service area covers 1.3 million square miles , and its power — transmitted by a high voltage grid over 17,000 miles long — serves customers in 15 western states .

wapa markets and transmits hydropower from 56 federal dams operated by bor , and the corps .

it also sells hydropower power produced by facilities administered by the international boundary and water commission , and markets the united states' 24.3% share ( 547 megawatts ) of the coal - fired navajo generating station in arizona .

in addition to the types of public bodies traditionally served as preference customers by the other pmas , wapa has developed a policy to give preference to native american tribes regardless of their utility status .

in addition to issues specific to individual pmas , some recent proposals have applied to multiple pmas .

in 2018 , the trump administration proposed to sell the transmission assets owned and operated by the federal power marketing administrations .

the proposal suggested that "eliminating or reducing" the federal government's role in owning and operating transmission assets and increasing the private sector role would "encourage a more efficient allocation of economic resources and mitigate unnecessary risk to taxpayers. .

the proposal calls for federal transmission infrastructure assets ( lines , towers , substations , and / or rights of way ) to be sold , with the private sector and / or state and local entities potentially taking over the transmission functions now provided by the pmas .

the federal entities that would result after such sales could contract with other utilities to provide transmission service for the delivery of federal power just as the southeastern power administration , which does not own transmission lines , already does .

the proposal reports that according to the administration's fy2019 budget justification , the sale of federal transmission assets would result in a net budgetary savings of $9.5 billion , in total , over a 10-year window .

reportedly , the administration dropped the plan due to stakeholder opposition , with the department of energy stating that such a sale of pma transmission assets would not proceed unless directed by congress .

proposals to sell all or part of the pmas are not new , and have been made in some form by almost every president since reagan .

however , congress has sought to prevent executive branch alterations of pma structures and authority .

under section 208 of the urgent supplemental appropriations act , 1986 ( p.l .

99-349 ) , the executive branch is prohibited from spending funds to study or draft proposals to transfer from federal control any portion of the assets of the pmas unless specifically authorized by congress .

the trump administration divestment proposal could have had an indirect impact on the original congressional intent for the pmas to provide electricity at the lowest possible cost .

this in turn could require changes to the following provisions: flood control act of 1944 , as amended ( fca ; 16 u.s.c .

§825s et seq .

 ) ; the 1937 bonneville project act ( bpa ; 16 u.s.c .

§832c ) ; and the reclamation project act of 1939 ( rpa ; 43 u.s.c .

§485h ( c ) ) .

these laws also stipulate a preference of public bodies for the sale of federal power .

selling federally owned transmission assets could potentially affect the "lowest possible" rates of sale , and the statutory preference for publicly or cooperatively owned utilities to be the vehicle for sale of electric power produced by federal facilities .

