t his report examines the president's authority to terminate the united states' international obligations under the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) without further action from congress .

it also examines whether the nafta implementation act , the primary federal statute that implements the agreement in domestic law , would remain in effect if the president successfully terminated u.s. obligations under the agreement .

in analyzing these issues , the report focuses on three related questions: ( 1 ) whether , under international law , the president may terminate u.s. international obligations under nafta without congressional approval ; ( 2 )  whether , under domestic law , the president , relying on constitutional or statutory authority , may terminate u.s. international obligations under nafta unilaterally ; and ( 3 ) whether the nafta implementation act would remain in effect if the president successfully terminated u.s. international obligations under the agreement .

nafta is an international trade agreement among the united states , canada , and mexico that became effective on january 1 , 1994 .

the agreement includes market - opening provisions that remove tariff and nontariff barriers to trade , as well as other rules affecting trade in areas such as agriculture , customs procedures , foreign investment , government procurement , intellectual property protection , and trade in services .

the united states approved nafta as a congressional - executive agreement by a majority vote of each house of congress , rather than as a treaty ratified by the president after senate approval by a two - thirds majority vote .

it was not a self - executing agreement ; rather , implementing legislation was required to provide domestic legal authorities with the power to enforce and comply with the agreement's provisions .

congress approved and implemented nafta in domestic law in the nafta implementation act .

although many u.s. obligations under nafta were already implemented in domestic law prior to congress's enactment of the nafta implementation act , congress delegated rulemaking authority to the president and various federal agencies in the act so that they could further implement nafta in domestic law by promulgating executive orders , proclamations , or regulations .

the nafta implementing legislation contemplates certain limited changes to certain provisions of nafta ( eg , certain rules of origin ) in accordance with nafta's rules for minor amendments to the text of the agreement and limited congressional delegations of authority to the president to implement such changes in u.s. law .

on may 18 , 2017 , u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) ambassador robert lighthizer notified congress that the administration intended to renegotiate nafta .

more than a year later , following the conclusion of the negotiations , president trump signed a proposed replacement for nafta , the united states - mexico - canada free trade agreement ( usmca ) , along with his counterparts from canada and mexico .

the new agreement addressed a variety of issues , including changes to rules of origin for automotive trade ; intellectual property rights protections ; digital trade ; limitations on the scope of investor - state dispute settlement ( isds ) provisions ; and certain provisions on agricultural trade .

president trump has at times suggested that he will withdraw the united states from nafta unilaterally if congress does not approve the usmca .

international law does not itself prohibit the president from unilaterally terminating the united states' obligations under nafta .

nafta is a legally binding agreement under international law .

in other words , nafta is a "treaty" under international law , a term that has a more expansive meaning than the same term when used in u.s. domestic practice .

in this regard , it is important to distinguish "treaty" in the context of international law , in which "treaty" and "international agreement" are synonymous terms for all binding agreements , and "treaty" in the context of domestic american law , in which "treaty" may more narrowly refer to a particular subcategory of binding international agreements that receive the senate's advice and consent .

part v of the vienna convention on the law of treaties ( vienna convention ) , which the united states has not ratified but considers to reflect , in many aspects , customary international law , provides rules for withdrawal of a party from a binding international agreement .

article 54 of the vienna convention provides that "termination of a treaty or the withdrawal of a party may take place .

 .

 .

in conformity with the provisions of the treaty .

 .

 .

. .

article 2205 of nafta , which congress approved in the nafta implementation act , provides that a "party may withdraw from this agreement six months after it provides written notice of withdrawal to the other parties .

if a party withdraws , the agreement shall remain in force for the remaining parties. .

nafta does not address whether , in the context of the united states' withdrawal from the agreement , the term "party" includes both the president and congress acting together to accomplish withdrawal .

in addition , neither the other provisions of the agreement , the context in which they appear , nor the subsequent practice of the nafta parties sheds light on the issue .

in the absence of language to the contrary in nafta article 2205 , the vienna convention applies .

article 67 of the vienna convention provides that: any act of declaring invalid , terminating , withdrawing from or suspending the operation of a treaty pursuant to the provisions of the treaty .

 .

 .

shall be carried out through an instrument communicated to the other parties .

if the instrument is not signed by the head of state , head of government or minister for foreign affairs , the representative of the state communicating it may be called upon to produce full powers [i.e. , a document showing that the representative has authority to terminate the agreement on behalf of the state] .

it thus appears that if the president ( i.e. , the "head of state" for the united states ) communicated a notice of withdrawal from nafta to canada and mexico , and such notice became effective at least six months later , it would terminate the united states' obligations under the agreement as a matter of international law .

the withdrawal process under international law , however , may not account for the unique statutory , constitutional , and separation - of - powers principles related to withdrawal under u.s. domestic law , as discussed below .

if the president sought to terminate u.s. international obligations under nafta , an injured business or other party with standing to bring a lawsuit might seek an injunction from a u.s. federal court directing the executive branch to refrain from issuing a notice terminating u.s. obligations under nafta or a declaration from the court that such issuance is unlawful .

it is difficult to predict how a court might resolve such a challenge , as u.s. courts have uniformly avoided answering whether the u.s. constitution authorizes the president to terminate an international pact without express congressional approval .

instead , courts have left the executive and legislative branches to resolve disagreements over the termination power through the political process .

while no court has considered a case involving a trade agreement approved as a congressional - executive agreement under trade promotion authority ( tpa ) procedures , there is a significant possibility that a court would dismiss such a case for lack of jurisdiction .

congress could signal that it disputes the executive's termination of u.s. nafta obligations to a court by enacting a law or resolution with a veto - proof majority opposing or purporting to block such action .

if congress passed such an act or resolution and the executive still terminated nafta in direct derogation of that act or resolution , the legal paradigm governing the separation - of - powers analysis might shift .

to resolve certain separation - of - powers conflicts , the supreme court typically applies the approach set forth in justice jackson's concurring opinion in youngstown sheet & tube co. v. sawyer , which states that the president's constitutional powers often "are not fixed but fluctuate , depending on their disjunction or conjunction with those of congress. .

justice jackson's opinion sets forth a tripartite framework for evaluating the constitutional powers of the president .

the president's authority is ( 1 ) at a maximum when acting pursuant to authorization by congress ; ( 2 ) in a "zone of twilight" when congress and the president "may have concurrent authority , or in which its distribution is uncertain," and congress has not spoken on an issue ; and ( 3 ) at its "lowest ebb" when taking measures incompatible with the will of congress .

although congress has not enacted a law or resolution prohibiting the president from terminating nafta unilaterally , such action could place the president's authority at the "lowest ebb. .

in that scenario , the president may act in contravention of the will of congress only in matters involving exclusive presidential prerogatives that are "at once so conclusive and preclusive" that they "disabl[e] the congress from acting upon the subject. .

members of the executive branch have suggested that treaty termination is part of the president's plenary powers , but one could plausibly advance the counterargument that the legislative branch plays a shared role in the termination process , especially in matters that implicate congress's enumerated powers , such as international trade .

assuming that a federal court found a case challenging the president's termination of nafta to be justiciable , it would likely evaluate the president's authority to take such action .

because congress has not enacted a resolution or legislation disapproving of unilateral nafta termination , in order to terminate nafta without further congressional action , either ( 1 ) the president must possess plenary constitutional authority to terminate u.s. international obligations under nafta , or ( 2 ) congress must have authorized the president to take such action through legislation .

the nafta implementation act , the primary federal statute that implements nafta in domestic law , would likely remain in effect if the president successfully terminated the united states' international obligations under nafta unilaterally .

under supreme court precedent , the repealing of statutes generally must conform to the same bicameral and presentment process set forth in article i that is used to enact new legislation .

for example , in clinton v. city of new york , the supreme court struck down the line item veto act ( liva ) , a law that authorized the president , within five days of signing a bill into law , to make partial cancellation of certain tax and spending provisions in the law if the president determined certain criteria were met .

the court held that the liva violated the bicameralism and presentment requirements of the constitution because the president could effectively repeal acts of congress without going through the regular legislative process involving house and senate passage of legislation and presentment of it to the president for his signature or veto .

nonetheless , the court has recognized congress's authority to enact contingent legislation that provides for the alteration of a law's effect based on a condition that arises after the law is enacted .

it should be noted that sections 109 ( b ) and 415 of the nafta implementation act contain language that could be read to effect the repeal of certain provisions of the nafta implementation act under specific circumstances .

specifically , section 109 ( b ) states the following: ( b ) termination of nafta status — during any period in which a country ceases to be a nafta country , sections 101 through 106 shall cease to have effect with respect to such country .

section 415 ( a ) provides similar language with respect to certain provisions addressing dispute settlement in antidumping and countervailing duty cases in title iv of the nafta implementation act: in general — except as provided in subsection ( b ) [ , which contains transitional provisions] , on the date on which a country ceases to be a nafta country , the provisions of this title ( other than this section ) and the amendments made by this title shall cease to have effect with respect to that country .

the nafta implementation act defines "nafta country" as those countries ( i.e. , canada and mexico ) ( 1 ) to which the agreement is in force and ( 2 ) to which the united states "applies the agreement. .

the text and legislative history of sections 109 ( b ) and 415 of the nafta implementation act indicate that congress intended these sections to trigger automatic termination of certain provisions of the act with respect to canada or mexico when either country withdrew from nafta but the united states remained a party .

however , it is unclear what language in either of these provisions would afford the president the authority to terminate the agreement without such conduct by canada or mexico .

moreover , interpreting sections 109 ( b ) and 415 to provide for the automatic termination of certain provisions in the nafta implementation act when the president unilaterally terminates u.s. nafta obligations under international law would appear to violate a key canon of statutory construction that holds that if one plausible reading of a statute would raise questions about the statute's constitutionality , a court should look for another , "fairly possible" reading that would avoid the constitutional issue .

interpreting sections 109 ( b ) and 415 to authorize the president to terminate portions of the nafta implementation act by withdrawing the united states from nafta would raise the question of whether congress's delegation of such authority to the president violates separation - of - powers principles by contravening the presentment clause of the constitution , which , as noted above , requires that legislation be passed by congress and presented to the president for his signature or veto in order to become law .

accordingly , a more likely reading of sections 109 ( b ) and 415 would likely be that certain provisions of the nafta implementation act cease to have effect with respect to canada or mexico if either country withdraws from nafta but the united states remains a party .

therefore , absent further congressional action , the united states' withdrawal from nafta alone appears unlikely to trigger sections 109 ( b ) and 415 or render the nafta implementation act ineffective .

notably , even if the nafta implementation act remains in effect , other provisions of federal law ( eg , section 301 of the trade act of 1974 ) may grant the president or a federal agency authority to restrict trade with canada or mexico .

as noted , such actions would likely be subject to judicial review on various grounds .

