u.s. insurers and congress face new policy issues and questions related to the opportunities and risks presented by the growth in the international insurance market and trade in insurance products .

insurance is often seen as a localized product and u.s. insurance regulation has addressed this through a state - centric regulatory system .

the mccarran - ferguson act , passed by congress in 1945 , gives primacy to the individual states , and every state has its own insurance regulator and state laws governing insurance .

although the risks of loss and the regulation may be local , the business of insurance , as with many financial services , has an increasingly substantial international component as companies look to grow and diversify .

the international aspects of insurance have spurred the creation of a variety of entities and measures , both domestic and foreign , to facilitate the trade and regulation of insurance services .

financial services have been addressed in a number of u.s. trade agreements going back to the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) in 1994 .

the international association of insurance supervisors ( iais ) was created more than 20 years ago , largely under the impetus of the u.s. national association of insurance commissioners ( naic ) , to promote cooperation and exchange of information among insurance supervisors , including development of regulatory standards .

the 2007-2009 financial crisis sparked further international developments , with heads of state of the g - 20 nations creating the financial stability board ( fsb ) .

the postcrisis 2010 dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank ) altered the u.s. insurance regulatory system , particularly as it relates to international issues .

with the states continuing as the primary insurance regulators , following dodd - frank , the federal reserve exercised holding company oversight over insurers who owned a bank subsidiary or who were designated for enhanced supervision ( popularly known as systemically important financial institutions or sifis ) by the new financial stability oversight council ( fsoc ) .

the fsoc includes a presidentially appointed , independent voting member with insurance expertise as well as a state regulator as a nonvoting member .

the federal reserve , already a major actor in efforts at the fsb and the basel committee on banking supervision , thus became a significant insurance supervisor and joined the iais shortly thereafter .

dodd - frank also created a new federal insurance office ( fio ) .

the fio is not a federal insurance regulator , but is tasked with representing the united states in international fora and , along with the united states trade representative ( ustr ) , can negotiate international covered agreements relating to insurance prudential measures .

the fio also became a member of the iais and is participating significantly in iais efforts to create insurance capital standards .

the new federal involvement in insurance issues , both domestic and international , has created frictions both among the federal entities and between the states and the federal entities , and has been a subject of both congressional hearings and proposed legislation .

this report discusses trade in insurance services and summarizes the various international entities and agreements affecting the regulation of and trade in insurance .

it then addresses particular issues and controversies in greater depth , including the concluded u.s. - eu covered agreement , pending u.s. - uk covered agreement , and issues relating to international insurance standards .

it includes an appendix addressing legislation in the 115 th congress .

in 2017 , total u.s. services accounted for $798 billion of u.s. exports and $542 billion of u.s. imports , creating a surplus of $255 billion .

in financial services generally , the united states runs a substantial trade surplus , exporting $110 billion and importing $29 billion .

in contrast , the united states imported nearly $51 billion in insurance services and exported $18 billion in 2017 , mostly due to firms' reliance on foreign reinsurance .

this deficit has dropped from its peak in 2009 , but u.s. insurance services trade has been consistently in deficit for many years ( see figure 1 ) .

global performance by insurance brokers and agencies is concentrated , with europe , north america , and north asia accounting for 88.6% of total written premiums .

overall , the north american and european domestic insurance markets are highly competitive and there are fewer suppliers and less competition in the asia - pacific region .

a third of u.s. insurance services exports are with asia - pacific , with japan accounting for 14% of total u.s. insurance exports in 2017 ( see figure 2 ) .

bermuda and the united kingdom each account for another 15% of u.s. international insurance exports .

industry analysts note that although the current level of trade is relatively low for industry segments such as property , casualty , and direct insurance , it is rising as companies seek new markets for growth and risk diversification .

the property casualty market declined from 2013 to 2018 , in part due to intensifying natural disasters ; however , moving forward , that market is expected to grow due to demand in emerging markets .

in comparison to trade agreements , a covered agreement is a relatively new form of an international agreement , established along with the fio in title v of the dodd - frank act .

the statute defines a covered agreement as a type of international insurance or reinsurance agreement for recognition of prudential measures that the fio and the ustr negotiate on a bilateral or multilateral basis .

fio has no regulatory authority over the insurance industry , which is generally regulated by the individual states .

this is a significant contrast to , for example , federal financial regulators , such as the federal reserve or the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) , that might enter into international regulatory agreements at the basel committee on banking supervision or the international organization of securities commissions , respectively .

after such agreements are reached , the federal reserve or sec would generally then implement the agreements under its regulatory authority using the federal rulemaking process .

although the fio lacks regulatory authority , some state laws may be preempted if the fio director determines that a state measure ( 1 ) is inconsistent with a covered agreement and ( 2 ) results in less favorable treatment for foreign insurers .

the statute limits the preemption with the following provision: ( j ) savings provisions .

 — nothing in this section shall — ( 1 ) preempt — ( a ) any state insurance measure that governs any insurer's rates , premiums , underwriting , or sales practices ; ( b ) any state coverage requirements for insurance ; ( c ) the application of the antitrust laws of any state to the business of insurance ; or ( d ) any state insurance measure governing the capital or solvency of an insurer , except to the extent that such state insurance measure results in less favorable treatment of a non - united state insurer than a united states insurer .

further strictures are placed on the fio determination , including notice to the states involved and to congressional committees ; public notice and comment in the federal register ; and the specific application of the administrative procedure act , including de novo determination by courts in a judicial review .

although there is no legal precedent interpreting the covered agreement statute , it appears that these provisions would narrow the breadth of any covered agreement , particularly compared with other international agreements reached by federal financial regulators .

international agreements have been undertaken without direct congressional direction under agencies' existing regulatory authorities .

these authorities are then implemented through the regulatory rulemaking process , which may , in some cases , preempt state laws and regulations .

although the fio and the ustr must consult with congress on covered agreement negotiations , the statute does not require specific authorization or approval from congress for a covered agreement .

it does , however , require a 90-day layover period .

outside of international trade negotiations and agreements , two separate but interrelated entities have the most significant impact on international insurance issues in the united states: the financial stability board and the international association of insurance supervisors .

as part of its monitoring of global financial stability , the fsb has designated a number of financial institutions as globally systemically important .

an fsb designation is meant to indicate that the failure of an individual institution could have a negative impact on the global financial system .

initially , the designation focused on global systemically important banks ( g - sibs ) , but it also encompasses global systemically important insurers ( g - siis ) , and nonbank noninsurer global systemically important financial institutions ( nbni g - sifis ) , such as large asset managers , broker - dealers , and hedge funds .

designated institutions are expected to meet higher qualitative and quantitative regulatory and capital standards to help ensure their stability during a crisis .

although the fsb designations may be similar in intent to the designations done under the fsoc in the united states , fsb designations are a separate process with somewhat different criteria .

in 2016 , the fsb designated nine g - siis , including three u.s. insurers ( aig , metlife , and prudential financial ) .

the fsb also had requested that the iais develop capital standards and other regulatory measures to apply to g - siis as well as internationally active insurance groups ( iaigs ) , a wider set of insurers that fall short of the g - sii designation .

in 2017 , the fsb did not publish a new g - sii list , allowing the 2016 list to continue to be in effect .

in 2018 , the fsb decided not to identify g - siis , and it may suspend or discontinue the identification of g - siis depending on a new iais "holistic framework" to address systemic risk based on specific activities rather than individual firm designations .

in addition to the standards addressing systemic risk , the iais is developing a general common framework for the supervision of internationally active insurance groups ( comframe ) .

comframe encompasses a range of supervisory standards , particularly capital standards for iaigs .

the comframe process dates to 2010 ; currently , a public comment period has ended for a draft of the overall framework and a "2.0" version of specific insurance capital standards , with additional consultations continuing and formal adoption scheduled at the end of 2019 .

the 116 th congress faces an immediate issue regarding the u.s. - uk covered agreement .

this agreement is currently in its statutory 90-day layover period ( which began december 11 , 2018 ) before it can take effect .

congress could enact legislation directly affecting the agreement , conduct hearings or other oversight mechanisms , or allow the covered agreement to take effect without direct action .

the u.s. - uk covered agreement may not be the only international insurance issue before this congress .

with expected continued growth in the international insurance market and differences in regulatory approaches , the frictions between u.s. and foreign regulators as well as between state and federal regulators seem likely to continue .

congress may choose to address these issues in multiple ways including , for example , amending dodd - frank and the statutory role of fio and the ustr in international insurance negotiations ; legislating an increased role for states in u.s. representation to international insurance regulatory entities ; endorsing international insurance standards and legislating their adoption by states ; encouraging additional covered agreements to address the countries not covered by the current ones ; or encouraging the inclusion of insurance services as part of negotiations of potential free trade agreements .

the following summarizes legislation addressing international insurance issues in the 115 th congress .

legislation is ordered according to the stage to which it advanced in the legislative process .

economic growth , regulatory relief , and consumer protection act ( p.l .

115-174 / s. 2155 ) s. 2155 was introduced by senator michael crapo and 19 cosponsors on november 16 , 2017 .

the bill , covering a broad range of financial services provisions largely dealing with noninsurance issues , was marked up and reported on a vote of 16-7 by the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs in december 2017 .

a new section was added during the senate committee markup with language similar to s. 1360 ( discussed below ) .

s. 2155 passed the senate by a vote of 67-31 on march 14 , 2018 .

the house passed s. 2155 without amendment on may 22 , 2018 , and the president signed the bill into p.l .

115-174 on may 24 , 2018 .

section 211 of p.l .

115-174 finds that the treasury , federal reserve , and fio director shall support transparency in international insurance fora and shall "achieve consensus positions with state insurance regulators through the [naic]" when taking positions in international fora .

it creates an "insurance policy advisory committee on international capital standards and other insurance issues" at the federal reserve made up of 21 members with expertise on various aspects of insurance .

the federal reserve and the department of the treasury are to complete an annual report and to provide testimony on the ongoing discussions at the iais through 2022 , and the federal reserve and fio are to complete a study and report , along with the opportunity for public comment and review by the government accountability office ( gao ) , on the impact of international capital standards or other proposals prior to agreeing to such standards .

unlike s. 1360 , however , the enacted law does not have specific requirements on the final text of any international capital standard .

after signing s. 2155 , the president released a statement indicating that the congressional directions in the findings contravene the president's "exclusive constitutional authority to determine the time , scope , and objectives of international negotiations" but that the president will "give careful and respectful consideration to the preferences expressed by the congress in section 211 ( a ) and will consult with state officials as appropriate. .

international insurance standards act ( h.r .

4537 / s. 488 , title xiv ) representative sean duffy , along with seven cosponsors , introduced h.r .

4537 on december 4 , 2017 .

 ( a substantially similar bill , h.r .

3762 , was previously introduced and addressed in an october 24 , 2017 , hearing by the house financial services' subcommittee on housing and insurance. ) .

h.r .

4537 was marked up and ordered reported on a vote of 56-4 by the house committee on financial services on december 12-13 , 2017 .

it was reported ( h.rept .

115-804 ) on july 3 , 2018 .

the house considered a further amended version on july 10 , 2018 , and passed it under suspension of the rule by a voice vote .

h.r .

4537 was not taken up by the senate in the 115 th congress .

s. 488 originally was introduced by senator pat toomey as the encouraging employee ownership act , increasing the threshold for disclosure relating to compensatory benefit plans .

after senate passage on september 11 , 2017 , it was taken up in the house and amended with a number of different provisions , mostly focusing on securities regulation .

title xiv of the amended version of s. 488 , however , was nearly identical to h.r .

4537 as it passed the house .

the house - passed version of s. 488 was not taken up by the senate in the 115 th congress .

h.r .

4537 as passed by the house and s. 488 as passed by the house would have instituted a number of requirements relating to international insurance standards and insurance covered agreements .

u.s. federal representatives in international fora would have been directed not to agree to any proposal that does not recognize the u.s. system as satisfying that proposal .

such representatives would have been required to consult and coordinate with the state insurance regulators and with congress prior to and during negotiations and to submit a report to congress prior to entering into an agreement .

with regard to future covered agreements , the bill would have required u.s. negotiators to provide congressional access to negotiating texts and to "closely consult and coordinate with state insurance commissioners. .

future covered agreements were to be submitted to congress for possible disapproval under "fast track" legislative provisions .

the congressional budget office's cost estimate on h.r .

4537 as reported from committee found that , any budgetary effects of enacting h.r .

4537 would depend , in part , on how often the united states negotiates international insurance agreements and how frequently the negotiators must consult and coordinate with state insurance commissioners .

cbo has no basis for predicting that frequency but expects that the cost of such consultations would be less than $500,000 per year .

international insurance capital standards accountability act of 2017 ( s. 1360 ) s. 1360 was introduced by senator dean heller with cosponsor senator jon tester on june 14 , 2017 , and referred to the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs .

similar language to s. 1360 was added to p.l .

115-174 / s. 2155 as discussed above .

s. 1360 would have created an "insurance policy advisory committee on international capital standards and other insurance issues" at the federal reserve made up of 11 members with expertise on various aspects of insurance .

it would have required both an annual report and testimony from the federal reserve and the department of the treasury on the ongoing discussions at the iais through 2020 .

the federal reserve and fio would have been required to complete a study and report , along with the opportunity for public comment and review by gao , on the impact of international capital standards or other proposals prior to agreeing to such standards .

any final text of an international capital standard would have been required to be published in the federal register for comment and could not have been inconsistent with either state or federal reserve capital standards for insurers .

international insurance standards act of 2017 ( h.r .

3762 ) h.r .

3762 was introduced by representative sean duffy with cosponsor representative denny heck on september 13 , 2017 .

it was addressed in an october 24 , 2017 , hearing by the house financial services' subcommittee on housing and insurance , but it was not the subject of further committee action .

the sponsor introduced an identically titled and substantially similar bill , h.r .

4537 , which was ordered reported by the house committee on financial services on december 13 , 2017 .

see the above section on h.r .

4537 for more information on the bill .

federal insurance office reform act of 2017 ( h.r .

3861 ) h.r .

3861 was introduced by representative sean duffy with cosponsor representative denny heck on september 28 , 2017 .

it was addressed in an october 24 , 2017 , hearing by the house financial services' subcommittee on housing and insurance , but it was not the subject of further action .

h.r .

3861 would have amended the dodd - frank act provisions creating the federal insurance office , generally limiting the focus and size of fio .

it would have placed fio specifically within the office of international affairs and narrowed its function in international issues to representing the treasury rather than all of the united states .

it also would have required fio to reach a consensus with the states on international matters .

the bill would have removed fio's authority to collect and analyze information from insurers , including its subpoena power , and to issue reports with this information .

under the bill , the authority to preempt state laws pursuant to covered agreements would have rested with the secretary of the treasury , and fio would have been limited to five employees .

