o n december 21 , 2018 , president trump signed into law the first step act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-391 ) .

the act was the culmination of several years of congressional debate about what congress might do to reduce the size of the federal prison population while also creating mechanisms to maintain public safety .

correctional and sentencing reform was an issue that drew interest from many members of congress .

some members took it up for fiscal reasons ; they were concerned that the increase in the bureau of prisons' ( bop ) budget would take resources away from the department of justice's ( doj ) other priorities .

other members were interested in correctional reform due to concerns about the social consequences ( eg , the effects incarceration has on employment opportunities and the families of the incarcerated , or the normalizing of incarceration ) of what some deem mass incarceration , or they wanted to roll back some of the tough on crime policy changes that congress put in place during the 1980s and early 1990s .

this report provides an overview of the provisions of the first step act .

the act has three major components: ( 1 ) correctional reform via the establishment of a risk and needs assessment system at bop , ( 2 ) sentencing reform that involved changes to penalties for some federal offenses , and ( 3 ) the reauthorization of the second chance act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-199 ) .

the act also contains a series of other criminal justice - related provisions that include , for example , changes to the way good time credits are calculated for federal prisoners , prohibiting the use of restraints on pregnant inmates , expanding the market for products made by the federal prison industries , and requiring bop to aid prisoners with obtaining identification before they are released .

the correctional reform component of the first step act involves the development and implementation of a risk and needs assessment system ( system ) at bop .

the first step act makes several changes to federal sentencing law .

the act reduced the mandatory minimum sentences for certain drug offenses , expanded the scope of the safety valve , eliminated the stacking provision , and made the provisions of the fair sentencing act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-220 ) retroactive .

the second chance reauthorization act of 2018 ( title v of the first step act ) reauthorizes many of the grant programs that were initially authorized by the second chance act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-199 ) .

the second chance reauthorization act also reauthorized a bop pilot program to provide early release to elderly prisoners .

in addition to correctional and sentencing reform and reauthorizing the second chance act , the first step act contained a series of other criminal justice - related provisions .

the act amended 18 u.s.c .

section 3624 ( b ) so that federal prisoners can earn up to 54 days of good time credit for every year of their imposed sentence rather than for every year of their sentenced served .

prior to the amendment , bop interpreted the good time credit provision in section 3624 ( b ) to mean that prisoners are eligible to earn 54 days of good time credit for every year they serve .

for example , this means that an offender who was sentenced to 10 years in prison and earned the maximum good time credits each year could be released after serving eight years and 260 days , having earned 54 days of good time credit for each year of the sentence served , but in effect , only 47 days of good time credit for every year of the imposed sentence .

the act requires bop to provide a secure storage area outside of the secure perimeter of a correctional institution for qualified law enforcement officers employed by bop to store firearms or allow this class of employees to store firearms in their personal vehicles in lockboxes approved by bop .

the act also requires bop , notwithstanding any other provision of law , to allow these same employees to carry concealed firearms on prison grounds but outside of the secure perimeter of the correctional institution .

the act prohibits bop or the u.s .

marshals service ( usms ) from using restraints on pregnant inmates in their custody .

the prohibition on the use of restraints begins on the date that pregnancy is confirmed by a healthcare professional .

the restriction ends when the inmate completes postpartum recovery .

the prohibition on the use of restraints does not apply if the inmate is determined to be an immediate and credible flight risk or poses an immediate and serious threat of harm to herself or others that cannot be reasonably prevented by other means , or a healthcare professional determines that the use of restraints is appropriate for the medical safety of the inmate .

only the least restrictive restraints necessary to prevent escape or harm can be used .

the exception to the use of restraints does not permit bop or usms to use them around the ankles , legs , or waist of an inmate ; restrain an inmate's hands behind her back ; use four - point restraints ; or attach an inmate to another inmate .

upon the request of a healthcare professional , correctional officials or deputy marshals shall refrain from using restraints on an inmate or shall remove restraints used on an inmate .

if restraints are used on a pregnant inmate , the correctional official or deputy marshal who used the restraints is required to submit a report within 30 days to bop or usms , and the healthcare provider responsible for the inmate's health and safety , that describes the facts and circumstances surrounding the use of the restraints , including the reason ( s ) for using them ; the details of their use , including the type of restraint and length of time they were used ; and any observable physical effects on the prisoner .

bop and usms are required to develop training guidelines regarding the use of restraints on inmates during pregnancy , labor , and postpartum recovery .

the guidelines are required to include the following: how to identify certain symptoms of pregnancy that require immediate referral to a healthcare professional ; circumstances under which exceptions to the prohibition on the use of restraints would apply ; in cases where an exception applies , how to use restraints in a way that does not harm the inmate , the fetus , or the newborn ; the information required to be reported when restraints are used ; and the right of a healthcare professional to request that restraints not be used and the requirement to comply with such a request .

the act amends 18 u.s.c .

section 3621 ( b ) to require bop to house prisoners in facilities as close to their primary residence as possible , and to the extent practicable , within 500 driving miles , subject to a series of considerations .

when making decisions about where to house a prisoner , bop must consider bedspace availability , the prisoner's security designation , the prisoner's programmatic needs , the prisoner's mental and medical health needs , any request made by the prisoner related to faith - based needs , recommendations of the sentencing court , and other security concerns .

bop is also required , subject to these considerations and a prisoner's preference for staying at his / her current facility or being transferred , to transfer a prisoner to a facility closer to his / her primary residence even if the prisoner is currently housed at a facility within 500 driving miles .

the act amends 18 u.s.c .

section 3624 ( c ) ( 2 ) to require bop , to the extent practicable , to place prisoners with lower risk levels and lower needs on home confinement for the maximum amount of time permitted under this paragraph .

under section 3624 ( c ) ( 2 ) , bop is authorized to place prisoners in prerelease custody on home confinement for 10% of the term of imprisonment or six months , whichever is shorter .

the act amends 18 u.s.c .

section 3582 ( c ) regarding when a court can modify a term of imprisonment once it is imposed .

under section 3582 ( c ) ( 1 ) ( a ) , a court , upon a petition from bop , can reduce a prisoner's sentence and impose a term of probation or supervised release , with or without conditions , equal to the amount of time remaining on the prisoner's sentence if the court finds that "extraordinary and compelling reasons warrant such a reduction," or the prisoner is at least 70 years of age , the prisoner has served at least 30 years of his / her sentence , and a determination has been made by bop that the prisoner is not a danger to the safety of any other person or the community .

this is sometimes referred to as compassionate release .

the amendments made by the act allow the court to reduce a prisoner's sentence under section 3582 ( c ) ( 1 ) ( a ) upon a petition from bop or the prisoner if the prisoner has fully exhausted all administrative rights to appeal a failure by bop to bring a motion on the prisoner's behalf or upon a lapse of 30 days from the receipt of such a request by the warden of the prisoner's facility , whichever is earlier .

the act also requires bop within 72 hours of a prisoner being diagnosed with a terminal illness to notify the prisoner's attorney , partner , and family about the diagnosis and inform them of their option to submit a petition for compassionate release on the prisoner's behalf .

within seven days , bop is required to provide the prisoner's partner and family with an opportunity to visit .

bop is also required to provide assistance to the prisoner with drafting and submitting a petition for compassionate release if such assistance is requested by the prisoner or the prisoner's attorney , partner , or family .

bop is required to process requests for compassionate release within 14 days .

if a prisoner is mentally or physically unable to submit a petition for compassionate release , bop is required to notify the prisoner's attorney , partner , or family that they can submit a petition on the prisoner's behalf .

bop is required to accept and process requests for compassionate release that are drafted by the prisoner's attorney , partner , or family .

bop is also required to assist prisoners who are mentally or physically unable to prepare their own request if such assistance is requested by the prisoner's attorney , partner , or family .

bop is required to make available to prisoners information regarding their ability to request compassionate release , the timeline for submitting a request , and their right to appeal to a court the denial of a request after exhausting all administrative appeals bop makes available to prisoners .

this information is to appear in written materials for prisoners and staff , and be visibly posted the act also requires bop to submit annual reports to the house and senate judiciary committees that provides data on how bop is processing applications for compassionate release .

the act amends the authorization for the federal prisoner reentry initiative ( 34 u.s.c .

section 60541 ( b ) ) to require bop to assist prisoners and offenders who were sentenced to a period of community confinement with obtaining a social security card , driver's license or other official photo identification , and birth certificate prior to being released from custody .

the act also amends 18 u.s.c .

section 4042 ( a ) to require bop to establish prerelease planning procedures to help prisoners apply for federal and state benefits and obtain identification , including a social security card , driver's license or other official photo identification , and birth certificate .

bop is required to help prisoners secure these benefits , subject to any limitations in law , prior to being released .

the act also amends section 4042 ( a ) to require prerelease planning to include any individuals who only served a sentence of community confinement .

the act authorizes the federal prison industries ( fpi , also known by its trade name , unicor ) to sell products to public entities for use in correctional facilities , disaster relief , or emergency response ; to the district of columbia government ; and to nonprofit organizations .

however , fpi is not allowed to sell office furniture to nonprofit organizations .

the act also requires bop to set aside 15% of the wages paid to prisoners with fpi work assignments in a fund that will be payable to the prisoner upon release to aid with the cost of transitioning back into the community .

the act requires bop to provide training to correctional officers and other bop employees ( including correctional officers and employees of facilities that contract with bop to house prisoners ) on how to de - escalate encounters between a law enforcement officer or an officer or employee of bop and a civilian or a prisoner , and how to identify and appropriately respond to incidents that involve people with mental illness or other cognitive deficits .

within 90 days of enactment of the act , bop is required to submit a report to the house and senate judiciary and appropriations committees that assesses the availability of , and the capacity of bop to provide , evidence - based treatment to prisoners with opioid and heroin abuse problems , including mat , where appropriate .

as a part of the report , bop is required to provide a plan to expand access to evidence - based treatment for prisoners with heroin and opioid abuse problems , including mat , where appropriate .

after submitting the report , bop is required to execute the plan it outlines in the report .

the act places a similar requirement on the administrative office of the united states courts ( aousc ) regarding evidence - based treatment for opioid and heroin abuse for prisoners serving a term of supervised release .

aousc has 120 days after enactment to submit its report to the house and senate judiciary and appropriations committees .

the act requires bop to establish two pilot programs that are to run for five years in at least 20 facilities .

the first is a mentoring program that is to pair youth with volunteer mentors from faith - based or community organizations .

the other program is to use prisoners to provide training and therapy to animals seized by federal law enforcement officers and to abandoned or rescued animals in the care of organizations that provide shelter and similar services .

the act requires bjs to expand data collected under its national prisoner statistics program to include 26 new data elements related to federal prisoners .

some of the data the act requires bjs to collect include the following: the number of prisoners who are veterans ; the number of prisoners who have been placed in solitary confinement in the past year ; the number of female prisoners who are known to be pregnant and the result of those pregnancies ; the number of prisoners who received mat to treat a substance abuse problem ; the number of prisoners who are the parent or guardian of a minor child ; the number of assaults on bop staff by prisoners and the number of criminal prosecutions that resulted from those assaults ; the capacity of recidivism reduction programs and productive activities to accommodate eligible prisoners at each bop facility ; and the number of prisoners enrolled in recidivism reduction programs and productive activities at each bop facility , broken down by risk level and by program , and the number of those enrolled prisoners who successfully completed each program .

starting one year after the enactment of the act , bjs is required to submit an annual report to the house and senate judiciary committees for a period of seven years that contains the data specified in the act .

the act requires bop to provide tampons and sanitary napkins that meet industry standards to prisoners for free and in a quantity that meets the healthcare needs of each prisoner .

the act requires the attorney general to coordinate with the secretary of housing and urban development , the secretaries of labor , education , health and human services , veterans affairs , and agriculture , and the heads of other relevant federal agencies , as well as interested persons , service providers , nonprofit organizations , and state , tribal , and local governments , on federal reentry policies , programs , and activities , with an emphasis on evidence - based practices and the elimination of duplication of services .

the attorney general , in consultation with the secretaries specified in the act , is required to submit a report to congress within two years of the enactment of the act that summarizes the achievements of the coordination , and includes recommendations for congress on how to further reduce barriers to successful reentry .

the act prohibits juvenile facilities from using room confinement for discipline , punishment , retaliation , or any reason other than as a temporary response to a covered juvenile's behavior that poses a serious and immediate risk of physical harm to any individual .

the provisions of the act only apply to juveniles who have been charged with an alleged act of juvenile delinquency ; have been adjudicated as delinquent under chapter 403 , title 18 of the u.s. code ; or are facing charges as an adult in a federal district court for an alleged criminal offense .

juvenile facilities are required to try to use less restrictive techniques , such as talking with the juvenile in an attempt to de - escalate the situation or allowing a mental health professional to talk to the juvenile , before placing the juvenile in room confinement .

if the less restrictive techniques do not work and the juvenile is placed in room confinement , the staff of the juvenile facility is required to tell the juvenile why he / she is being placed in room confinement .

staff are also required to inform the juvenile that he / she will be released from room confinement as soon as he / she regains self - control and no longer poses a threat of physical harm to himself / herself or others .

if a juvenile who poses a threat of harm to others does not sufficiently regain self - control , staff must inform the juvenile that he / she will be released within three hours of being placed in room confinement , or in the case of a juvenile who poses a threat of harm to himself / herself , that he / she will be released within 30 minutes of being placed in room confinement .

if after the maximum period of confinement allowed the juvenile continues to pose a threat of physical harm to himself / herself or others , the juvenile is to be transferred to another juvenile facility or another location in the current facility where services can be provided to him / her .

if a qualified mental health professional believes that the level of crisis services available to the juvenile are not adequate , the staff at the juvenile facility is to transfer the juvenile to a facility that can provide adequate services .

the act prohibits juvenile facilities from using consecutive periods of room confinement on juveniles .

