banks play a central role in the financial system by connecting borrowers to savers and allocating available funds across the economy .

as a result , banking is vital to the u.s. economy's health and growth .

nevertheless , banking is an inherently risky activity involving extending credit and undertaking liabilities .

therefore , banking can generate tremendous societal and economic benefits , but banking panics and failures can create devastating losses .

over time , a regulatory system designed to foster the benefits of banking while limiting risks has developed , and both banks and regulatio n have coevolved as market conditions have changed and different risks have emerged .

for these reasons , congress often considers policies related to the banking industry .

the last decade has been a transformative period for banking .

the 2007-2009 financial crisis threatened the total collapse of the financial system and the real economy .

many assert only huge and unprecedented government interventions staved off this collapse .

others argue that government interventions were unnecessary or potentially exacerbated the crisis .

in addition , many argue the crisis revealed that the financial system was excessively risky and the regulatory regime governing the financial system had serious weaknesses .

policymakers responded to the perceived weaknesses in the pre - crisis financial regulatory regime by implementing numerous changes to financial regulation , including to bank regulation .

most notably , congress passed the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ; p.l .

111-203 ) in 2010 with the intention of strengthening regulation and addressing risks .

in addition , u.s. bank regulators have implemented changes under their existing authorities , many of which generally adhere to the basel iii accords — an international framework for bank regulation agreed to by u.s. and international bank regulators — that called for making certain bank regulations more stringent .

in the ensuing years , some observers raised concerns that the potential benefits of those regulatory changes ( eg , better - managed risks , increased consumer protection , greater systemic stability , potentially higher economic growth over the long term ) were outweighed by the potential costs ( eg , compliance costs incurred by banks , reduced credit availability for consumers and businesses , potentially slower economic growth ) .

in response to these concerns , congress passed the economic growth , regulatory relief , and consumer protection act ( egrrcp act ; p.l .

115-174 ) .

among other things , the law modified certain ( 1 ) regulations facing small banks ; ( 2 ) regulations facing banks large enough to be subjected to dodd - frank enhanced regulation but still below the size thresholds exceeded by the very largest banks ; and ( 3 ) mortgage regulations facing lenders including banks .

in addition , federal banking regulatory agencies — the federal reserve ( the fed ) , the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) , and the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) — have proposed further changes in regulation .

implementing the regulatory changes prescribed in the aftermath of the crisis and made pursuant to the dodd - frank act occurred over the course of years .

in recent years — a period in which the leadership of the regulators has transferred from obama administration to trump administration appointees — the banking regulators have expressed the belief that , after having viewed the effects of the regulations , they now have the necessary information to determine which regulations may be ineffective or inefficient as currently implemented .

recently , these regulators have made of number of proposals with the aim of reducing regulatory burden .

a key issue surrounding regulatory relief made pursuant to the egrrcp act and regulator - initiated changes is whether regulatory burden can be reduced without undermining the goals and effectiveness of the regulations .

meanwhile , market trends and economic conditions continue to affect the banking industry coincident with the implementation of new regulation .

some of the more notable conditions include the development of new technologies used in financial services ( known as "fintech" ) and a rising interest rate environment following an extraordinarily long period of very low rates .

this report provides a broad overview of selected banking - related issues , including issues related to "safety and soundness" regulation , consumer protection , community banks , large banks , what type of companies should be able to establish banks , and recent market and economic trends .

this report is not an exhaustive look at all bank policy issues , nor is it a detailed examination of any one issue .

rather , it provides concise background and analyses of certain prominent issues that have been the subject of recent discussion and debate .

in addition , this report provides a list of congressional research service reports that examine specific issues .

banks face a number of regulations intended to increase the likelihood that banks are profitable without being excessively risky and prone to failures ; decrease the likelihood that bank services are used to conceal the proceeds of criminal activities ; and to protect banks and their customers' data from cyberattacks .

this section provides background on these "safety and soundness" regulations and analyzes selected issues related to them , including prudential regulation related to capital requirements and the volcker rule ( which restricts proprietary trading ) ; requirements facing banks related to anti - money laundering laws , such as the bank secrecy act ( p.l .

91-508 ) ; and challenges related to cybersecurity .

financial products can be complex and potentially difficult for consumers to fully understand .

consumers seeking loans or financial services could be vulnerable to deceptive or unfair practices .

to reduce the occurrence of bad outcomes , laws and regulations have been put in place to protect consumers .

this section provides background on consumer financial protection and the bureau of consumer financial protection's ( cfpb ) authority .

the section also analyzes related issues , including whether the cfpb has used its authorities and regulations of banking institutions appropriately ; concerns relating to the lack of consumer access to banking services ; and whether the community reinvestment act as currently implemented is effectively and efficiently meeting its goal of ensuring banks provide credit to the areas in which they operate .

although some banks hold a very large amount of assets , are complex , and operate on a national or international scale , the vast majority of u.s. banks are relatively small , have simple business models , and operate within a local area .

this section provides background on these simpler banks — often called community bank s — and analyzes issues related to them , including regulatory relief for community banks and the long - term decline in the number of community banks .

along with the thousands of relatively small banks operating in the united states , there are a handful of banks with hundreds of billions of dollars of assets .

the 2007-2009 financial crisis highlighted the problem of "too big to fail" ( tbtf ) financial institutions — the concept that the failure of a large financial firm could trigger financial instability , which in several cases prompted extraordinary federal assistance to prevent the failure of certain of these institutions .

in response to the crisis , policymakers took a number of steps through the dodd - frank act and the basel iii accords to eliminate the tbtf problem , including subjecting the largest banks to enhanced prudential regulations , a new resolution regime to unwind these banks in the event of failure , and higher capital requirements .

this section provides background on these large banks and examines issues related to them , including reductions in the application of enhanced prudential regulations facing certain large banks made pursuant to p.l .

115-174 and changes to capital requirements proposed by regulators that would reduce the amount of capital certain large banks would have to hold .

as regulators implement these statutory changes and their proposed rules move forward , congress faces questions about whether relaxing these regulations appropriately eases overly stringent requirements or unnecessarily increases the likelihood that large banks take on excessive risks .

to legally operate as a bank and perform the relevant activities , an institution generally must have a charter granted by either the occ at the federal level or a state - level authority .

in addition , to engage in certain activities , the institution must have federal deposit insurance granted by the fdic .

currently , these requirements raise a number of policy questions , including whether companies established primarily as financial technology companies should be able to receive a national bank charter , as has been offered by the occ ; and whether the application process and determinations made by the fdic as they relate to institutions seeking a specific type of state charter , called an industrial loan company ( ilc ) charter , is overly restrictive .

in addition to regulation issues , market and economic conditions and trends continually affect the banking industry .

this section analyzes such trends that may affect banks , including migration of financial activity from banks into nonbanks or the "shadow banking" system ; increasing capabilities and market presence of financial technology or fintech ; and a higher interest rate environment following a long period of extraordinarily low rates .

