the nation's air , land , and marine transportation systems are designed for accessibility and efficiency , two characteristics that make them vulnerable to attack .

the difficulty and cost of protecting the transportation sector from attack raises a core question for policymakers: how much effort and resources to put toward protecting potential targets versus pursuing and fighting terrorists .

while hardening the transportation sector against terrorist attack is difficult , measures can be taken to deter terrorists .

the focus of debate is how best to implement and finance a system of deterrence , protection , and response that effectively reduces the possibility and consequences of terrorist attacks without unduly interfering with travel , commerce , and civil liberties .

for all modes of transportation , one can identify four principal policy objectives that would support a system of deterrence and protection: ( 1 ) ensuring the trustworthiness of the passengers and the cargo flowing through the system ; ( 2 ) ensuring the trustworthiness of the transportation workers who operate and service the vehicles , assist the passengers , or handle the cargo ; ( 3 ) ensuring the trustworthiness of the private companies that operate in the system , such as the carriers , shippers , agents , and brokers ; and ( 4 ) establishing a perimeter of security around transportation facilities and vehicles in operation .

the first three policy objectives are concerned with preventing an attack from within a transportation system , such as occurred on september 11 , 2001 .

the concern is that attackers could once again disguise themselves as legitimate passengers ( or shippers or workers ) to get in position to launch an attack .

the fourth policy objective is concerned with preventing an attack from outside a transportation system .

for instance , terrorists could ram a bomb - laden speedboat into an oil tanker , as was done in october 2002 to the french oil tanker limberg , or they could shoot a shoulder - fired missile at an airplane taking off or landing , as was attempted in november 2002 against an israeli charter jet in mombasa , kenya .

achieving all four of these objectives is difficult at best , and in some modes , is practically impossible .

where limited options exist for preventing an attack , policymakers are left with evaluating options for minimizing the consequences of an attack , without imposing unduly burdensome requirements .

following the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , congress took swift action to create the transportation security administration ( tsa ) within the u.s. department of transportation and gave it control over all airline passenger and baggage screening functions and deployment of armed air marshals on commercial passenger flights .

in 2003 , tsa was transferred to the newly formed department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

to this day , the federal role in airport screening remains controversial .

while airports are allowed to opt out of federal screening , alternative private screening under tsa contracts has been limited to 22 airports out of approximately 450 commercial passenger airports where passenger screening is required .

congress has sought to ensure that optional private screening remains available for those airports that want to pursue this option .

the tsa modernization act , incorporated into the faa reauthorization act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-254 ) , includes language directing tsa to streamline the contracting process for private screening at airports , and directs tsa to look into the feasibility of modifying the program to allow individual airport terminals , instead of entire airports , to switch over to screening by private contractors .

proposals seeking more extensive reforms of passenger screening have not been extensively debated .

rather , aviation security legislation has largely focused on specific mandates to comprehensively screen for explosives and carry out background checks and threat assessments .

despite the extensive focus on aviation security for more than a decade , a number of challenges remain , including effectively screening passengers , baggage , and cargo for explosives threats ; developing effective risk - based methods for screening passengers and others with access to aircraft and sensitive areas ; incorporating biometrics into the passenger screening process to verify identities ; exploiting available intelligence information and watchlists to identify individuals who pose potential threats to civil aviation ; implementing effective systems , regulations , and international agreements to assess risk and conduct risk - based screening of air cargo shipments worldwide ; effectively deterring and responding to security threats in public areas of airports and at screening checkpoints ; developing effective strategies for addressing aircraft vulnerabilities to shoulder - fired missiles and other standoff weapons ; and addressing the potential security implications of unmanned aircraft operations in domestic airspace and developing effective countermeasures to protect critical infrastructure , including airports and aircraft , from attacks using drones .

bombings of and shootings on passenger trains in europe and asia have illustrated the vulnerability of passenger rail systems to terrorist attacks .

passenger rail systems — primarily subway systems — in the united states carry about five times as many passengers each day as do airlines , over many thousands of miles of track , serving stations that are designed primarily for easy access .

the increased security efforts around air travel have led to concerns that terrorists may turn their attention to "softer" targets , such as transit or passenger rail .

a key challenge congress faces is balancing the desire for increased rail passenger security with the efficient functioning of transit systems , the potential costs and damages of an attack , and other federal priorities .

the volume of ridership and number of access points make it impractical to subject all rail passengers to the type of screening all airline passengers undergo .

consequently , transit security measures tend to emphasize managing the consequences of an attack .

nevertheless , steps have been taken to try to reduce the risks of an attack as well .

these include vulnerability assessments ; emergency planning ; emergency response training and drilling of transit personnel ( ideally in coordination with police , fire , and emergency medical personnel ) ; increasing the number of transit security personnel ; installing video surveillance equipment in vehicles and stations ; and conducting random inspections of bags , platforms , and trains .

the challenges of securing rail passengers are dwarfed by the challenge of securing bus passengers .

there are some 76,000 buses carrying 19 million passengers each weekday in the united states .

some transit systems have installed video cameras on their buses , but the number and operating characteristics of transit buses make them all but impossible to secure .

in contrast with the aviation sector , where tsa provides security directly , security in surface transportation is provided primarily by the transit and rail operators and local law enforcement agencies .

tsa's main roles are oversight , coordination , intelligence sharing , training , and assistance .

however , it provides some operational support through its visible intermodal prevention and response ( vipr ) teams , which conduct operations with local law enforcement officials , including periodic patrols of transit and passenger rail systems to create "unpredictable visual deterrents. .

several presidential administrations have sought to reduce the size of the vipr program , the value of which has yet to be demonstrated , but congress has sought to increase the size of the program .

congressional efforts to promote the security of passenger rail and transit include providing grants to service providers , requiring those providers considered to be high - risk targets ( by dhs ) to have security plans approved by dhs , and requiring dhs to conduct security background checks and immigration status checks on all transit and railroad frontline employees .

according to tsa , its three primary objectives for reducing risk in transit are to increase system resilience by protecting high - risk / high - consequence assets ( i.e. , critical tunnels , stations , and bridges ) ; expand visible deterrence activities ( i.e. , canine teams , passenger screening teams , and antiterrorism teams ) ; and engage the public and transit operators in the counterterrorism mission .

tsa surface transportation security inspectors conduct assessments of transit systems ( and other surface modes ) through the agency's baseline assessment for security enhancement ( base ) program .

the agency has also developed a security training and security exercise program for transit .

tsa's program for securing surface transportation is known as risk mitigation activities for surface transportation ( rmast ) .

the intent of the rmast program is to focus tsa's limited surface security resources on high - risk entities and locations .

however , gao reported in 2017 that tsa had not identified or prioritized high - risk entities for the rmast program to focus on .

the surface transportation inspector program has been a focus of congressional interest .

issues of concern to congress have included whether the inspectors promoted from screening passengers at airports have sufficient expertise in surface transportation security ; the administrative challenge of having the surface inspectors managed by airport - based federal security directors who themselves typically have no surface transportation experience ; and the security value of the tasks performed by surface inspectors .

the number of surface inspectors declined from 404 in fy2011 to 222 ( full - time equivalent positions ) in fy2018 .

tsa attributed the decrease to efficiencies achieved through focusing efforts on the basis of risk .

however , in 2017 gao reported that surface transportation inspectors were spending more time on the surface transportation mode that tsa had identified as the lowest risk than on the one identified as the highest risk .

surface inspection field offices are located near airports , and surface inspectors may spend a significant portion of their time on tasks related to aviation safety , but tsa does not have complete information on the extent to which surface inspectors are tasked to work on aviation security .

gao reported in 2014 that lack of guidance to tsa's surface inspectors resulted in inconsistent reporting of rail security incidents and that tsa had not consistently enforced the requirement that rail agencies report security incidents , resulting in poor data on the number and types of incidents .

gao also found that tsa did not have a systematic process for collecting and addressing feedback from surface transportation stakeholders regarding the effectiveness of its information - sharing effort .

in a 2015 hearing , gao testified that tsa had put processes in place to address these issues .

dhs provides grants for security improvements for public transit , passenger rail , and occasionally other surface transportation modes under the transit security grant program .

the vast majority of the funding goes to public transit providers .

crs estimates that , on an inflation - adjusted basis , funding for this program has declined 84% since 2009 , when congress allocated $150 million in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 , in addition to routine appropriations ( see table 1 ) .

in a 2012 report , gao found potential for duplication among four dhs state and local security grant programs with similar goals , one of which was the public transportation security grant program .

despite this finding , congress has not supported consolidation of the programs , though appropriators have expressed concern that grant programs have not focused on areas of highest risk and that significant amounts of previously appropriated funds have not yet been awarded to recipients .

in p.l .

114-50 , congress directed tsa to ensure that all passenger transportation providers it considers as having high - risk facilities have in place plans to respond to active shooters , acts of terrorism , or other security - related incidents that target passengers .

the bulk of u.s. overseas trade is carried by ships , and thus the economic consequences of a maritime terrorist attack could be significant .

in the aftermath of the 9 / 11 attacks , the u.s. customs service ( now customs and border protection , cbp ) and the coast guard realized that they needed to "push the borders out" — that is , they needed to begin screening vessels and cargo before they reached a u.s. port .

while the previous screening methods that occurred at u.s. ports were sufficient to intercept other illicit cargo ( eg , drug smuggling ) they could be too late in the case of intercepting a terrorist bomb .

thus , customs instituted the "24-hour rule," requiring importers to submit shipment information to customs a day before the shipment arrived at the overseas port of loading rather than submitting this information within days of its arrival at a u.s. port .

customs analyzes this information and other intelligence to flag shipments it believes are higher risk or have an unknown risk .

under the container security initiative , those riskier shipments are examined by imaging machines or possibly unloaded before being loaded on a vessel .

 ( it is practically impossible to examine shipping containers once they are aboard a vessel or while the ship is at sea. ) .

similarly , the coast guard recognized the need to extend terrorist screening beyond u.s. ports .

it required ships to announce and report their intended arrival four days before entering a u.s. harbor .

the coast guard examines the vessel's particulars , its crew , and past history to evaluate the security risk .

the coast guard pushed for establishing international standards for port security at the international maritime organization so that overseas ports sending cargo to the united states would abide by the same security regulations as u.s. ports .

the coast guard also visits foreign ports to assess their security measures .

in addition to pushing the borders out , these agencies have instituted multiple layers of security that cover the four main elements of maritime transportation: ports , vessels , cargo , and workers .

cbp's customs trade partnership against terrorism ( c - tpat ) program identifies a series of practices that importers are to follow that are designed to cover a shipper's entire supply chain — from the overseas point of origin to final delivery in the united states .

for instance , c - tpat includes procedures and independent checks when loading a shipping container and applying the seal on its doors to prevent tampering while in route .

in addition to container inspection equipment installed at overseas ports , cbp has installed radiation portal monitors at each truck exit gate in u.s. ports .

the coast guard requires vessel owners , port authorities and their terminal operators to submit security plans that describe their access control measures , drills and exercises to respond to a security incident , and other measures to secure their facilities .

the coast guard recognizes that u.s. ports vary greatly in terms of their geographies and types of cargo they handle .

the port security plans allow the industry to develop plans specific to their vulnerabilities .

an important goal of the coast guard is "maritime domain awareness" — knowledge of the varied legitimate vessel activity taking place in a harbor ( cargo , fishing , recreational ) so as to spot any abnormal or suspicious activity .

one aspect of this is requiring many vessels to be equipped with automatic identification systems ( transponders ) .

the coast guard , along with tsa , has also instituted a port worker background check for longshoremen , truck drivers , vessel crews , and others that need access to port terminals .

a transportation worker identification credential ( twic ) card must be obtained from the tsa and renewed every five years .

congress authorized much of the coast guard's role in maritime security in the maritime transportation security act of 2002 ( mtsa ; p.l .

107-295 ) and cbp's role in the security and accountability for every port act of 2006 ( safe port act ; p.l .

109-347 ) .

congress modified these maritime security programs in division j of the faa reauthorization act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-254 ) .

two aspects of maritime security that have drawn attention recently are cybersecurity and the use of drones for coastal surveillance .

the development of electronic navigation ( "e - navigation" ) , involving the replacement of paper charts with electronic charts ( already commonplace ) or the replacement of channel marker buoys with virtual aids to navigation ( in progress ) , could create vulnerabilities to cyberattack .

in june 2017 , a cyberattack on maersk line , the largest container carrier , prevented the carrier from taking bookings and required it to close its u.s. terminals for two to three days .

a less severe attack affected cosco shipping in july 2018 .

p.l .

115-254 incorporated cybersecurity as a required element in mtsa security plans for terminal and vessel operators .

the coast guard has provided guidance for vessels and ports to address cyber vulnerabilities , and has incorporated cybersecurity into existing enforcement and compliance programs .

the coast guard has added cybersecurity training to the requirements for mariner licensing and for port security officer qualifications .

greater use of unmanned aircraft systems potentially offers significant efficiencies in performing various coast guard missions , including coastal surveillance .

congress has provided funding for the use of drones aboard national security cutters .

the coast guard has tested both hand - held drones and larger drone aircraft to extend the surveillance range of its patrol vessels .

since 2015 , the coast guard has been testing uass in the arctic for missions such as surveying ice conditions , marine environmental monitoring , marine safety , and search and rescue .

the unmanned aircraft being tested each summer can be launched from land or a coast guard cutter .

the coast guard authorization act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-282 , §812 ) requests a study by the national academy of sciences as to how drones could be used to enhance the coast guard's maritime domain awareness .

the act also allows the coast guard to lease but not design its own large uass if funding is provided for design and construction of offshore patrol cutters ( §304 ) .

