after over 15 years characterized by conflict , violence , and zero - sum political competition , iraqis are working to open a new chapter in their country's development and are debating the future of their relationship with the united states .

the iraqi government declared military victory against the islamic state organization in december 2017 , but insurgent attacks by remaining is fighters continue to threaten iraqis in some areas .

iraq's security forces are rebuilding after years of intense fighting .

notwithstanding significant u.s. and international assistance , iraq's security forces still lack some operational , intelligence , logistical , and management capabilities needed to protect their country .

more than 4 million internally displaced iraqis have returned home , but extensive stabilization and reconstruction are needed in liberated areas .

an estimated 1.7 million iraqis remain as internally displaced persons ( idps ) , and iraqi authorities have identified $88 billion in reconstruction needs over the next decade .

u.s. and other foreign troops remain in iraq at the invitation of the iraqi government and provide advisory and training support to the iraqi security forces ( isf ) , including peshmerga forces associated with the kurdistan regional government ( krg ) .

however , some iraqi political groups — including some with ties to iran — are pushing for u.s. and other foreign troops to depart ; they may force formal consideration of a resolution to that effect in the iraqi parliament .

such a resolution would likely be nonbinding ( if adopted ) , but nevertheless could create significant political and diplomatic complications for u.s. and iraqi leaders , and might prompt more fundamental policy reconsiderations on both sides .

the iranian government has viewed instability in neighboring iraq as a threat and an opportunity since 2003 , and works to influence the security sector decisions of iraqi leaders .

it also maintains ties to some armed groups in iraq , including some units of the popular mobilization forces ( pmf ) — volunteer militias recruited to fight the islamic state .

the pmf have been recognized as an enduring component of iraq's national security establishment pursuant to a 2016 law that calls for their integration under existing command structures and administration .

u.s. officials have recognized the contributions that pmf volunteers have made to iraq's fight against the islamic state ; they also remain wary of the potential for iran - linked elements of the pmf to evolve into permanent proxy forces , whether they remain tied to the iraqi state or work outside formal iraqi government and military control .

u.s. policy seeks to support the long - term development of iraq's military , counterterrorism , and police services as alternatives to the continued use of pmf units to secure iraq's borders , communities , and territory recaptured from the islamic state .

u.s. concerns about iranian government policies have intensified in recent years , and iraq has become a venue for u.s. - iranian competition .

iran's government supported insurgent attacks on u.s. forces during the u.s. presence from 2003 to 2011 .

since then , u.s. - iranian competition has remained contained and nonviolent , but there is no certainty it will remain so , as demonstrated by indirect fire attacks in 2018 on u.s. diplomatic facilities , attacks attributed by u.s. officials to iranian proxy groups .

iraqi leaders are trying to prevent their country from being used as a battleground for regional and international rivalries and seek to build positive , nonexclusive ties to their neighbors and global powers .

broad u.s. efforts to put pressure on iran extend to the iraqi energy sector , where years of sanctions , conflict , neglect , and mismanagement have left iraq dependent on purchases of natural gas and electricity from its iranian neighbors .

since 2018 , iraqi leaders have sought relief from u.s. sanctions on related transactions with iran .

the trump administration has granted temporary permissions , and current u.s. initiatives encourage iraq to diversify its energy relationships with its neighbors and develop more independence for its energy sector .

u.s. officials promote u.s. companies as potential partners for iraq through the expansion of domestic electricity generation capacity and the introduction of technology to capture the large amounts of natural gas that are currently flared ( burned at wellheads ) .

oil production and exports are the lifeblood of iraq's public finances and economy and have reached all - time highs .

oil export revenues provide iraq's government with significant financial resources , but oil proceeds also have contributed to the creation of a state - centric economic model in which public sector employment and contracting have crowded out private sector activity .

public investment and reconstruction spending is financed through deficit spending , borrowing , and international aid , and iraq's finances remain vulnerable to price changes in global oil markets .

while iraq's young , growing population and geographic location ( table 1 ) make it an attractive market for foreign investment , bureaucratic constraints , service interruptions , corruption , and security and political concerns continue to deter some investors .

the u.s. government supports iraq's compliance with reform targets pursuant to imf agreements and promotes an expansion of u.s. - iraqi trade and investment ties .

however , future u.s. investment prospects in iraq may be contingent on the broader political and security relationship .

overall , the united states faces complicated choices in iraq .

the 2003 invasion unseated an adversarial regime , but unleashed more than a decade of violent insurgency and terrorism that divided iraqis , while creating opportunities for iran to strengthen its influence in iraq and across the region .

since 2003 , the united states has invested both militarily and financially in stabilizing iraq .

since 2014 , u.s. policy toward iraq has focused on ensuring the defeat of the islamic state as a transnational insurgent and terrorist threat .

the islamic state threat has been reduced , but iraqi security needs remain considerable and both countries are examining the impetus and terms for continued u.s. investment in iraq .

successive u.s .

administrations have sought to keep u.s. involvement and investment minimal relative to the 2003-2011 era , pursuing u.s. interests through partnership with various entities in iraq and the development of those partners' capabilities , rather than through extensive u.s. military deployments .

u.s. economic assistance bolsters iraq's ability to attract lending support and is aimed at improving the government's effectiveness and public financial management .

the united states is the leading provider of humanitarian assistance to iraq and also supports post - is stabilization activities across the country through grants to united nations agencies and other entities .

the trump administration has sustained a cooperative relationship with the iraqi government and has requested funding for fy2020 to support iraq's stabilization and continue security training for iraqi security forces .

the size and mission of the u.s. military presence in iraq have evolved as conditions on the ground have changed since 2017 ; they could change further if iraqi officials revise their current requests for continued u.s. and international security assistance .

the 116 th congress has appropriated funds to provide security assistance , humanitarian relief , and foreign aid for iraq ( p.l .

116-6 ) , and is considering appropriations and authorization requests for fy2020 that would largely continue u.s. policies and programs on current terms .

it remains to be seen whether iraq and the united states will be able to pursue opportunities to build a bilateral relationship that is less defined by conflict and its aftermath .

to do so , leaders on both sides will likely have to continue creatively managing unusually complex political and security challenges .

since the u.s. - led ouster of saddam hussein in 2003 , iraq's shia arab majority has exercised greater national power both in concert and in competition with the country's sunni arab and kurdish minorities .

while intercommunal identities and rivalries remain politically relevant , competition among shia movements and coalition building across communal groups are now major factors in iraqi politics .

notwithstanding their ethnic and religious diversity and political differences , many iraqis advance similar demands for improved security , government effectiveness , and economic opportunity .

some iraqi politicians have broadened their political and economic narratives in an attempt to appeal to disaffected citizens across the country .

years of conflict , poor service delivery , corruption , and sacrifice have strained the population's patience with the status quo , adding to the pressures that leaders face from the country's uncertain domestic and regional security environment .

although the islamic state's exclusive control over distinct territories in iraq has now ended , the u.s. intelligence community assessed in 2018 that the islamic state "has started — and probably will maintain — a robust insurgency in iraq and syria as part of a long - term strategy to ultimately enable the reemergence of its so - called caliphate. .

in january 2019 , director of national intelligence dan coats told congress that the islamic state "remains a terrorist and insurgent threat and will seek to exploit sunni grievances with baghdad and societal instability to eventually regain iraqi territory against iraqi security forces that are stretched thin. .

the legacy of the war with the islamic state strains security in iraq in two other important ways .

first , the popular mobilization committee ( pmc ) and its militias — the mostly shia popular mobilization forces ( pmf ) recruited to fight the islamic state — have been recognized as enduring components of iraq's national security establishment .

this is the case even as many pmf units continue to operate outside the bounds of their authorizing legislation and the control of the prime minister .

the u.s. intelligence community considers iran - linked shia elements of the pmf to be the "the primary threat to u.s. personnel" in iraq .

second , national and krg forces remain deployed across from each other along contested lines of control while their respective leaders are engaged in negotiations over a host of sensitive issues .

following a kurdish referendum on independence in 2017 , the iraqi government expelled kurdish peshmerga from some disputed territories they had secured from the islamic state , and is fighters now appear to be exploiting gaps in isf and kurdish security to survive .

pmf units remain active throughout the territories in dispute between the iraqi national government and the federally recognized kurdistan region of northern iraq , with local populations in some areas opposed to the pmf presence .

amid unrest in southern iraq during late summer 2018 , the state department directed the temporary evacuation of u.s. personnel and temporary closure of the u.s. consulate in basra after indirect fire attacks on the consulate and the u.s. embassy compound in baghdad .

u.s. officials attributed the attacks to iran - backed forces and said that the united states would hold iran accountable and would respond directly to attacks on u.s. facilities or personnel by iran - backed entities .

the incidents highlight the potential for u.s. - iran tensions to escalate in iraq .

the public finances of the national government and the krg remain strained , amplifying the pressure on leaders working to address the country's security and service - provision challenges .

the combined effects of lower global oil prices from 2014 through mid - 2017 , expansive public - sector liabilities , and the costs of the military campaign against the islamic state have exacerbated national budget deficits .

the imf estimated iraq's 2017-2018 financing needs at 19% of gdp .

oil exports provide nearly 90% of public - sector revenue in iraq , while non - oil sector growth has been hindered over time by insecurity , weak service delivery , and corruption .

the 2019 budget expands public salaries and investments .

iraq's oil production and exports have increased since 2016 , but fluctuations in oil prices undermined revenue gains until the latter half of 2017 .

revenues have since improved , and iraq has agreed to manage its overall oil production in line with mutually agreed organization of the petroleum exporting countries ( opec ) output limits .

in february 2019 , iraq exported an average of nearly 4 million barrels per day ( mbd , including krg - administered oil exports ) , above the march 2019 budget's 3.9 mbd export assumption and at prices above the budget's $56 per barrel benchmark .

the imf projects modest gdp growth over the next five years and expects growth to be stronger in the non - oil sector if iraq's implementation of agreed measures continues as oil output and exports plateau .

fiscal pressures are more acute in the kurdistan region , where the fallout from the national government's response to the september 2017 referendum further strained the krg's already weakened ability to pay salaries to its public - sector employees and security forces .

the krg's loss of control over significant oil resources in kirkuk governorate , coupled with changes implemented by national government authorities over shipments of oil from those fields via the krg - controlled export pipeline to turkey , contributed to a sharp decline in revenue for the krg during 2018 .

the resumption of exports from kirkuk in late 2018 , and an agreement between the krg and baghdad providing for the payment of some public sector salaries in exchange for krg oil export proceed deposits in national accounts , has improved the situation as of march 2019 .

related issues shaped consideration of the 2018 and 2019 budgets in the cor , with kurdish representatives criticizing the government's budget proposals to allocate the krg a smaller percentage of funds to the kri than the 17% benchmark reflected in previous budgets .

national government officials argue that krg resources should be based on a revised population estimate , and agreements reached for the national government to pay krg civil service and peshmerga salaries in the 2019 budget are linked to the krg placing 250,000 barrels per day of oil exports under federal control in exchange for financial all ocations for verified expenses .

krg oil contracts may limit the region's ability to meet this target , but the transfer of national funds to the krg appears likely to ease fiscal pressures that had required payment limits that fueled protests .

negotiations among iraqi factions following the may 2018 election have not fully resolved all questions about iraq's future approach to u.s. - iraqi relations .

former prime minister abadi , with whom the u.s. government worked closely , could not translate his list's third - place finish into a mandate for a second term .

his successor , prime minister adel abd al mahdi , served in abadi's government ; u.s. officials have worked positively with him in the past .

nevertheless , the nature and durability of the political coalition arrangements supporting his leadership are unclear , and he lacks a strong personal electoral mandate .

similarly , iraqi president barham salih is familiar to u.s. officials as a leading and friendly figure among iraqi kurds , but he serves at a time of significant political differences among kurds , and amid strained relations between kurds and the national government .

salih has supported continued u.s. - iraqi cooperation but also has rebuked some statements by u.s. officials .

while baghdad - krg ties have improved relative to their post - 2017 referendum low point , it remains possible that the national government could more strictly assert its sovereign prerogatives with regard to foreign assistance to substate entities , and / or that krg representatives could seek expanded aid or more direct foreign support .

as negotiations over cabinet positions conclude in baghdad , iraq's government is expected to debate the implementation of the national budget , reform of the water and electricity sectors , employment and anticorruption initiatives , and various national security issues .

among the latter may be proposals from some factions calling for the reduction or expulsion of u.s. and other foreign military forces from iraq .

some iraqi groups remain vocally critical of the remaining u.s. and coalition military presence in the country and argue that the defeat of the islamic state's main forces means that u.s. and other foreign forces should depart .

these groups also accuse the united states of seeking to undermine the popular mobilization forces or to otherwise subordinate iraq to u.s. preferences .

most mainstream iraqi political movements or leaders did not use the u.s. military presence as a major wedge issue in the run - up to or aftermath of the may 2018 election , and u.s. officials express confidence that many iraqi military leaders and key political figures do not want to end iraq's security partnership with the united states .

nevertheless , members of congress and u.s. officials face difficulties in developing policy options that can secure u.s. interests on specific issues without provoking major opposition from iraqi constituencies .

at the same time , iraqi leaders may wonder whether the 2019 u.s. drawdown from syria might augur a similar u.s. drawdown in iraq .

if iraqi leaders seek to develop alternative sources of support should the united states decide to leave iraq , then such sources could include iran .

debates over u.s. military support to iraqi national forces and substate actors in the fight against the islamic state illustrated this dynamic , with some u.s. proposals for the provision of aid to all capable iraqi forces facing criticism from iraqi groups that may harbor suspicions of u.s. intentions or fear that u.s. assistance could empower their domestic rivals .

to date , u.s. aid to the kurds has been provided with the approval of the baghdad government , though some members of congress have advocated for assistance to be provided directly to the krg .

u.s. concern about the unwillingness of some pmf units and armed groups to subordinate themselves to the national command authority of iraq's elected government is another example .

the strained relationship between national government and kurdish forces along the disputed territories and the future of the popular mobilization forces are issues that will doubtless recur in debates over the continuation of prevailing patterns of u.s. assistance .

oversight reporting to congress suggests that dod estimates the iraq security forces are "years , if not decades" away from ending their "reliance on coalition assistance," and dod expects "a generation of iraqi officers with continuous exposure to coalition advisers" would be required to establish a self - reliant iraqi fighting force .

according to the lead inspector general for overseas contingency operations ( lig - oco ) , these conditions raise "questions about the duration of the oir mission since the goal of that mission is defined as the 'enduring defeat' of isis. .

to achieve that goal , dod may seek the continuation of u.s. and coalition training and advisory relationships with iraq over a long , but as yet unspecified , period of time and on a consistent if as yet undefined scale .

this may present questions to congress about whether or how best to authorize and fund future u.s. security assistance to iraq , and whether current bilateral agreements with the government of iraq are sufficient and viable .

the financial structure of u.s. security support efforts also could evolve .

in the past , some in congress have called for u.s. military training or other aid to iraq to be provided on a reimbursement or loan basis , while with other major oil exporters like saudi arabia , long - term training activities have been funded by the recipient country through foreign military sales .

iraq is already a significant fms customer .

it seems reasonable to expect that iraqis will continue to assess and respond to u.s. initiatives ( and those of other outsiders ) primarily through the lenses of their own domestic political rivalries , anxieties , hopes , and agendas .

reconciling u.s. preferences and interests with iraq's evolving politics and security conditions may thus require continued creativity , flexibility , and patience .

h.r .

571 .

a bill to impose sanctions with respect to iranian persons that threaten the peace or stability of iraq or the government of iraq .

subject to national security waiver , the bill would direct the president to impose sanctions on "any foreign person that the president determines knowingly commits a significant act of violence that has the direct purpose or effect of — ( 1 ) threatening the peace or stability of iraq or the government of iraq ; ( 2 ) undermining the democratic process in iraq ; or ( 3 ) undermining significantly efforts to promote economic reconstruction and political reform in iraq or to provide humanitarian assistance to the iraqi people. .

the bill would further require the secretary of state to submit a determination as to whether asa'ib ahl al haq , harakat hizballah al nujaba , or affiliated persons and entities meet terrorist designation criteria or the sanctions criteria of the bill .

the bill also would direct the secretary of state to prepare , maintain , and publish a "a list of armed groups , militias , or proxy forces in iraq receiving logistical , military , or financial assistance from iran's revolutionary guard corps or over which iran's revolutionary guard corps exerts any form of control or influence. .

the u.s. government designated harakat hizballah al nujaba pursuant to executive order 13224 on terrorism in march 2019 .

a similar bill would direct the president to impose sanctions on select groups without a national security waiver ( h.r .

361 ) .

the bill reflects amendments reported to congress by the house foreign affairs committee and endorsed by the house during the 115 th congress ( h.r .

4591 ) .

s.j.res .

13 .

a joint resolution to repeal the authorizations for use of military force against iraq , and for other purposes .

the joint resolution would repeal the authorization for use of military force against iraq resolution ( p.l .

102-1 ; 105 stat .

3 ; 50 u.s.c .

1541 note ) of january 14 , 1991 , and the authorization for use of military force against iraq resolution of 2002 ( p.l .

107-243 ; 116 stat .

1498 ; 50 u.s.c .

1541 note ) of october 16 , 2002 .

