t he prices paid by consumers for prescription drugs have been a recent area of significant congressional interest .

several committees in the house and senate have held hearings this year on drug pricing issues , and a number of bills have been introduced in the 116 th congress that seek to address the perceived high costs of prescription drugs and other pharmaceutical products .

because intellectual property ( ip ) rights , including patent rights and regulatory exclusivities , play an important role in the development and pricing of pharmaceutical products , a key focus of this debate is whether existing ip law promptly balances the need for innovation with the costs that ip may impose on the public .

understanding the interplay between several complex legal regimes is necessary in order to fully make sense of this debate .

ip law comprises a set of exclusive rights that prevent others from making , copying , or using certain intangible creations of the human mind .

federal law contains several different varieties of ip , depending on the type of intellectual creation at issue .

for example , copyright law generally grants authors of original creative works ( such as literary works or musical compositions ) the exclusive right to reproduce their work , publicly perform and display it , distribute it , and adapt it , for a specified term of years .

other species of federal ip include patent law , which protects novel inventions , and trademark law , which protects symbols used to identify goods and services .

each form of ip covers a different type of creation , has a different procedure for obtaining rights , and grants the ip owner legal rights that vary in scope and duration .

although each of these forms of ip is legally distinct , they broadly share a common motivation: providing incentives to create .

patents and copyrights are typically justified by a utilitarian rationale that exclusive rights are necessary to provide incentives to produce new creative works and technological inventions .

this rationale maintains that absent legal protections , competitors could freely copy such creations , denying the original creators the ability to recoup their investments in time and effort , and thereby reduce the incentive to create in the first place .

ip incentives are said to be particularly necessary for products , such as pharmaceuticals , that are costly to develop but easily copied once marketed .

in the words of the supreme court , ip rights are premised on an "economic philosophy" that the "encouragement of individual effort by personal gain is the best way to advance public welfare through the talents of authors and inventors. .

from this perspective , the fundamental aim of ip law is to find the optimal balance between providing incentives for innovation and the costs that ip rights impose on the public .

by design , ip rights may lead to increased prices for goods or services that are protected by ip .

ip rights are often said to grant a temporary and limited "monopoly" to the rights holder .

the existence of a patent on a particular manufacturing process , for example , generally means that only the patent holder ( and persons licensed by the patent holder ) can use that patented process for a set period of time .

in some circumstances , this legal exclusivity may allow the patent holder ( or her licensees ) to charge higher - than - competitive prices for goods made with the patented process , as a monopolist would , because the patent effectively shields the patent holder from competition .

new pharmaceutical products generally benefit from two main forms of ip protection: patent rights and regulatory exclusivities .

these two sets of exclusive rights are distinct , yet often confused .

patents , which are available to a wide variety of technologies beyond pharmaceuticals , are granted by the u.s. patent and trademark office ( pto ) to inventions that are new , useful , nonobvious , and directed at patentable subject matter .

the holder of a valid patent generally has the exclusive right to make , use , sell , or import a patented invention within the united states for a period beginning when the patent is issued by the pto and ending 20 years after the date of the patent application .

the food and drug administration ( fda ) grants regulatory exclusivities upon the completion of the fda regulatory process necessary to market pharmaceutical products ( i.e. , drugs and biological products ) .

exclusivities are granted only to certain pharmaceutical products such as innovative products ( eg , a new active ingredient or new indication for an existing drug ) or those that serve a specific need ( eg , treating rare diseases ) .

regulatory exclusivities prevent fda from accepting or approving an application by a competitor for fda approval of a follow - on product ( i.e. , a generic or biosimilar version ) of a previously approved pharmaceutical for a set time period , and / or preclude a competitor from relying on safety and efficacy data submitted by the original manufacturer for a period of time .

depending on the type of pharmaceutical product at issue and other factors , regulatory exclusivities may last anywhere from six months to 12 years .

in overlapping ways , both patent rights and regulatory exclusivities can operate to deter or delay the market entry of a generic drug or biosimilar .

the department of health and human services ( hhs ) has found that national spending on pharmaceutical products has been rising in recent years , predicting that these expenditures would continue to rise faster than overall health spending .

many factors other than ip rights contribute to the price consumers pay for prescription drugs and biologics , including demand , manufacturing costs , r&d costs , the terms of private health insurance , and the involvement of a government insurance program such as medicaid .

that said , pharmaceutical products are frequently protected by ip rights , and some studies have shown that ip rights are among the most important factors driving high drug prices .

for example , fda has found that increased competition from generic drug manufacturers is associated with lower prices for pharmaceuticals .

given that ip rights may allow the rights holder to charge higher - than - competitive prices , and can deter or delay the market entry of generic drug or biosimilar competitors , changes to ip rights or otherwise facilitating competition is seen by some to offer a potential means of lowering prices for pharmaceutical products .

accordingly , several current proposed congressional reforms to lower drug prices would reform the existing legal structure of ip rights in the pharmaceutical context .

this report explains how several of these congressional proposals to reduce drug prices would interact with and / or alter existing ip law for pharmaceutical products .

first , the report reviews the basics of patent law , fda law and regulatory exclusivities , and the interaction between patent rights and fda approval of pharmaceutical products .

with this legal background in hand , the report overviews the details of a number of current legislative proposals to change these laws in order to reduce the drug prices paid by consumers .

several different legal and regulatory regimes create or affect ip rights in pharmaceutical products .

as noted above , pharmaceuticals are subject to two principal forms of ip protection — patents and regulatory exclusivities — which are generally distinct , but at times overlap and interact .

complicating matters further is the fact that fda regulates pharmaceutical products differently depending on whether they derive from natural sources .

in particular , before they can be marketed or sold , nonbiological "drugs" must be approved by fda under the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( fd&c act ) , whereas "biologics" must be licensed by fda under the public health service act ( phsa ) .

finally , patents on pharmaceutical drugs or biologics are subject to specialized patent dispute resolution procedures that can affect a manufacturer's ability to bring a follow - on product ( i.e. , a generic drug or biosimilar ) to market .

specifically , provisions of the drug price competition and patent term restoration act of 1984 ( the hatch - waxman act ) govern fda approval and patent disputes for generic drugs , whereas the biologics price competition and innovation act of 2009 ( bpcia ) governs fda licensure and patent disputes for biosimilars .

in light of these complexities , a fair amount of background is necessary to understand how ip rights are obtained in pharmaceuticals , how these rights may impact drug prices , and the various reforms that have been proposed in congress to reduce drug prices for consumers .

this section provides this background , proceeding in three parts .

first , it reviews patent law , including the requirements for obtaining a patent , the rights granted to patent holders , and various limitations on those rights .

second , it overviews fda requirements for obtaining approval to market a drug or biological product , the abbreviated pathways for generic drug approval under the hatch - waxman act and biosimilar licensure under the bpcia , and different regulatory exclusivities that fda grants to certain types of approved pharmaceutical products .

finally , this section describes and compares the different specialized patent dispute procedures for generic drugs and biosimilars under hatch - waxman and the bpcia , respectively .

this section reviews a number of legislative proposals in the 115 th and 116 th congresses that seek to reduce pharmaceutical drug and biological product prices through reforming ip laws and / or facilitating increased competition from generic drug and biosimilar manufacturers .

this review is not intended to be comprehensive , nor does it evaluate the merits of these proposals .

rather , proposals are reviewed merely as representative examples of the various types of legal changes under consideration .

related or similar proposals are referenced in the footnotes .

as noted above , ip rights are only one factor that may contribute to consumer prices in a highly complex pharmaceutical market .

thus , congressional proposals related to ip rights are merely one potential means to reduce drug prices that is currently under consideration in congress .

other legislative proposals seeking to reduce drug prices would , for example , permit the secretary of hhs ( the secretary ) to negotiate drug prices for medicare part d , allow consumers to import ( often cheaper ) pharmaceuticals from canada under certain circumstances , or reform health insurance requirements to institute a cap on consumers' out - of - pocket costs for prescription drugs .

because these and other similar proposals relate only indirectly to ip rights in pharmaceuticals , they are outside the scope of this report .

in part due to the complexity of the legal regimes governing ip rights in pharmaceutical products , there are many different approaches that legislators seeking to reduce drug and biologic prices might take .

these approaches include efforts to facilitate generic and biosimilar market entry , curtail practices perceived to be anticompetitive , limit ip rights based on pricing behavior , and increase patent transparency .

this section surveys some of the specific means used in existing legislative proposals .

concerns about perceived high prices for prescription drugs and other pharmaceutical products implicate a complex set of legal regimes , including patent law , fda law , and specialized patent dispute procedures for drugs and biological products .

much of the debate over allegedly high pharmaceutical prices is fundamentally a matter of public policy: in particular , finding the appropriate balance between providing incentives to create innovative new medicines versus the costs those incentives may impose on the public in the form of higher prices .

nonetheless , knowledge of the workings of the existing legal regimes governing ip rights in pharmaceutical products is necessary to fully understand the implications of the variety of legislative approaches to reduce pharmaceutical prices .

