timber harvesting on federal lands is a long - standing activity which sometimes generates controversy .

most timber harvesting on federal lands occurs on lands directed to provide a regular output of multiple uses under current law .

determining the proportions of these uses , in whole and on individual lands , is challenging for land management agencies .

often at issue is the appropriate use of federal lands for timber harvesting under these policies , including what amount of timber harvesting should occur and what constitutes proper balance among timber harvesting and other uses .

congress has authorized timber harvesting on certain federal lands under specified circumstances .

most timber harvesting on federal lands occurs on two land systems .

the majority of harvests occur on the national forest system ( nfs ) , which is managed by the forest service ( fs ) within the department of agriculture ( usda ) .

harvests also occur on the public lands managed by the bureau of land management ( blm ) within the department of the interior ( doi ) .

the fs manages 144.9 million acres of forest , while the blm manages 37.6 million acres of forest ( see figure 1 ) .

together , fs and blm forest comprises 76% of federal forest area and 23% of all forest in the united states .

within their respective forest , the fs has 96.1 million acres of timberlands , and the blm has 6.1 million acres of timberlands .

the united states has 765.5 million acres of forest , of which 514.4 million acres is timberland and 57% is private .

the united states has 57.0 million acres of woodland .

timber harvesting is the physical cutting and removal of trees or parts of trees from a given forested site .

harvested timber , or cut and removed trees , is the raw material for items made of wood , such as lumber , plywood , paper , and other products .

timber harvesting may occur on private , federal , or non - federal publicly owned lands , and may be conducted by the landowner or by another entity they allow to do so .

most timber harvesting in the united states is conducted on private lands: in 2011 , 88% of timber harvests were conducted on private lands , and in 2012 , 90% of wood and paper products in the united states originated on private lands .

fs and blm conduct timber sales as the most general way to allow timber harvesting on their respective lands , although they may allow harvesting in other ways .

a timber sale is a formal process whereby an entity may purchase a contract to cut and remove specified timber .

fs and blm receive revenue from the sale of the contract .

information on timber harvesting in this report , such as harvested volume , harvested value , and other statistics , derives from fs and blm data and may include timber harvested through timber sales or other means .

both fs and blm timber sale planning and implementation proceed under similar principles of achieving multiple use and sustained yield .

both agencies conduct timber harvesting for various purposes .

both plan long - term timber management by designating areas that can support sustainable timber harvest and calculating yields that can be taken without permanent impairment .

in the short term , both agencies create plans for timber sales , determine the value of offered timber and specify what timber may be cut , and conduct sales in a competitive manner open to the public .

timber harvesting may also occur on two other federal land systems , the national park system , managed by the national park service , and the national wildlife refuge system ( nwrs ) , managed by the fish and wildlife service ( both agencies are within doi ) .

in the case of the national park system , the secretary may dispose of timber to control insects and diseases or to conserve natural or historic resources .

in the case of the nwrs , the secretary of the interior may permit timber harvesting to achieve desired fish and wildlife habitat conditions .

on both systems , timber harvesting is rare , and harvested volumes are small .

this report provides an overview of timber harvesting on fs and blm lands .

the report describes general statutory authorities and regulations , planning activities , timber sales , and trends in the volume and value of timber harvested , first from fs lands , and then for blm lands .

it concludes with a discussion of issues congress has debated concerning timber harvesting and federal lands .

the national forest system comprises nearly 193 million acres .

it is made up of 154 national forests , national grasslands , and other units such as research and experimental areas .

approximately 75% of national forest acreage is located in 15 states .

as discussed , the nfs contains 144.9 million acres of forest and woodland , of which 66% are considered timberland .

the bureau of land management ( blm ) administers about 246 million surface acres of federal lands , almost entirely located in twelve western states .

as noted , about 37.6 million acres of blm lands are forest ; of that , 16% is considered timberland .

the oregon and california ( o&c ) lands , which comprise approximately 2.6 million acres , contain 2.4 million acres of forest ( see " statutory authorities for harvesting timber ," below , for a description of the o&c lands ) .

the transfer of the forest reserves to fs administration in the early 1900s reduced the amount of forest land and timberland under blm management today .

management of federal lands for multiple uses and sustained yield is challenging , including balancing timber harvesting with other uses .

timber production from federal lands is driven by a complex interaction of environmental factors , market forces , and land management policies .

under current law , efforts to change harvest levels must comport with the provision of a sustained yield of multiple uses .

congress has sometimes considered legislation to prioritize or exclude some uses in a limited manner — in certain geographic regions , for example — but has not changed these fundamental management concepts since their enactment in the 1960s and 1970s .

the public often expresses preferences for uses of federal forests , including with respect to timber harvesting .

some may support timber harvesting generally , and believe the current levels of production are sufficient .

others may wish to see the levels of production increased or decreased , depending on their perspective .

those who support timber harvesting on federal lands may cite benefits to the local timber industry , a belief that harvesting is part of the core mission of federal forests , or a belief that timber harvesting is a tool for improving forest health conditions , among other reasons .

proponents of timber harvesting on federal lands may also emphasize the role of timber harvesting in some forest - adjacent rural economies .

others may oppose timber harvesting due to concerns about ecological or human impacts: for example , they may cite beliefs that timber sales have detrimental impacts on environmental quality , fish and wildlife habitat , forest character , recreation and tourism , or cultural and aesthetic values .

opponents may also contend that conducting timber sales favors the timber industry over other interests .

in addition to the themes identified above , congress may also debate other issues related to federal timber harvests that are not discussed in detail in this report .

for example , these include issues related to the disposition and use of timber sale revenues ; the relationship between timber harvest planning and statutes such as nepa and the endangered species act ( esa ) ; and special harvest authorities , among others .

the following tables list and describe the funds that receive timber sale revenues ; the funds' statutory authority is also shown .

a detailed discussion of funding levels , expenditures , and issues related to these funds is outside the scope of this report .

