program eligibility requirements and payment limits are central to how various u.s. farm programs operate .

these requirements fundamentally address various equity concerns and reflect the goals of government intervention in agriculture .

they determine who receives federal farm program payments and how much they receive .

eligibility requirements and payment limits are controversial because they influence what size farms are supported .

policymakers have debated what limit is optimal for annual payments , whether payments should be proportional to production or limited per individual or per farm operation , and whether the limit should be specific to each program or cumulative across all programs .

furthermore , program eligibility requirements and payment limits generate considerable congressional interest because their effects differ across regions and by type of commodities produced and because a substantial amount of annual u.s. farm program payments are at stake: direct federal outlays have averaged $13.7 billion per year from 1996 through 2017 .

when federal crop insurance premium subsidies are included , annual farm payments have averaged $18.5 billion over the same period .

this report discusses various eligibility factors and their interaction under the 2018 farm bill .

it describes current restrictions that limit or preclude payments to farmers based on a number of factors as well as areas where few , if any , restrictions limit farmers' access to such benefits or to the amount of benefits .

this report begins by discussing farm program eligibility , including the primary types of legal entities participating in farm programs .

other limiting requirements are discussed , such as participant identification , citizenship , the current interpretation of what constitutes "actively engaged in farming" ( aef ) , adjusted gross income ( agi ) limits , and conservation compliance .

this is followed by a discussion of the direct attribution of payments to individual recipients for assessing whether a person's payment limit has been exceeded .

next , annual payment limits for the major categories of farm programs are examined .

much of this information is summarized in table 1 .

this report also discusses several issues related to farm program payment limits , including policy design issues , that may be of interest to congress .

finally , an appendix contains a history of the evolution of annual payment limits for major commodity programs ( table a - 1 ) .

not all farm businesses are eligible to participate in federal farm programs .

a number of statutory and regulatory requirements govern federal farm program eligibility for benefits under various programs .

some farm businesses , although eligible to participate , are restricted from receiving certain benefits or may be limited in the extent of program payments that they may receive .

over time , program eligibility rules have evolved , expanding to more programs and including more limitations .

cross - cutting methods of determining program eligibility — such as agi thresholds — are relatively new .

discussed below are cross - cutting eligibility requirements that affect multiple programs , including participant identification , foreign ownership , nature and extent of participation ( i.e. , aef criteria ) , means tests , and conservation requirements .

the process of tracking payments to an individual through various levels of ownership in single and multiperson legal entities is referred to as "direct attribution. .

several types of legal entities may qualify for farm program payments .

however , ultimately every legal entity represents some combination of individuals .

for example , a joint operation can be made up of a combination of individuals , partnerships , and / or corporate entities .

a particular individual may be part of each of these three component entities , as well as additional subentities within each of these components .

farm payments flow down through these arrangements to individual recipients .

congress defines legal entity as an entity created under federal or state law that ( 1 ) owns land or an agricultural commodity or ( 2 ) produces an agricultural commodity .

this broad definition encompasses the multiperson legal entities discussed earlier such as family farm operations , joint ventures , corporations , and institutional arrangements .

ownership shares in a multiperson legal entity are tracked via a person's social security number or ein as reported in ccc - 901 and ccc - 902 .

identification at the individual payment recipient level is critical for assessing the cumulative payments of each individual against the annual payment limit .

direct attribution was originally authorized in the 2008 farm bill ( §1603 ( b ) ( 3 ) ) .

all farm program payments made directly or indirectly to an individual associated with a specific farming operation are combined with any other payments received by that same person from any other farming operation — based on that person's pro rata interest in those other operations .

it is this accumulation of an individual's payments — tracked through four levels of ownership in multiperson legal entities — that is subject to the annual payment limit ( see text box below ) .

the first level of attribution is an individual's personal farming operation .

subsequent levels of attribution are related to those legal entities in which an individual has an ownership share .

if a person meets his or her payment limit at the first level of attribution ( i.e. , on his or her own personal farming operation ) , then any payments to legal entities at lower levels of attribution are reduced by that person's pro rata share .

when the eligibility criteria — including aef , agi , conservation compliance , and others — are met , the cumulative benefits across certain farm programs are subject to specific annual payment limits ( detailed in table 1 ) that can be received by an individual or legal entity in a year .

explicit payment limits date back to the 1970s .

despite their longevity , payment limits are not universal among programs .

payment limits are also enforced differently for different types of legal entities ( as mentioned earlier and summarized below ) .

for example , certain program limits may be expanded depending on the number of participants , or they may be subject to exceptions , or they may not exist .

the major categories of farm program support and the applicability of annual payment limits , if any , are briefly discussed below .

limitations on farm program payments raise a number of issues that have led to debate among farm policymakers and agricultural stakeholders and may continue to be of interest to congress as it considers issues of equity and efficiency in farm programs .

theoretically , market prices — based on relative supply and demand conditions under competitive market conditions — provide the most useful signals for allocating scarce resources .

in other words , in a situation where no policy support is available , most producers would make production decisions based primarily on market conditions .

if these conditions hold , then tighter payment limits ( i.e. , a smaller role for government support policies and production incentives ) would imply that more land would be farmed based on market conditions and less land would be farmed based on policy choices .

supporters of payment limits use both economic and political arguments to justify tighter limits .

economically , they contend that large payments facilitate consolidation of farms into larger units , raise the price of land , and put smaller family - sized farming operations and beginning farmers at a disadvantage .

even though tighter limits would not redistribute benefits to smaller farms , they say that tighter limits could help indirectly by reducing incentives to expand , thus potentially reducing upward price pressure on land markets .

this could help small and beginning farmers buy and rent land .

politically , they believe that large payments undermine public support for farm subsidies and are costly .

in the past , newspapers have published stories critical of farm payments and how they are distributed to large farms , nonfarmers , or landowners .

limits increasingly appeal to urban lawmakers and have advocates among smaller farms and social interest groups .

critics of payment limits ( and thus supporters of higher limits or no limits ) counter that all farms are in need of support , especially when market prices decline , and that larger farms should not be penalized for the economies of size and efficiencies they have achieved .

they say that farm payments help u.s. agriculture compete in global markets and that income testing is at odds with federal farm policies directed toward improving u.s. agriculture and its competitiveness .

in addition to these concerns , this section briefly reviews other selected payment limit issues and eligibility requirements .

the majority of farm payments go to a small share of large operators .

according to usda's 2012 agricultural census , farms with market revenue equal to or greater than $250,000 accounted for 12% of farm households but produced 89% of the value of total u.s. agricultural production and received 60% of federal farm program payments .

selecting a particular dollar value as a limit on annual government support payments involves a fundamental choice about who should benefit from farm program payments .

this has important , but complex , policy implications .

for example , numerous academic studies have shown that government payments are usually capitalized into cropland values , thus raising rental rates and land prices .

higher land values disfavor beginning and small farmers , who generally have limited access to capital .

as a result , critics contend that there is a lack of equity and fairness under the current system of farm program payments that appears to favor large operations over small and that payment limits are really about farm size .

in contrast , supporters of the current system argue that larger farms tend to be more efficient operators and that altering the system in favor of smaller operators may create inefficiencies and reduce u.s. competitiveness in international markets .

furthermore , they contend that tightening payment limits will have different effects across crops , thus resulting in potentially harmful regional effects .

tighter payment limits do not affect all crops and regions equally .

as limits are tightened , they will likely first impact those crops with higher per - unit and per - acre production value .

among the major u.s. program crops , higher valued crops include rice , peanuts , and cotton , all of which tend to be produced in the southeast , the mississippi delta , and western states .

furthermore , payment limits may influence local economic activity .

in particular , payment limits are likely to have a greater economic impact in regions where agricultural production accounts for a larger share of economic output — that is in rural , agriculture - based counties — and where there may be fewer opportunities for diversification to offset any payment - limit - induced reduction in agricultural incomes .

under current law , peanuts have a separate program payment limit — a consequence of the 2002 federal quota buyout ( p.l .

107-171 , §1603 ) .

this separate payment limit affords peanut production an advantage over production of other program crops that are subject to combined payments for arc and plc under a single limit .

as a result of this feature , a farmer who grows multiple program crops including peanuts has essentially two different program payment limits: 1 .

$125,000 per person for an aggregation of arc and plc program payments made to all program crops other than peanuts , and 2 .

$125,000 per person for arc and plc program payments made exclusively to peanuts .

thus , under an extreme scenario involving large payments for both peanuts and other program crops , this could potentially double a peanut farmer's payment limits to as much as $250,000 .

the 2018 farm bill ( §1703 ) excluded mal benefits from any payment limit while also raising the mal rates for several program crops ( §1202 ) , including barley , corn , grain sorghum , oats , extra - long - staple cotton , rice , soybeans , dry peas , lentils , and small and large chickpeas .

raising mal rates has two potential program effects .

first , since mal rates function as floor prices for eligible loan commodities , higher rates increase the potential for greater usda outlays under mal .

second , mal rates are used to establish the maximum payment under plc .

thus , raising the loan rate for a program commodity lowers its potential plc program payment rate .

the absence of a limit on benefits received under the mal program creates the potential for unlimited , fully coupled usda farm support outlays .

as a result , an apparent equity issue emerges when comparing program benefits of a producer facing a hard cap for arc and plc payments as compared to a producer with access to mal benefits .

because mal payments are fully coupled — that is , tied to the production of a specific crop — mal program outlays count directly against u.s. amber box spending limits under world trade organization ( wto ) commitments .

to the extent that such program outlays might induce surplus production and depress market prices , they could result in potential challenges under the wto's dispute settlement mechanism .

when eligibility requirements or payment limits are changed , economically rational producers are likely to alter their behavior to make adjustments to optimize net revenue under the new set of policy and market circumstances .

for example , new eligibility requirements or tighter payment limits may result in a reorganization of the farm operation to increase the number of eligible persons or to lower the income that counts against a new agi limit or the farm program payments that count against a smaller payment limit ; a change in the crop and program choices or marketing practices , for example , to take advantage of the absence of a payment limit on mal benefits ; a change in crop choices , as agronomic and marketing opportunities allow , to favor a crop with an expanded limit ( eg , peanuts ) over crops with more restricted program payment opportunities ; or a change in land use , such as instead of farming the same acreage , renting out or selling some land to farmers who have not hit their payment limits .

payment limits applied per unit or per base acre represent an alternative to per - person payment limits that may mitigate some potential distortions to producer behavior .

an example of such a per - unit payment limit is the 85% payment reduction factor applied to base acres receiving payments under either the plc or arc programs .

the reduction factor is applied equally across all program payments irrespective of crop choice , farm size , agi , or total value of payments .

some economists contend that such a payment reduction factor is generally applied for cost - saving reasons rather than for "fairness" or equity reasons that at least partially motivate per - person payment limits .

the 2018 farm bill retained the $900,000 agi limit established under the 2014 farm bill .

this agi limit applies to all farm income whether earned on the farm or off .

under the 2008 farm bill , the agi limit was divided into two components: a $500,000 agi limit for farm - earned income and a $750,000 agi cap on nonfarm earned income .

analysis by usda ( 2016 ) found that fewer farms are affected by the single agi cap ( $900,000 ) compared with the multiple farm ( $500,000 ) and nonfarm ( $750,000 ) agi caps of the 2008 farm bill .

for example , while federal income tax data are not available for the $900,000 cap level , published data from 2013 — a year of record - high farm income — found that only about 0.7% of all farm sole proprietors and share rent landlords reported total agi in excess of $1 million .

thus , it is likely that consolidating the separate agi farm and nonfarm limits into a single agi limit with a higher bound has restored eligibility for farm program payments to some farm operations that had previously been disqualified .

other major exemptions from the agi limit include state and local governments and agencies , federally recognized indian tribes , and waivers under rcpp .

the 2014 farm bill shifted the farm safety net focus away from traditional revenue support programs and toward crop insurance programs , which are not subject to the agi cap .

the 2018 farm bill maintains this emphasis on crop insurance as the foundational farm safety net program .

during the eight - year period of 2011-2018 , federal crop insurance premium subsidies averaged $6.4 billion annually .

extending the agi cap to crop insurance subsidies was considered during both the 2014 and 2018 farm bill debates .

however , concerns were raised that the elimination of subsidies for higher - income participants could affect overall participation in crop insurance and damage the soundness of the entire program .

however , usda has estimated that in most years , less than 0.5% of farms and less than 1% of premiums would be affected by the $900,000 income cap if it were extended to crop insurance subsidies as well as to farm program payments .

