the u.s. fourth national climate assessment , released in 2018 , concluded that "the impacts of global climate change are already being felt in the united states and are projected to intensify in the future — but the severity of future impacts will depend largely on actions taken to reduce greenhouse g as [ghg] emissions and to adapt to the changes that will occur. .

although a variety of efforts seeking to reduce ghg emissions are currently underway on the international and sub - national level , federal policymakers and stakeholders have different viewpoints over what to do , if anything , about future climate change and related impacts .

their views regarding climate change cover a wide range of perspectives .

for example , some contend that climate change poses a "direct , existential threat" to human society and that nations must start making significant reductions in ghg emissions in order to avoid "dire effects. .

to support this argument , proponents of climate change mitigation highlight the evidence and conclusions from recent reports that are generally considered authoritative , including: 1 .

the intergovernmental panel on climate change , global w arming of 1.5°c , 2018 ; and 2 .

the u.s .

global change research program , fourth national climate assessment , volume ii: impacts , risks , and adaptation in the united states , 2018 .

on the other hand , some question whether there are sufficient risks of climate change to merit a federal program requiring ghg emission reductions .

in addition , others argue that a unilateral approach to climate change by the united states could disproportionately impact domestic industries while achieving minimal results in global climate change mitigation .

if congress were to consider establishing a program to reduce ghg emissions , one option would be to apply a tax or fee on ghg emissions or the inputs that produce them .

this type of approach is commonly called a carbon tax or a ghg emissions fee ( see "terminology issues: a carbon tax or an emissions fee ? " ) .

this report does not compare and analyze the multiple policy tools available to congress that could address climate change ( see text box "other policy options for addressing ghg emissions" ) .

this report focuses on the policy considerations and potential impacts of using a carbon tax or ghg emissions fee to control ghg emissions .

the key human - related ghg is co 2 , which is generated primarily through the combustion of fossil fuels: coal , oil , and natural gas .

in 2016 , fossil fuel combustion accounted for 94% of u.s. co 2 emissions and 76% of u.s. ghg emissions .

a carbon tax could apply either directly to ghg emissions or to the materials — based on their carbon contents — that ultimately generate the emissions ( i.e. , "emissions inputs" ) .

a carbon price on emissions or their emissions inputs — mainly fossil fuels — would increase the relative price of the more carbon - intensive energy sources , particularly coal .

this result could spur innovation in less carbon - intensive technologies ( eg , renewable energy , nuclear power , carbon capture and sequestration [ccs] ) and stimulate other behavior that may decrease emissions , such as efficiency improvements .

the energy price increases could also have both economy - wide impacts and negative effects on specific industries and particular demographic groups .

a carbon tax approach has received some attention and debate in recent years .

in the 115 th congress , members introduced nine carbon tax or fee proposals .

outside of congress , the climate leadership council — a bipartisan group of former policymakers and industry leaders — published a conceptual carbon tax approach in 2017 that generated some interest .

some of the industry leaders on the council represent major energy companies , including shell , bp , and exxonmobil .

on the other hand , many members have expressed their opposition to a carbon tax .

starting in the 112 th congress and going through the 115 th congress , members have introduced resolutions in both the house and senate expressing the view that a carbon tax is not in the economic interests of the united states .

in 2018 , the house passed a resolution "expressing the sense of congress that a carbon tax would be detrimental to the united states economy" ( h.con.res .

119 ) .

an analogous resolution was not introduced in the senate in the 115 th congress .

the first section of this report examines carbon tax design issues , including the point of taxation , the rate of taxation , and potential border carbon adjustments .

the second section discusses issues related to the distribution of carbon tax revenues .

the third section discusses additional considerations associated with a carbon tax program , including estimates of ghg emissions , federal revenue , and fossil fuel prices and changes in energy use .

the fourth section provides concluding observations .

if policymakers decide to establish a carbon tax system , congress would face several key design decisions , including the point of taxation — where to impose the tax and what to tax — the rate of taxation , and whether and / or how to address imported carbon - intensive materials .

alternatively , congress could direct one or more federal agencies to determine these design features through a rulemaking procedure .

although a few of the ghg emission reduction proposals in prior congresses delegated such authority to an agency , such as the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) , all of the proposals since the 111 th congress have included some degree of design details in the statutory language .

 ( a later section discusses carbon tax revenue application considerations. ) .

although a tax may be levied on fossil fuels or ghg emission sources at various points in the economy , the carbon tax impacts may be experienced elsewhere .

policymakers have multiple options to address these expected impacts .

policymakers would face challenging decisions regarding the distribution of the new carbon tax revenues .

as discussed below , some economic analyses indicate that certain distributions of tax revenue — depending on the level of the tax — would have a greater economic impact than the direct effects from the tax or fee on ghg emissions .

carbon tax revenues could be treated as general fund revenue without a dedication to a specific purpose in the enacting legislation ( i.e. , subject to the annual appropriations process ) , or policymakers could state that the new revenues would support deficit ( or debt ) reduction .

alternatively , the enacting legislation could return the tax revenue to the economy in some manner , sometimes called "revenue recycling. .

all of the carbon tax legislative proposals in recent congresses have proposed some manner of revenue recycling , specifically directing the carbon tax revenue to support specific policy objectives .

carbon tax revenues may be used to support a variety of policy goals .

when deciding how to allocate the new revenue stream , policymakers would likely encounter trade - offs among objectives , including: reducing the economy - wide costs resulting from a carbon tax program ; alleviating the costs borne by subgroups in the u.s. population , particularly low - income households and / or communities most dependent on carbon - intensive economic activity ; and supporting specific policy objectives , such as domestic employment , climate change adaptation , energy efficiency , technological advance , energy diversity , or federal deficit reduction , among others .

in general , economic carbon tax studies have found that the relative ranking of revenue recycling options to mitigate the economy - wide impacts is generally the opposite of the relative ranking for alleviating distributional impacts .

the contrasting relative rankings highlight a central tradeoff policymakers would face when deciding how to allocate carbon tax revenues .

the following sections discuss these trade - offs and some of the revenue application options that have received attention in recent years .

a large body of economic literature has examined the economic impacts of hypothetical carbon tax programs , particularly the impacts of using the carbon tax revenues for different purposes .

many of the economic studies cited below were prepared prior to the enactment of the tax cuts and jobs act ( tcja , p.l .

115-97 ) .

signed by president trump in december 2017 , the act changed various elements of the u.s. federal tax system .

in particular , the act lowered the corporate income tax rate from 35% to 21% .

as discussed below , adjusting the corporate income tax rate is one of the central policy options generally considered in carbon tax economic literature both before and after enactment of p.l .

115-97 .

based on a selected review of the economic literature that includes the tax code changes in p.l .

115-97 , the central conclusions from carbon tax literature regarding revenue recycling appear to be largely unchanged .

a carbon tax is one policy option to address u.s. ghg emission levels , which contribute to climate change and related impacts .

economic modeling indicates that a carbon tax would achieve emission reductions , the level of which would depend on which ghg emissions and sources are covered and the rate of the carbon tax .

a carbon tax would generate a new revenue stream .

the magnitude of the revenues would depend on the scope and rate of the tax and multiple market factors , which introduce uncertainty in the revenue projections .

a 2018 cbo study estimated that a $25 / metric ton tax on co 2 emissions from energy - related activities and other selected ghg emission sources would yield approximately $100 billion in the first year of the program .

to put this estimate in context , the cbo projected that total federal revenue would be $3.5 trillion in fy2019 .

policymakers would face challenging decisions regarding the distribution of the new carbon tax revenues .

depending on the level of the tax , some economic analyses indicate that the distribution of tax revenue could yield greater economic impacts than the direct impacts of the tax .

some models indicate that the economic impacts are greatest in the early years of the carbon tax .

policymakers could apply the tax revenues to support a range of policy objectives .

when deciding how to allocate the revenues , policymakers would encounter trade - offs among objectives .

the central trade - offs involve minimizing economy - wide costs , lessening the costs borne by specific groups — particularly low - income households — and supporting a range of specific policy objectives .

a primary concern with a carbon tax is the potential economy - wide costs that may result .

the potential costs would depend on a number of factors , including the magnitude , design , and use of revenues of the carbon tax .

in general , economic literature finds that some of the modeled revenue applications would reduce the economy - wide costs imposed by a carbon tax but may not eliminate them entirely .

policymakers and stakeholders may have different perspectives regarding whether these estimated economy - wide costs ( typically measured in terms of gdp loss ) represent a significant concern .

some argue that the estimated economy - wide costs should be compared with the policy option of not establishing a carbon tax .

this comparison is uncertain as carbon tax analyses do not generally consider the benefits that would be gained by reducing ghg emissions and avoiding climate change and its adverse impacts .

some studies cite particular economic modeling scenarios in which a carbon tax and revenue recycling could produce a net increase in gdp or economic welfare , compared to a baseline scenario .

these scenarios involve using carbon tax revenues to offset reductions in existing , distortionary taxes , such as corporate income or payroll taxes .

although the models indicate that these revenue applications would yield the greatest benefit to the economy overall , the models also find that lower - income households would likely face a disproportionate impact under such revenue applications .

as lower - income households spend a greater proportion of their income on energy needs , these households are expected to experience disproportionate impacts from a carbon tax if revenues were not recycled back to them in some fashion , such as a lump - sum distribution .

carbon tax revenues that are used to offset the burden imposed on various sectors or specific population groups would not be available to support other objectives .

an additional concern with a carbon tax involves potential disproportionate impacts to "emission - intensive , trade - exposed industries. .

policymakers could select among several options to address these concerns , either by establishing a border carbon adjustment program or allocating some of the carbon tax revenues to selected industry sectors based on an output - based metric .

if other nations were to adopt comparable carbon price policies , this concern may be alleviated to some degree .

relatedly , a carbon tax is projected to disproportionately impact fossil fuel industries , particularly coal , and the communities that rely on their employment .

to alleviate these impacts , policymakers could allocate some of the carbon tax revenue to provide transition assistance to employees or affected communities .

 table a - 1 identifies sources of ghg emissions that account for 0.5% or more of total u.s. ghg emissions .

the sources are listed in descending order by their percentage contribution .

co 2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion , which accounts for almost 76% of total u.s. ghg emissions , are broken down by fossil fuel type: petroleum , coal , and natural gas .

the table identifies potential points in the economy at which a carbon tax could be applied .

the table lists the approximate number of entities that would be involved with different tax applications .

the number of entities listed is current as of the most recent data available and varies accordingly by category .

see table notes for details .

the right - hand column of the table provides additional comments for some of the emission sources .

in some cases the comments discuss potential opportunities for additional ghg emissions coverage at a particular source .

in other cases , the comments address potential limitations of covering all of the emissions from a particular source .

