the issue of executive discretion has been at the center of constitutional debates in liberal democracies throughout the twentieth century .

how to balance a commitment to the rule of law with the exigencies of modern political and economic crises has engaged legislators and scholars in the united states and around the world .

the united states constitution is silent on questions of emergency power .

as such , over the past two centuries , congress and the president have answered those questions in varied and often ad hoc ways .

in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries , the answer was often for the president to act without congressional approval in a time of crisis , knowingly risking impeachment and personal civil liability .

congress claimed primacy over emergency action and would decide subsequently to either ratify the president's actions or indemnify the president for any civil liability .

by the twentieth century , a new pattern had begun to emerge .

instead of retroactively judging an executive's extraordinary actions in a time of emergency , congress created statutory bases permitting the president to declare a state of emergency and make use of extraordinary delegated powers .

the expanding delegation of emergency powers to the executive and the increase of governing via emergency power by the executive has been a common trajectory among twentieth - century liberal democracies .

as innovation has quickened the pace of social change and global crises , some legislatures have felt compelled to delegate to the executive , who traditional political theorists assumed could operate with greater "dispatch" than deliberate , future - oriented legislatures .

whether such actions subvert the rule of law or are a standard feature of healthy modern constitutional orders has been a subject of extensive debate .

the international emergency economic powers act ( ieepa ) is one such example of a twentieth - century delegation of emergency authority .

one of 123 emergency statutes under the umbrella of the national emergencies act ( nea ) , ieepa grants the president extensive power to regulate a variety of economic transactions during a state of emergency .

congress enacted ieepa in 1977 to rein in the expansive emergency economic powers that it had been delegated to the president under the trading with the enemy act ( twea ) .

nevertheless , some scholars argue that judicial and legislative actions subsequent to ieepa's enactment have made it , like twea , a source of expansive and unchecked executive authority in the economic realm .

others , however , argue that presidents often use ieepa to implement the will of congress either as directed by law or as encouraged by congressional activity .

until recently , there has been little congressional discussion of modifying either ieepa or its umbrella statute , the nea .

recent presidential actions , however , have drawn attention to presidential emergency powers under the nea of which ieepa is the most frequently used .

should congress consider changing ieepa , there are two issues that congress may wish to address .

the first pertains to how congress has delegated its authority under ieepa and its umbrella statute , the nea .

the second pertains to choices made in the export control reform act of 2018 .

congress may wish to address a number of issues with respect to ieepa ; two are addressed here .

the first pertains to how congress has delegated its authority under ieepa and its umbrella statute , the nea .

the second pertains to choices made in the export control reform act of 2018 .

although the stated aim of the drafters of the nea and ieepa was to restrain the use of emergency powers , the use of such powers has expanded by several measures .

presidents declare national emergencies and renew them for years or even decades .

the limitation of ieepa to transactions involving some foreign interest was intended to limit ieepa's domestic application .

however , globalization has eroded that limit , as few transactions today do not involve some foreign interest .

many of the other criticisms of twea that ieepa was supposed to address — consultation , time limits , congressional review , scope of power , and logical relationship to the emergency declared — are criticisms that scholars levy against ieepa today .

in general , three common criticisms are levied by scholars with respect to the structure of the nea and ieepa that may be of interest to congress .

first , the nea and ieepa do not define the phrases "national emergency" and "unusual and extraordinary threat" and presidents have interpreted these terms broadly .

second , the scope of presidential authority under ieepa has become less constrained in a highly globalized era .

third , owing to rulings by the supreme court and amendments to the nea , congress would likely have to have a two - thirds majority rather than a simple majority to terminate a national emergency .

despite these criticisms , congress has not acted to terminate or otherwise express displeasure with an emergency declaration invoking ieepa .

this absence of any explicit statement of disapproval , coupled with explicit statements of approval in some instances , may indicate congressional approval of presidential use of ieepa thus far .

arguably , then , ieepa could be seen as an effective tool for carrying out the will of congress .

neither the nea nor ieepa define what constitutes a "national emergency. .

ieepa conditions its invocation in a declaration on its necessity for dealing with an "unusual and extraordinary threat … to the national security , foreign policy , or economy of the united states. .

in the markup of ieepa in the house , fred bergsten , then - assistant secretary for international affairs in the department of the treasury , praised the requirement that a national emergency for the purposes of ieepa be "based on an unusual and extraordinary threat" because such language "emphasizes that such powers should be available only in true emergencies. .

because "unusual" and "extraordinary" are also undefined , the usual and ordinary invocation of the statute seems to conflict with those statutory conditions .

if congress wanted to refine the meaning of "national emergency" or "unusual and extraordinary threat," it could do so through statute .

additionally , congress could consider requiring some sort of factual finding by a court prior to , or shortly after , the exercise of any authority , such as under the first militia act of 1792 or the foreign intelligence surveillance act .

however , congress may consider that the ambiguity in the existing statute provides the executive with the flexibility necessary to address national emergencies with the requisite dispatch .

while ieepa nominally applies only to foreign transactions , the breadth of the phrase , "any interest of any foreign country or a national thereof" has left a great deal of room for executive discretion .

the interconnectedness of the modern global economy has left few major transactions in which a foreign interest is not involved .

as a result , at least one scholar has concluded , "the exemption of purely domestic transactions from the president's transaction controls seems to be a limitation without substance. .

presidents have used ieepa since the 1980s to control exports by maintaining the dual - use export control system , enshrined in the export administration regulations ( ear ) in times when its underlying authorization , the export administration act ( eaa ) , periodically expired .

during those times when congress did not reauthorize the eaa , presidents have declared emergencies to maintain the dual - use export control system .

the current emergency has been ongoing since 2001 .

while presidents have used ieepa to implement trade restrictions against adversaries , it has not been used as a general way to impose tariffs .

however , as noted above , president nixon used twea to impose a 10% ad valorem tariff on goods entering the united states to avoid a balance of payments crisis after he ended the convertibility of the u.s. dollar to gold .

although the use of twea in this instance was criticized at the time , it does not appear that the subsequent reforms resulting in the enactment of ieepa would prevent the president from imposing tariffs or other restrictions on trade .

however , the availability of diverse other authorities for addressing trade , including for national security purposes , makes the use of ieepa for this purpose unlikely .

the scope of powers over individual targets is also extensive .

under ieepa , the president has the power to prohibit all financial transactions with individuals designated by executive order .

such power allows the president to block all the assets of a u.s. citizen or permanent resident .

such uses of ieepa may reflect the will of congress or they may represent a grant of authority that may have gone beyond what congress originally intended .

the heart of the curtailment of presidential power by the nea and ieepa was the provision that congress could terminate a state of emergency declared pursuant to the nea with a concurrent resolution .

when the "legislative veto" was struck down by the supreme court ( see above ) , it left congress with a steeper climb — presumably requiring passage of a veto - proof joint resolution — to terminate a national emergency declared under the nea .

two such resolutions have ever been introduced and neither declarations of emergency involved ieepa .

the lack of congressional action here could be the result of the necessity of obtaining a veto - proof majority or it could be that the use of ieepa has so far reflected the will of congress .

if congress wanted to assert more authority over the use of ieepa , it could amend the nea or ieepa to include a "sunset provision," terminating any national emergency after a certain number of days .

at least one scholar has recommended such an amendment .

alternatively , congress could amend ieepa to provide for a review mechanism that would give congress an active role .

in the senate during the 115 th congress , for example , senator mike lee introduced the global trade accountability act of 2017 required the president to report to congress on any proposed trade action ( including the use of ieepa ) , including a description of the proposal together with a list of items to be affected , an economic impact study of the proposal including potential retaliation .

congress , using expedited procedures , would need to approve the president's action through a joint resolution within a 60-day period .

the legislation would have provided for a temporary one - time unilateral trade action for a 90-day period .

similarly , in the 116 th congress , senator lee introduced s. 764 , a bill to provide for congressional approval of national emergency declarations , and for other purposes , which would amend the nea to require an act of congress within 30 days to allow a national emergency to continue .

another approach would establish a means for congress to pass a resolution of disapproval if ieepa authorities are invoked .

an example of this approach is the trade authority protection act ( h.r .

5760 ) .

after the submission of similar reporting requirement to s. 177 ( above ) , congress could , under congressional review act ( cra ) - style procedures , pass a joint resolution of disapproval .

congress does have the authority to pass a joint resolution under ieepa , as noted above , but the use of cra procedures would allow for certain expedited consideration .

alternatively , congress could use any of these mechanisms to amend the current disapproval resolution process in ieepa or the nea itself .

in testimony before the house committee on international relations in 1977 , professor harold g. maier summed up the main criticisms of twea: section 5 ( b ) 's effect is no longer confined to "emergency situations" in the sense of existing imminent danger .

the continuing retroactive approval , either explicit or implicit , by congress of broad executive interpretations of the scope of powers which it confers has converted the section into a general grant of legislative authority to the president…" like twea before it , ieepa sits at the center of the modern u.s. sanction regime .

like twea before it , congress has often approved explicitly of the president's use of ieepa .

in several circumstances , congress has directed the president to impose a variety of sanctions under ieepa and waived the requirement of an emergency declaration .

even when congress has not given explicit approval , no member of congress has ever introduced a resolution to terminate a national emergency citing ieepa .

the nea requires that both houses of congress meet every six months to consider a vote on a joint resolution on terminating an emergency .

neither house has ever met to do so .

in response to concerns over the scale and scope of the emergency economic powers granted by ieepa , supporters of the status quo would argue that congress has implicitly and explicitly expressed approval of the statute and its use .

in 2018 , congress passed the export control reform act ( ecra ) .

the legislation repealed the expired export administration act of 1979 , the regulations of which had been continued by reference to ieepa since 2001 .

the ecra became the new statutory authority for export administration regulations .

nevertheless , several export controls addressed in the export administration act of 1979 were not updated in the export control reform act of 2018 ; instead , congress chose to require the president to continue to use ieepa to continue to implement the three sections of the export administration act of 1979 that were not repealed .

going forward , congress may wish to revisit these provisions , which all relate to deterring the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .

appendix a. nea and ieepa us .

