bosnia's complex political system is a product of the dayton agreement ; one of its annexes serves as bosnia's constitution ( annex 4 ) .

its provisions partly reflect the situation on the ground in 1995 , including the subdivision of bosnia into two ethnoterritorial entities ( figure 1 ) : republika srpska ( "rs" ) , which bosnian serb leaders had proclaimed in 1992 , and the federation of bosnia and herzegovina ( "fbih," predominantly populated by bosniaks and croats ) , which was created by the 1994 washington agreement .

entity borders were largely drawn to form ethnic majorities , even though they also reflected territorial seizure and ethnic cleansing .

many bosniaks view the division of bosnia into these roughly equal entities as awarding the spoils of war to bosnian serbs , whom they regard as the aggressors .

many bosnian serbs , however , view the serb - majority entity as a protection against marginalization .

the designation of bosniaks , croats , and serbs as bosnia's three "constituent peoples" is a cornerstone of the dayton system .

numerous government bodies have ethnic quotas requiring equal representation of the three groups .

in these power - sharing institutions , delegates from each constituent group may veto measures that go against vital ethnic interests .

while these arrangements make bosnia's political system prone to gridlock , dayton's negotiators viewed them as necessary to prevent any group from feeling marginalized in a context of low trust .

many analysts contend that the dayton agreement helped hold bosnia together after the war ; they point to the absence of widespread violence since 1995 as an indicator of its success .

however , observers also question whether bosnia can function much longer under the dayton system .

they identify several key challenges .

initially viewed as a "european problem," the bosnian conflict eventually helped shape the post - cold war role of the united states and nato in european security .

when the united states assumed greater responsibilities in resolving the conflict , its role was considerable: leading nato airstrikes , garnering diplomatic support from russia and european allies , persuading warring parties to agree to a ceasefire , brokering the dayton peace agreement , and deploying 20,000 troops to bosnia .

according to richard holbrooke , the u.s. official who brokered the talks , the bosnian war was a pivotal period in u.s. foreign policy in europe: "the three main pillars of [policy] — u.s. - russian relations , nato enlargement into central europe , and bosnia — had often worked against each other .

now they reinforced each other: nato sent its forces out of area for the first time in its history , and russian troops , under an american commander , were deployed alongside them. .

some analysts and policymakers believe that the united states' strong hand in resolving the conflict and in shaping bosnia's political system have made it a stakeholder in bosnia's future .

u.s. officials , often in cooperation with the eu , have intervened to defuse crises and broker reform talks .

the united states also has imposed sanctions against bosnian officials: in addition to dodik ( see above ) , the u.s. state department publicly designated bosnian serb politician nikola špirić ( dodik's associate ) for "significant corruption or gross violation of human rights. .

u.s. policymakers attach strategic importance to bosnia's stability ; many analysts believe turbulence in bosnia could reverberate in the balkans and potentially draw in croatia and serbia , while instability in other parts of the region could spill over into bosnia .

when the trump administration indicated in 2018 that it would consider supporting a potential serbia - kosovo agreement to "adjust borders" between the two — a major break with the long - standing eu and u.s. policy to oppose redrawing borders in the balkans along ethnic lines — some analysts expressed concern that the administration could reshape long - standing u.s. policy toward bosnia .

however , the new u.s .

ambassador to bosnia stated in february 2019 that the u.s. will continue to be "guarantor of bosnia and herzegovina's sovereignty and territorial integrity. .

on the other hand , many observers also note that u.s. engagement in bosnia ( and the western balkans ) decreased under the administrations of president george w. bush and president barack obama .

during this time u.s. policymakers turned their focus to geopolitical crises and challenges in other parts of the globe while ceding the regional lead to the eu .

indeed , some analysts have urged the united states to assume a greater role in bosnia , arguing that bosnia's current crises warrant it , and that the eu and the united states are more effective in the region when they work together .

congressional interest in bosnia dates back to the 1992-1995 war .

many members featured prominently in foreign policy debates over u.s. intervention in the conflict .

in 2015 , the house passed a resolution describing the srebrenica massacres as a genocide and urging the united states to continue to support bosnia's territorial integrity ( h.res .

310 , 114 th congress ) .

in the 114 th and 115 th congresses , a bill was introduced in the senate to establish an enterprise fund to promote economic development and the private sector in bosnia ( s. 2307 and s. 864 ) .

in april 2018 , the house foreign affairs committee's subcommittee on europe , eurasia , and emerging threats held a hearing on bosnia's prospects ahead of its october 2018 elections .

congress's engagement with bosnia also continues within the broader context of policy concern over the external influence of china , turkey , and russia in the western balkans and energy security .

as a potential candidate for eu membership and nato partner , bosnia is eligible for assistance through the countering russian influence funds under the countering america's adversaries through sanctions act ( caatsa ) enacted in 2017 ( p.l .

115-44 ) .

through congressionally approved ( and sometimes expanded ) foreign assistance appropriations , bosnia has received more than $2 billion in aid since 1995 .

between 1996 and 1999 , the united states pledged $1 billion of the $4 billion international commitment to implementing dayton's civilian provisions and helping to rebuild bosnia .

the cost of u.s. military operations in bosnia since 1992 is estimated at more than $10 billion ( appendix i ) .

bosnia continues to receive u.s. foreign assistance , although the amount has decreased in recent years .

assistance to bosnia in fy2015 and fy2016 was approximately $33 million each year .

in fy2017 , it was $53.5 million , and $41.5 million in fy2018 .

the administration requested $21 million for fy2019 and $16.9 million for fy2020 .

nearly 25 years after the dayton peace agreement , bosnia faces many challenges .

in considering u.s. relations with bosnia , members of congress may consider the following questions: how can the united states encourage bosnia's government to incorporate the legal rulings of the bosnian constitutional court and the european court of human rights into election legislation and the constitution ? .

how can u.s. foreign assistance be used to counter russian influence in republika srpska , in particular russia's close ties to bosnian serb politicians and its use of local media and sputnik to amplify anti - u.s. narratives and project pro - russia soft power ? .

what are the implications of potential militarization in republika srpska ? .

how can the united states effectively address this alleged trend ? .

how can the united states support a successful reform initiative that secures transparency and accountability , and facilitates a political community in which politicians and voters are committed to the bosnian state and socioeconomic challenges that transcend all three ethnic groups ? .

can the germany - u.k. initiative from 2015 be revived , or is it better to start from scratch ? .

are the approximately 600 troops in the european union force mission in bosnia sufficient to stabilize bosnia if violence breaks out ? .

if serbia and kosovo agree to normalize relations by redrawing their borders , how can u.s. policymakers prevent this development from destabilizing bosnia , particularly given milorad dodik's threats to seek rs secession if kosovo is "partitioned" ? .

how can the united states encourage croatia and serbia to engage in bosnia in a manner that helps bridge ethnic divisions and contributes to bosnia's territorial integrity and sovereignty ? .

given the pervasiveness of corruption in bosnia , how can u.s. assistance most effectively be used to counter it ? .

does foreign assistance contribute to civic groups and independent media that could serve as a check against corruption ? .

