the federal government subsidizes a wide range of activities through the tax code .

the majority of available tax incentives are claimed directly by the party engaged in the activity targeted by the subsidy .

there are several tax credits , however , that often require or encourage the intended beneficiary of the subsidy to partner with a third party to use the tax incentive .

this may happen because the tax credits are nonrefundable and the intended beneficiary of the tax credit has little or no tax liability ( eg , a nonprofit ) , or because the credits are delivered over multiple years whereas upfront funding is needed to break g round .

this situation often results in a tax equity transaction — the intended beneficiary of the tax credit agrees to transfer the rights to claim the credits to a third party in exchange for an equity financing contribution .

one estimate placed the size of the tax equity market in 2017 at $20 billion .

this report provides an introduction to the general tax equity financing mechanism .

to facilitate the presentation of the tax equity approach to subsidization , three categories of tax credits that either currently use or have recently used this mechanism are examined: the low - income housing tax credit ( lihtc ) ; the new markets tax credit ( nmtc ) ; and two energy - related tax credits — the renewable electricity production tax credit ( ptc ) and energy investment tax credit ( itc ) .

this report does not evaluate the economic rationale for subsidizing the activities targeted by these tax credits , and does not analyze whether these subsidies increase net investment in these activities .

instead , this report focuses on explaining the structure and functioning of tax equity arrangements .

t ax equity investment is not a statutorily defined term , but rather identifies transactions that pair the tax credits or other tax benefits generated by a qualifying physical investment with the capital financing associated with that investment .

these transactions involve one party agreeing to assign the rights to claim the tax credits to another party in exchange for an equity investment ( i.e. , cash financing ) .

the exchange is sometimes referred to as "monetizing," "selling," or "trading" the tax credits .

importantly , however , the "sale" of federal tax credits occurs within a partnership or contractual agreement that legally binds the two parties to satisfy federal tax requirements that the tax credit claimant have an ownership interest in the underlying physical investment .

this makes the trading of tax credits different than the trading of corporate stock , which occurs between two unrelated parties on an exchange .

the partnership form also allows for income ( or losses ) , deductions , and other tax items to be allocated directly to the individual partners .

in some cases , nonprofit entities can form a partnership with taxable investors and benefit from tax credits through this relationship .

while several current federal tax credits use the tax equity financing mechanism , no two credits do so in the same manner .

for example , affordable housing developers are awarded lihtcs by officials in each state who review applications , decisions regarding nmtc applications are made by federal officials , and renewable energy tax credits have no similar application and review process .

the rate of subsidization and time frame over which the various tax credits may be claimed are also different , as are many of the intricacies of the rules and requirements of each .

this section reviews three large tax credits that employ the tax equity financing mechanism to illustrate the various ways the approach is used in practice .

there are a range of policy options to consider when it comes to using tax equity markets to monetize tax benefits .

for existing programs and new tax policies that could involve tax equity transactions , consideration of various options might ask whether the use of tax equity markets is an efficient and effective means of delivering federal financial support .

at first glance , it may appear that the government would get more "bang for its buck" by structuring the subsidy delivery mechanism to eliminate investors .

however , such a conclusion overlooks one role that tax equity investors often play in addition to providing financing: tax equity investors evaluate the quality of projects before investing , as well as provide continuing oversight and compliance monitoring .

effectively , the tax equity mechanism outsources a portion of the oversight and compliance monitoring to the investors in exchange for a financial return .

there may be value to the federal government in being able to rely on outside investors to provide oversight and monitoring .

it could be argued , though , that for some tax equity programs that have a government entity overseeing participant compliance , the monitor role of investors is redundant .

this section presents several policy options frequently discussed in debates regarding tax equity .

the options are with respect to the general tax equity approach .

due to important differences in the underlying structure of various current or future credits , some options may be better suited for particular credits than others .

careful consideration on a case - by - case basis is part of evaluating the appropriateness of each option .

the list of options presented here is by no means exhaustive .

making the tax credits refundable could , in some cases , reduce or eliminate the need for tax equity .

in other cases , making the tax credits refundable could reduce the cost of such financing for those who still need to access tax equity markets .

all the tax credits currently using the tax equity approach are nonrefundable .

nonrefundable credits have value only to the extent that there is a tax liability to offset .

in contrast , refundable credits have value regardless of tax liability .

for example , if a developer has $1,000 in refundable tax credits and no tax liability , they may claim the credits and receive a tax refund of $1,000 .

thus , fully refundable credits are similar to direct grants administered through the tax system .

even if the relevant tax credits were made refundable , there could still be a role for tax equity investment .

current tax credits relying on tax equity are delivered over multiple years or when the investment in qualifying property is complete and tax returns are filed .

project developers , however , typically need upfront capital to make their investments .

thus , developers ( for - profit and nonprofit ) may still choose to rely on tax equity markets to monetize tax credits even if they were refundable .

alternatively , allowing tax credits to be refundable could make it easier for projects to rely on debt financing .

lenders may be more willing to lend on favorable terms to a project that expects a refundable tax benefit in the future .

moving to refundable credits could potentially increase the amount of subsidy per dollar of federal revenue loss .

that is , it could increase the efficiency of the subsidy delivery mechanism and result in more of the targeted activity taking place .

as discussed previously , all else equal , higher tax credit prices imply there is more federal subsidization per dollar loss of federal tax revenue .

with refundable tax credits , current tax equity investors would be expected to pay more for each tax credit because the risk of not having sufficient tax liability to use the credits would be removed .

additionally , potential investors who are currently not purchasing tax credits because of uncertainty over their ability to use nonrefundable tax credits may enter the market now that the uncertainty is gone .

this would add to the competition among investors and would likely put upward pressure on tax credit prices , further enhancing the subsidy mechanism .

transitioning to refundable business tax credits raises two potential concerns .

the first is the federal cost .

refundable tax credits typically result in a large revenue loss because they may be fully utilized regardless of tax liability , whereas nonrefundable credits may be claimed only to the extent there is a tax liability , which can result in a portion of nonrefundable credits ultimately going unused .

this concern is likely less of an issue with lihtc and nmtc , since few of these tax credits currently go unclaimed .

this implies that converting these to refundable credits would likely not result in a significant increase in federal revenue loss .

making the energy credits ( ptc and itc ) refundable could result in considerable federal revenue loss .

itcs and ptcs that are currently carried forward and ultimately go unused under current law could instead be claimed immediately by taxpayers .

for energy tax credits , many are claimed without the involvement of tax equity investors .

tax equity investors typically require projects to be of a certain size ( i.e. , generate a certain amount of tax benefits ) to invest .

as a result , there are many ptc - and itc - eligible projects that are not able to monetize tax benefits using tax equity investors .

making energy tax credits refundable could ( 1 ) make the tax credits more attractive to developers that are not currently participating in tax equity markets ; and ( 2 ) reduce the cost of tax equity for developers that are participating .

without a cap on the amount of itcs or ptcs that can be claimed , if policy changes were made that increased demand for credits , the cost associated with delivering those credits would increase .

one option to address concerns about the potential cost associated with an unlimited tax credit would be to limit the amount of tax credits that could be claimed .

there is some experience with refundable energy tax credits .

the energy tax credits enacted for wind and solar in the late 1970s were refundable , although legislation was enacted to make the credits nonrefundable in 1980 .

also , several states offer tax credits designed to promote renewable energy that are refundable .

the second concern is allowing businesses to claim a refundable tax credit generally .

refundable tax credits are a useful tool for providing income support via the tax code .

for this reason , refundable tax credits have generally been reserved for households , and mostly for lower - income households .

some may take issue with allowing businesses to access an income - support tax incentive .

others assert that allowing the credits to be refundable would likely result in each dollar of federal tax revenue loss yielding more subsidy flowing into the intended activity .

the tax credits could be replaced with grants .

a concern with the current tax equity mechanism is the amount of subsidy that is diverted away from the underlying activity and toward third - party investors and middlemen .

even if the tax credits were fully refundable , as discussed above , tax equity might still be used to monetize tax credits to get upfront financing .

nonprofit entities that do not file federal income tax returns would also not generally benefit directly from an incentive delivered through the tax code .

another concern with the current tax equity structure that has already been mentioned is that it can potentially create a bias toward larger - scale projects because of tax credit investors' appetite for credits combined with the cost savings from evaluating and monitoring fewer projects .

one way to potentially overcome or mitigate these concerns would be to provide lump - sum grants .

the effective subsidy would correspond to the federal revenue loss , and there would no longer be a bias toward larger projects resulting from the way the subsidy was delivered .

the tradeoff , however , is that there would be no outside investors scrutinizing the long - term feasibility of potential projects or monitoring compliance after construction — though a mechanism such as that used to award nmtcs may help address this concern .

thus , there could be an increase in project failure and noncompliance , without the federal government ( and in some cases , state governments ) filling the role of tax credit investors .

carefully designed recapture provisions would also be needed in the case of project failure .

in the end , replacing tax credits with grants would likely increase government administrative costs that could offset the increased subsidy flowing to the projects from the removal of tax credit investors .

an option for maintaining the role of investors would be to deliver a portion of the tax credits as upfront grants , and deliver the remaining tax credits over time .

to maintain a feasible tax credit market and investor participation , the proportion of grant funding would have to be such that enough developers sold their remaining tax credits .

it is not clear exactly what proportion would achieve the appropriate balance , although there are several options .

the federal government could statutorily determine a particular split , such as 50% grants and 50% tax credits .

for programs primarily administered by states , such as the lihtc , the decision could be left to the states .

alternatively , developers could request that a specific amount of their funding be in the form of grants up to a certain percentage .

in any case , if enough developers chose not to sell their credits , then the tax credit market would not function well , and project feasibility assessment and compliance monitoring responsibilities would fall on the government .

there is recent precedent for allowing grants in lieu of tax credits .

during the great recession , falling corporate tax liabilities reduced investor demand for credits , leading to depressed credit prices .

in response to the general macroeconomic conditions at the time , congress passed the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) in early 2009 .

the act allowed a portion of lihtcs to be converted into grants .

renewable energy tax credits also had the option of receiving a grant in exchange for forgoing future tax benefits .

in the case of the lihtc , the grants were awarded via the competitive process used for awarding the credits .

the need to intervene in tax credit markets highlights that the tax equity mechanism can create fluctuations in the subsidy qualified activities receive , as was discussed in the " subsidy fluctuations " section .

in addition , arra allowed taxpayers who otherwise would have been eligible for the ptc or itc to elect to receive a one - time grant from the treasury in lieu of these tax benefits .

initially , the grant option was to be available for 2009 and 2010 , although the policy was later extended such that projects that began construction before the end of 2011 could qualify .

since the grant was designed to be in lieu of existing tax benefits , tax benefits that could be claimed only by tax - paying entities , tax - exempt entities were not eligible .

the tax code could be modified to allow the direct transfer of tax credits without having to form a legal partnership .

currently , federal tax law requires tax equity investors to have an ownership interest in the underlying business venture in order to claim the associated tax credits .

to meet this requirement , monetization of federal tax credits typically takes place within a partnership structure that legally binds the project's sponsor and investors for a period of time .

in contrast , certain states permit state tax credits to be sold directly to investors without the need to establish a legal relationship .

removing the need to form a partnership to invest in tax equity projects could broaden the pool of potential investors .

in turn , this could enhance competition for tax credits , resulting in more equity finance being raised per dollar of forgone federal tax revenue .

it is unclear , however , what impact the direct transfer of credits would have on deals involving other tax benefits that are often bundled with the tax credits .

for example , the section titled " the tax equity investor's return " notes that investors may also secure a claim to other state and federal tax incentives , operating income and losses , capital gains when the underlying investment is sold , or goodwill with the community or regulators .

a number of issues would need to be addressed before allowing tax credits to be directly transferred .

for example , allowing credits to be sold to anonymous investors with no formal ties to the underlying project potentially removes the tax equity investors' oversight incentives , which are a crucial feature of the current approach .

additionally , procedures would need to be implemented to track who has the right to claim the credits and prevent credits from being claimed ( or from being recaptured ) in instances of noncompliance or project failure .

a decision would also need to be made about whether credits could be transferred only once , or if purchasers could resell credits .

this would determine the resources needed to accurately track eligible credit claimants .

policymakers would also face the issue of who could participate in this market .

unsophisticated investors may not fully understand the risks or how to properly scrutinize these investments .

some of these issues may be resolved by the market itself if direct transfers were permitted .

for example , at the state level , tax credit brokers have emerged to facilitate the exchange of transferable credits .

there are also a number of online tax credit exchanges where state tax credits are traded .

brokers or exchanges can provide some level of expertise and guidance on the risks of these transactions .

their services also come at a cost that reduces the subsidy directed to the targeted activity .

imposing reporting requirements on brokers or exchanges may help with the administration of a direct transfer regime .

another option would be to allow more flexibility in transferring tax credits among various project participants .

for example , tax - exempt entities engaged in a subsidized activity could be allowed to transfer their tax credit to someone else involved in the project ( a designer or builder , or the provider of financing , for example ) without entering into a formal partnership .

as was the case with general transferability of credits , even allowing more restricted transfer of credits could impose additional administrative and oversight burdens on both taxpayers and the government .

accelerating the credits could potentially reduce the cost of tax equity .

this option , however , would not eliminate the need to rely on tax equity markets altogether .

further , this option is most directly applicable to tax credits or other tax benefits that accrue and reduce tax liability over a multiyear period , as opposed to the current tax year .

a straightforward way to accelerate the credits would be to shorten the time period over which they are claimed .

alternatively , acceleration could also be achieved by leaving the claim periods unaltered , and frontloading the credits so that a greater proportion could be claimed in the earlier years .

either of these changes would likely increase the amount of equity a developer could raise from a given tax credit award because tax equity investors would be willing to pay a higher price per dollar of tax credit .

this , in turn , would result in more subsidy flowing into the targeted investment , and allow for more projects to be undertaken for the same federal revenue loss .

tax equity investors would be willing to pay more if credits were accelerated for two reasons .

first , a shorter claim period means that investors would reduce the discount applied to the total stream of tax credits , since they could offset tax liabilities sooner .

second , longer claim periods result in more uncertainty ( risk ) over whether an investor will have sufficient tax liability to use purchased credits .

accelerating the tax credit reduces that risk , and less risk would lead to current investors being willing to pay higher prices for tax credits .

less risk could also bring new tax equity investors into the market , which would also tend to increase tax credit prices .

a concern with accelerating the tax credits is the potential for participants to lose focus on the investment after they have claimed all the credits .

this concern could be addressed with a compliance period that is longer than the claim period and with credit recapture .

for example , currently lihtc is claimed over a 10-year period , but investors and developers are subject to a 15-year compliance period .

should the project fall out of compliance with the lihtc rules in the last five years , the investors are subject to recapture of previously claimed tax credits .

for purposes of this example , the claim period could be shortened to five years while leaving the 15-year compliance period in place .

