since the founding , the federal courts have played a critical role in adjudicating legal disputes , including ones involving executive action .

as the supreme court stated in marbury v. madison , "where a specific duty is assigned by law .

 .

 .

the individual who considers himself injured[] has a right to resort to the laws of his country for a remedy. .

naturally , congress and its members have an interest in litigating in federal court , for example , to vindicate their institutional priorities , to argue that the executive is violating their legislative prerogatives , or to advance their legislative policy interests .

during the obama administration , for instance , legislative entities brought or joined litigation in federal court for a host of reasons , such as to challenge the executive's decision to allegedly expend money without a congressional appropriation , to defend the defense of marriage act from constitutional challenge in lieu of the executive , and to challenge the executive's decision to engage in military action in libya .

likewise , during the trump administration , legislators have become involved in lawsuits that challenge the president's alleged unconstitutional acceptance of emoluments , suits demanding the production of documents from the administration , and , in an amicus capacity , challenges to legality of the so - called travel ban .

congressional interest in litigation may increase in salience under the current divided government , as illustrated by the house of representatives' resolution to authorize the house to participate in ongoing litigation in texas involving the affordable care act and a recent lawsuit brought by several members of congress challenging the president's appointment of an acting attorney general .

however , whenever any party seeks to invoke the power of the federal courts , it must first show that its dispute belongs there .

for nearly its entire history , the supreme court has emphasized that the role of courts is in "decid[ing] on the rights of individuals. .

by contrast , "[v]indicating the public interest ( including the public interest in government observance of the constitution and laws ) is the function of congress and the chief executive. .

the federal courts apply a number of doctrines , known as justiciability doctrines , to ensure that they do not step beyond their bounds and decide issues more properly reserved for the other branches .

foremost among these doctrines is the requirement that a party seeking judicial relief from a federal court demonstrate "standing. .

this report provides an overview of the standing doctrine as it applies to lawsuits involving legislators , committees , and houses of congress .

first , the report lays out the general rules of standing as they apply in every case in the federal courts and the main purpose behind the doctrine .

one central purpose of the standing doctrine — protecting the court's role in the constitutional balance of powers — is a theme that underlies this report , as many of these cases involve courts deciding whether they have the power to adjudicate high - profile political disputes between the other two branches of the federal government .

next , the report considers the relatively few supreme court cases to discuss legislator standing , explaining the general principles that courts have drawn from those cases .

the report then analyzes how lower courts have interpreted the limited supreme court case law on the issue , beginning with cases involving individual legislators , and following with cases brought by entire institutions , such as committees or houses of a legislature .

the report then considers other issues relating to legislator participation in litigation , such as intervention under the federal rules of civil procedure or participation purely as an "amicus curiae," or a "friend of the court. .

the report concludes by identifying unresolved doctrinal questions and offering takeaways for prospective congressional litigants .

article iii of the constitution limits the exercise of the federal courts' judicial power to "cases" and "controversies. .

the supreme court has interpreted this "case or controversy" language to impose various restrictions on the "justiciability" of disputes in the federal courts — that is , constraints on the federal courts' power to adjudicate and resolve disagreements between parties .

one aspect of justiciability requires a party seeking judicial relief from a federal court to have "standing," such that the party has "a personal stake in the outcome of the controversy as to warrant [the] invocation of federal - court jurisdiction and to justify exercise of the court's remedial powers on his behalf. .

further , a litigant must demonstrate standing for each claim he seeks to press and each form of relief that he seeks to obtain .

the supreme court articulated a three - part test for standing in its seminal 1992 decision lujan v. defenders of wildlife .

to establish standing under that test , a party must show that it has a genuine stake in the relief sought because it has personally suffered ( or will suffer ) ( 1 ) a concrete and particularized and actual or imminent injury - in - fact ( 2 ) that is traceable to the allegedly unlawful actions of the opposing party and ( 3 )  that is redressable by a favorable judicial decision .

while each of these requirements is complex and can blend into each other , courts generally regard the injury - in - fact requirement to be the "central focus" of the inquiry .

a party that seeks to demonstrate standing must show that his injury is "concrete" — meaning an injury that is "real" and not "abstract. .

nonetheless , an injury can be intangible in nature , as the deprivation of a constitutional right , like freedom of speech or the free exercise of one's religion , constitutes an injury - in - fact absent any tangible economic loss .

while it may sometimes be difficult to draw a distinction between an "intangible" injury and an "abstract" injury , the court has provided some guidance .

for example , the court has held that an alleged injury sufficient for standing may be one similar to those that have "traditionally been regarded as providing a basis for a lawsuit in english or american courts," such as the interest of a qui tam relator in the outcome of his suit .

the court has also stated that congress can build on common law conceptions of injury , as congress is "well positioned" to "identify intangible harms that meet minimum article iii requirements" and establish new causes of action to remedy such harms .

finally , the court has explicitly considered and rejected several types of abstract injuries in previous cases .

for instance , in valley forge christian college v. americans united for separation of church and state , the supreme court held that a public interest organization lacked standing to challenge the transfer of federal land to a religiously affiliated school , as the only injuries identified by the plaintiffs were the "psychological consequence[s] presumably produced by observation of conduct with which one disagrees. .

a claim based only on this sort of psychological discomfort will generally not support an injury - in - fact .

along with the requirement of concreteness , a plaintiff's alleged injury must be "particularized. .

this requirement focuses on whether the alleged injury affects the plaintiff in a "personal and individual way. .

significantly , the need for particularization bars plaintiffs from seeking redress for so - called "generalized grievances. .

under this doctrine , a plaintiff "claiming only harm to his and every citizen's interest in proper application of the constitution and laws" does not state a sufficiently particularized injury .

this principle does not mean , however , that injuries suffered by many are not justiciable .

rather , particularization only requires plaintiffs to connect to the injury they allege in some particular way , even if that injury is widely shared .

for instance , in federal election commission v. akins , the supreme court recognized that individual voters had suffered a justiciable injury based on the federal election commission's allegedly unlawful decision to not obtain and disclose certain information about a political organization .

the court concluded that even though that injury was "widely shared," the deprivation of a statutory right granting access to information "directly related to voting" was sufficiently "specific" to allow congress to authorize individuals to vindicate that right .

these limitations on the courts , as they are rooted in the constitution , are not easily circumvented .

for example , subject to "limited exceptions," a litigant must assert "his or her own legal rights and interests , and cannot rest a claim to relief on the legal rights or interests of third parties. .

to illustrate , in hollingsworth v. perry , the court held that the proponents of a california voter initiative lacked standing to defend that initiative from constitutional challenge when the california attorney general declined to do so .

in that case , the court agreed that a "political corporate body" can designate an agent to proceed in court on its behalf , but held that the proponents could not simply assert to be acting in such a capacity .

rather , some evidence of actual agency , such as the principal's right to control the agent , must be present .

because this control was lacking in hollingsworth — the state of california had no power to control or authority over the proponents of the initiative — the proponents could not claim to be proceeding on behalf of the state , and had to rely upon their own interests , which were not sufficiently concrete or particularized to amount to an injury - in - fact .

the requirement of concrete and particular injury is essential in every case , but it is especially significant in cases involving the constitutionality of government action because of the important role that the standing doctrine plays in preserving the separation of powers .

as one prominent treatise explains , difficult standing decisions often depend on "the importance of having the issues decided by the courts" versus "the importance of leaving the issues for resolution by other means. .

in other words , "[s]eparation of powers concerns" often "control the seemingly precise concept of injury. .

accordingly , the supreme court has long recognized that the separation of powers is the driving force behind the standing doctrine .

as the court explained in lujan , "the constitution's central mechanism of separation - of - powers depends largely upon common understanding of what activities are appropriate to legislatures , to executives , and to courts. .

the doctrine of standing , the court explained , serves to identify those disputes that are "appropriately resolved in the judicial process. .

thus , while the formal standing doctrine has some requirements that express "merely prudential considerations," its "core" is in ensuring that the courts do not stray beyond their essential role .

the doctrine of standing , therefore , forces the courts to police their own jurisdiction , preventing individuals from enlisting the courts in fights that should be resolved through the political process .

this conception of standing helps explain why the court has said that the standing inquiry is "especially rigorous" in cases involving the constitutionality of government action .

in such cases , the courts are being asked to participate in a dispute that may particularly involve the constitutional balance of power , placing the court's role in resolving that dispute under significant scrutiny .

separation of powers is logically the central focus when the plaintiff is a branch of government , such as a legislature .

although the supreme court has decided relatively few cases involving legislative standing , in those cases it articulated several principles that apply specifically when the plaintiff is a legislative entity .

the first significant supreme court case to involve legislators filing a lawsuit challenging a governmental action was the 1939 case coleman v. miller .

coleman involved the kansas legislature's then - recent approval of the proposed child labor amendment to the u.s. constitution , which congress had submitted to the states for ratification 15 years prior .

a bare majority of the kansas legislature voted to ratify the amendment , with the kansas lieutenant governor casting the tie - breaking vote in favor of ratification in the kansas senate .

seeking to undo this ratification , the plaintiffs , individual members of the kansas legislature who had voted against the amendment , challenged the lieutenant governor's right to cast his tie - breaking vote .

the plaintiffs argued that the lieutenant governor was not a part of the "legislature" and so his vote could not be counted to ratify the amendment under article v of the constitution .

the coleman plaintiffs also argued that the passage of time had sapped the amendment of its vitality .

they sued to compel the kansas secretary of state to annul the ratification .

the supreme court splintered and issued three opinions , none of which obtained five votes .

however , a majority of the court concluded that the plaintiff legislators had standing .

chief justice charles evans hughes , writing the "opinion of the court" for himself and two other justices , concluded that the petitioners had an "adequate interest to invoke [the court's] jurisdiction" because the senators' votes "would have been sufficient to defeat ratification" if they had been right that the lieutenant governor's vote was invalid .

as a result , their votes had been "held for naught" and "overridden," which ran contrary to the senators' "plain , direct and adequate interest in maintaining the effectiveness of their votes. .

justices butler and mcreynolds dissented from the majority's disposition of the case on the merits , but implicitly agreed with its conclusion that the plaintiffs had standing .

justice frankfurter , writing for four justices , would have held that the legislators lacked standing .

he argued that so - called "intra - parliamentary disputes" should be left to parliaments , and that the injuries suffered here "pertain[ed] to legislators not as individuals but as political representatives executing the legislative process. .

if these interests were recognized , frankfurter feared that the courts would end up "sit[ting] in judgment on the manifold disputes engendered by procedures for voting in legislative assemblies. .

despite these arguments , justice frankfurter's view did not control , and coleman is recognized as the first case in which the supreme court acknowledged that legislators' interest in their votes may constitute an injury that could be vindicated in federal court .

the court returned to the issue of legislator standing 30 years later in powell v. mccormack .

in that case , the house special subcommittee on contracts concluded that representative adam clayton powell jr. , the chairman of the committee on education and labor , had deceived house authorities as to travel expenses .

after voters nonetheless reelected representative powell to the house of representatives in 1966 , the house adopted a resolution excluding him from taking his seat , and the house sergeant at arms refused to pay representative powell his salary .

representative powell sued the speaker of the house in his official capacity , seeking a declaratory judgment that his exclusion was unconstitutional , an injunction restraining respondents from excluding him from the house , and an injunction commanding the sergeant at arms to pay representative powell his salary .

after the supreme court elected to take review of the case , the congress that had excluded powell terminated , and representative powell was seated in the house in january 1969 .

the court concluded that representative powell's case was justiciable .

in particular , the court looked to see if representative powell had a "legally cognizable interest" in the outcome of the case .

the court concluded that representative powell's claim for back salary was itself sufficient to "supply the constitutional requirement of a case or controversy. .

powell thus stands for the proposition that legislators — no less than other individuals — have a personal pecuniary interest in their salary ( and other personal prerogatives of office ) that can amount to an injury to support standing when a defendant threatens that interest .

the next case concerning legislative standing to come before the court was 1997's raines v. byrd .

raines concerned a constitutional challenge to the line item veto act of 1996 , which purported to authorize the president to "cancel" certain spending and tax benefit measures after they were signed into law .

the statute provided that "[a]ny member of congress or any individual adversely affected by [the line item veto act] may bring an action .

 .

 .

for declaratory judgment and injunctive relief on the ground that any provision of this part violates the constitution. .

accordingly , the day after the statute was signed into law , four senators and two members of the house , including senator robert byrd , all of whom had voted against the act , sued under this provision alleging that the act was unconstitutional .

senator byrd alleged that the act injured him in his official capacity in three ways: ( 1 ) by "alter[ing] the legal and practical effect of all votes" cast in the future on bills that would be subject to the "line item" veto ; ( 2 ) by divesting him of his constitutional role in the repeal of legislation ; and ( 3 ) by altering the constitutional balance of powers between the legislative and executive branch .

the supreme court held that senator byrd and the other legislators lacked standing to bring their claims .

chief justice rehnquist's opinion for the court emphasized that the standing inquiry turns , in part , on "whether the plaintiff is the proper party to bring this suit" and the requirement that the alleged injury be "particularized. .

the court's opinion also restated the standing doctrine's important role in "keeping the judiciary's power within its proper constitutional sphere" and the need to "carefully inquire" as to whether the plaintiffs had a sufficiently personal , particular , and concrete interest so as to justify a court's involvement .

chief justice rehnquist observed that , in contrast to the plaintiff in powell , senator byrd was not asserting that he was deprived of anything to which he was personally entitled , such as a salary .

instead , senator byrd was asserting that he had lost power as a result of the statute because it altered the balance of power between congress and the president .

thus , the individual legislators were , in the majority's view , impermissibly attempting to assert an "institutional injury" that they shared in common with the entire congress .

such injuries , in the form of the dilution of the power of the legislative body , could not give rise to standing because they were neither concrete — they were "wholly abstract" — nor were they particularized — they were "widely dispersed. .

the court acknowledged that , in coleman , it had upheld standing for legislators claiming a similar institutional injury — an interest in the effectiveness of their votes .

however , unlike the plaintiffs in coleman , senator byrd was not complaining that some illegal action had prevented his vote from counting , causing the bill to be passed in spite of his vote .

rather , senator byrd had voted , and he had "simply lost that vote. .

in other words , as the chief justice explained , individual legislators could validly assert the institutional injury in coleman only because the kansas senators' votes would have actually been enough to defeat the measure at issue , but were "completely nullified" by the allegedly illegal action .

senator byrd , in contrast , alleged "wholly abstract and widely dispersed" diminution of his future voting power .

the court went on to explain that members of congress had an alternative remedy to their judicial challenge — they could repeal the line item veto act .

further , the court noted that the statute was not immune from other judicial challenges — an individual with a cognizable injury could still bring suit .

raines thus greatly limited the ability of individual legislators to sue on behalf of their institutions .

nevertheless , the 1997 decision reaffirmed coleman , thereby not completely closing off the possibility that an individual legislator could assert an institutional injury .

in raines , the court found it "of some importance" that the various houses of congress did not authorize byrd and the other plaintiffs to bring the suit .

although congress had created a right to challenge the statute's constitutionality in the line item veto act itself , the plaintiffs had brought their suit only on their own behalf , and the plaintiffs' respective houses of congress as a whole had opposed it on the merits .

this factor would turn out to be decisive in the next legislative standing case to come before the court , arizona state legislature v. arizona independent redistricting commission .

in that case , the arizona state legislature — as a whole — sued the arizona redistricting commission ( commission ) , an independent commission vested by popular initiative with the authority to draw redistricting maps for congressional districts .

the arizona legislature sought to challenge the map adopted by the commission for the 2012 elections as unconstitutional .

the arizona legislature argued that , under the elections clause of the constitution , the "legislature" of a state had to have "primary responsibility" to set the manner of elections , and the commission did not qualify as a legislature .

the court concluded that , in contrast with the individual member plaintiffs in raines , the arizona legislature had standing .

the court found that the key difference between the arizona legislature and the plaintiffs in raines was that the former was "an institutional plaintiff asserting an institutional injury [that had] commenced this action after authorizing votes in both of its chambers. .

the problem with the individual members asserting institutional injury in raines , as the arizona state legislature court saw it , was that the injury was "widely dispersed," and no plaintiff in the 1997 case could "tenably claim a personal stake in the suit. .

in contrast with raines , the court concluded , arizona state legislature was closer to the coleman facts , in that the commission's authority "completely nullif[ied]" any vote by the legislature purporting to adopt a redistricting plan — and that injury was adequately particularized to the plaintiff that was bringing the suit .

importantly , however , the court stated in a footnote that the standing inquiry might have been different had the suit involved congress mounting a legal challenge to the president , which would have raised "separation - of - powers concerns absent here. .

a few key principles can be drawn from this line of supreme court cases .

with respect to cases brought by individual legislators , raines drew a fundamental distinction between so - called "institutional injury" and the sort of personal injury that was at issue with the plaintiff's lost salary in powell .

as the court would go on to explain in arizona state legislature , an "institutional injury" is an injury that "scarcely zeroe[s] in on any individual member," but rather "impact[s] all members of congress and both houses .

 .

 .

equally. .

the arizona state legislature court , interpreting raines , explained that individual legislators generally cannot assert institutional injuries: "[h]aving failed to prevail in their own houses , the suitors [in raines ] could not repair to the judiciary to complain. .

however , raines also determined that there was an exception to this general rule based on the court's holding in coleman v. miller , "[t]he one case in which [the court] upheld standing for legislators .

 .

 .

claiming an institutional injury. .

the court justified this exception because the plaintiffs in coleman , if they had been correct on the merits of their claim , would have been in a situation where "their votes not to ratify the amendment were deprived of all validity. .

the challenge , then , for any individual legislator asserting an institutional injury is to show that the asserted injury is analogous to the "vote nullification" that took place in coleman .

these principles will be discussed in the next section .

the supreme court's decision in arizona state legislature v. arizona independent redistricting commission reinforces that an institutional plaintiff , like the arizona state legislature , will typically have standing to assert an "institutional injury. .

in that case , discussed above , the court determined that the arizona state legislature had standing based on the redistricting commission's usurpation of its "primary responsibility" for redistricting under the constitution's elections clause .

although the court concluded that the legislature did not , in fact , have the exclusive authority it alleged , the court nonetheless determined that this merits determination did not undercut the legislature's claim of injury for the purposes of justiciability .

this analysis indicates that an institution , such as a legislature as a whole , may potentially assert an institutional injury and obtain standing in federal court .

the court left open , however , the possibility that separation - of - powers considerations could lead to a different result if the case instead involved congress suing the president .

in addition to the separation - of - powers concerns that might arise , arizona state legislature raises questions regarding who constitutes an institutional plaintiff and which institutional injuries are sufficiently concrete and particularized to give rise to standing .

these questions are the focus of the following sections .

whereas the analysis above focuses mainly on congressional entities filing their own lawsuits as plaintiffs , legislators or a legislature as a whole may also attempt to participate in ongoing litigation between nonlegislative parties in a variety of ways .

the procedural rules governing the federal courts contemplate that , subject to specified conditions , a nonparty may "intervene" in an existing federal case .

generally , if a court permits an entity to intervene in a case , that entity becomes a full party to the litigation and may freely participate in the case to the same extent as the original parties .

for instance , subject to certain exceptions and conditions , an intervenor may generally ( among other things ) file briefs and motions , participate in discovery , and appeal adverse judgments .

as relevant here , congressional litigants periodically attempt to intervene in existing federal cases initiated by noncongressional parties .

as explained in the following subsections , whether such attempts ultimately succeed depends on a variety of factors that to a large degree mirror the considerations relevant to whether a legislative plaintiff may initiate new litigation in federal court .

if congress ( or a unit or individual member thereof ) cannot participate as a full party to a particular lawsuit due to one or more of the constitutional , statutory , procedural , and prudential obstacles discussed above , it may still be able to participate in the case in a more limited capacity as an amicus curiae .

an amicus curiae — a latin term for "friend of the court" — is an entity with "a strong interest in the subject matter" of a particular case that may submit legal briefs or other filings to the court in support of ( or against ) a particular position , but may not otherwise participate in the suit to the same extent as an original party or an intervenor .

members , houses , and committees of congress have successfully filed amicus briefs in a wide variety of cases .

to name just a few salient examples , after the executive branch declined to defend the validity of the independent counsel provision of the ethics in government act , "both houses [of congress] filed amicus briefs defending the legislation's constitutionality. .

similarly , two opposing coalitions of individual members of congress filed dueling amicus briefs in a supreme court case concerning the continued vitality of roe v. wade .

the procedural rules governing the submission of amicus briefs may vary from court to court .

ultimately , however , federal courts possess broad discretion to decide whether to allow a nonparty to submit an amicus brief in a particular case .

thus , on rare occasions , some courts have exercised that discretion to reject congressional attempts to file amicus briefs .

for instance , the u.s. court of federal claims recently prohibited the house of representatives from filing an amicus brief in a private party's lawsuit against the united states .

the court , noting that "the sole purpose of the house's proposed amicus brief [was] to urge a ground for dismissing [the] plaintiff's complaint that was not raised by the [department of justice] in its motion to dismiss," reasoned that allowing the house to participate as an amicus would "improperly intrud[e] on the doj's 'exclusive and plenary' authority to litigate the case on the united states' behalf. .

as discussed , courts have identified several considerations that may be relevant when assessing whether a legislative entity has suffered a justiciable injury - in - fact allowing it to seek judicial relief from a federal court , including the presence of congressional authorization ; the absence of other legislative or nonlegislative remedies ; allegations of vote nullification ; historical practice ; availability of alternative plaintiffs to bring a judicial challenge ; and whether the lawsuit is an attempt to assert an interest other than the generalized interest in the proper application and implementation of the law .

while these considerations provide some guidance with regard to the standing inquiry in lawsuits involving a legislative entity , they do not comprehensively resolve every question that may arise .

additionally , the legal principles that courts have articulated in congressional standing cases to date are not always perfectly consistent with each other , making it difficult to predict whether any particular legislative attempt to participate in litigation will overcome the standing hurdle .

further compounding that difficulty is the fact that there are very few cases analyzing the legislative standing doctrine and only a handful of rulings on the issue from the supreme court itself .

as a consequence , it is important to identify areas of lingering doctrinal uncertainty , as well as measures that members , committees , and houses of congress may take to increase the likelihood that any given lawsuit will surmount the standing barrier .

one of the key unanswered questions regarding legislative standing concerns what form of authorization is necessary to empower a legislative plaintiff to assert an institutional injury on behalf of his respective institution .

in raines v. byrd , for instance , the supreme court concluded that the individual member plaintiffs "ha[d] not been authorized to represent their respective houses of congress" for standing purposes even though congress specifically enacted a statute purporting to authorize "any member of congress" to "bring an action .

 .

 .

for declaratory judgment and injunctive relief on the ground that any provision of [the line item veto act] violates the constitution. .

similarly , in walker v. cheney , the court concluded that 31 u.s.c .

§ 716 ( b ) ( 2 ) — which purports to grant the comptroller general freestanding authority to "bring a civil action .

 .

 .

to require the head of [an] agency to produce a record" — nonetheless did not authorize the comptroller general to sue the vice president .

these cases suggest that a congressional litigant asserting an institutional injury who obtains express authorization to participate in a specifically identified lawsuit is more likely to satisfy the standing requirement than a litigant who does not .

it remains uncertain , however , when ( if ever ) a statute purporting to authorize an entity to litigate on congress's behalf generally — without a specific vote authorizing that entity to participate in a particular case — would satisfy the authorization prong of the standing analysis .

an additional open question that existing precedent does not conclusively resolve is whether and under what circumstances the general availability of blunt legislative remedies — such as impeachment — will deprive a legislative litigant of standing to seek judicial relief against the executive branch .

in campbell v. clinton , for instance , the d.c .

circuit concluded that individual members lacked standing to sue the president in part because "there always remains the possibility of impeachment should a president act in disregard of congress' authority. .

in blumenthal v. trump , by contrast , the court concluded that a group of individual members did have standing to sue the president , stating ( with little explanation ) that "the availability of the extreme measure of impeachment to enforce the president's compliance with the [emoluments] clause is not an adequate remedy. .

further litigation will likely be necessary to resolve these conflicting strands of congressional standing precedent .

perhaps the most difficult open question raised by the legislative standing jurisprudence concerns what sort of institutional injury is sufficient to afford a legislative entity standing .

at one end of the spectrum , courts have generally recognized that institutional plaintiffs may sue to remedy discrete injuries , such as informational injuries resulting from an executive branch agency's refusal to comply with a subpoena .

at the other end , courts have typically determined that even institutional plaintiffs cannot assert a generalized , nonparticularized interest in the proper application , interpretation , or enforcement of the law .

some recent cases from the district courts , however , appear to envision a broader conception of institutional injury .

the court in u.s. house of representatives v. burwell , for example , concluded that the house possessed standing to pursue constitutional claims "that the executive ha[d] drawn funds from the treasury without a congressional appropriation. .

critical to the court's holding was the fact that the constitution designated "the congress ( of which the house and senate are equal ) " as "the only body empowered .

 .

 .

to adopt laws directing monies to be spent from the u.s .

treasury. .

according to the court , the "constitutional structure would collapse , and the role of the house would be meaningless , if the executive could circumvent the appropriations process and spend funds however it pleases. .

similarly , the blumenthal v. trump court concluded that the individual member plaintiffs possessed standing in part because they did not merely "disagree with the manner in which the president [wa]s administering or enforcing the law," but were instead wholly prevented from discharging their constitutionally designated role in the emoluments process .

burwell and blumenthal thus suggest that congress could have a justiciable injury when the executive branch violates the constitution in a way that specifically undermines congress's authority in a particular governmental process .

it is unclear whether the supreme court or the federal appellate courts would ultimately endorse the broad conceptions of congressional standing that the burwell and blumenthal courts adopted .

because the parties in burwell ultimately settled their dispute , neither the d.c .

circuit nor the supreme court ever determined whether the district court's standing conclusions were correct .

nor has the d.c .

circuit resolved whether the district court correctly concluded that the plaintiffs in blumenthal possess standing to pursue their emoluments clause challenges .

some ( though not all ) academics have argued , however , that the burwell and blumenthal courts' expanded conception of standing may be unsound , as these decisions would appear to authorize congressional litigants to hale executive branch entities into the federal courts in a fairly broad array of factual circumstances that implicate separation - of - powers principles .

burwell , for instance , contains language suggesting that at least some congressional litigants possess standing to sue the executive branch whenever it spends unappropriated funds .

blumenthal likewise contains language suggesting that legislative litigants — including individual members — could very well possess standing to sue the president in a variety of contexts in which the constitution offers congress ( or a house thereof ) an opportunity to provide prior approval to a particular executive action , such as appointments .

future judicial decisions may provide further guidance on whether , how , and under what circumstances this sort of freestanding congressional authority to summon executive branch entities before a federal judge is consistent with the supreme court's admonition that the "standing inquiry" is "especially rigorous when reaching the merits of the dispute would require [a court] to decide whether an action taken by one of the other two branches of the federal government was unconstitutional. .

the fact that standing is a constitutional requirement circumscribes congress's ability to alter the aforementioned standing rules by enacting legislation .

the supreme court has repeatedly reaffirmed "that congress cannot erase article iii's standing requirements by statutorily granting the right to sue to a plaintiff who would not otherwise have standing. .

at the same time , however , the court has also recognized "that congress may 'elevat[e] to the status of legally cognizable injuries concrete , de facto injuries that were previously inadequate in law.' .

it is therefore possible that , even though congress may not "abrogate the art[icle] iii minima," congress may under presently undefined circumstances enact a statute that grants it standing to pursue a claim in federal court that it could not pursue in that statute's absence .

however , whether ( and to what extent ) congress possesses such power to do so in the context of legislative standing may need to await further explication from the courts .

in the absence of such guidance from the judiciary , a congressional litigant's best strategy may be to attempt to satisfy as many of the considerations listed above — that is , to attempt to obtain authorization to pursue the specific lawsuit in question from one or both houses of congress ; attempt to persuade the court that all possible legislative remedies would be futile ; argue that the allegedly unlawful action has deprived members of congress of the efficacy of their votes ; analogize to historical precedent in which courts entertained similar challenges by congressional litigants ; demonstrate that no other litigant would possess standing to vindicate the congressional interest in dispute ; and avoid framing the legal theory as a generalized grievance challenging the opposing party's implementation or interpretation of a federal statute .

nonetheless , as several scholars have emphasized , "not all interbranch disputes — even constitutional disputes — need to be resolved in the courts. .

indeed , the federal judiciary has in many cases expressed marked hesitance to interpose itself between dueling branches of the u.s. government .

the lack of a judicial remedy to a congressional complaint may indicate that congress's most promising means for resolving disputes with the executive branch may be the political process , where a significant amount of constitutional decisionmaking occurs .

