this report provides both an overview of the fy2019 defense appropriations act ( p.l .

115-245 ) and access to other crs products providing additional detail and analysis on particular issues and programs dealt with by that law .

the overview section of the report immediately following this introduction covers the legislative history of the bill and the strategic and budgetary context within which is was debated .

subsequent sections of the report detail the bill's treatment of specific issues including procurement of various types of weapons .

each section dealing with procurement of a certain type of weapon includes a table presenting basic budget information and links to any relevant crs product .

for fy2019 , the trump administration requested $668.4 billion to fund programs falling within the scope of the annual defense appropriations act .

this included $67.9 billion to be designated by congress and the president as funding for overseas contingency operations ( oco ) and $599.4 billion for dod's base budget , comprising all operations not designated as oco .

oco - designated funding is related to current operations in afghanistan and syria , but includes other activities that congress and the president so - designate .

as enacted , h.r .

6157 provides $667.3 billion , a net reduction of $1.09 billion amounting to less than two - tenths of 1% of the total ( i.e. , base budget plus oco ) request .

compared with the total amount provided by the fy2018 defense appropriations bill ( p.l .

114-113 ) , the fy2019 act provides an increase of 2.3% .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

the house initially passed h.r .

6197 on june 28 , 2018 , by a vote of 359-49 .

on that same day , the senate appropriations committee reported s. 3159 , its own version of the fy2019 defense appropriations bill .

subsequently , the senate adopted several amendments to h.r .

6157 , including one that substituted the text of the senate committee bill for the house - passed text .

the senate also adopted an amendment that added to the defense bill the text of s. 3158 , the fy2019 appropriations bill for the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , which the senate appropriations committee had approved on august 20 , 2018 .

the senate then passed h.r .

6197 , as amended , on august 23 , 2018 , by a vote of 85-7 .

a house - senate conference committee reported a version of the bill on september 13 , 2018 .

the senate approved the conference report on september 18 by a vote of 93-7 and the house did likewise on september 26 by a vote of 361-61 .

president donald j. trump signed the bill into law ( p.l .

115-245 ) on september 28 , 2018 .

 ( see table 2 . ) .

the total amount requested for dod that falls within the scope of the annual defense appropriations bill and amounts provided in p.l .

115-245 as enacted are relatively close .

within those gross totals , however , there are differences between the amounts requested and the amounts provided for hundreds of specific elements within the sprawling dod budget .

many of these individual differences reflect congressional judgements about particular issues .

however , there also are patterns of differences that reflect congressional views on broad policy or budgetary questions: title i of the act , that funds military personnel accounts , provides $2.2 billion less than was requested for pay and benefits .

house - senate conferees said the reduction should have no adverse impact on the force .

according to the conference report , revised estimates of the budgetary impact of recent changes in the military retirement system were the basis for a net reduction from the request of $1.54 billion .

other reductions totaling $430 million were justified by conferees on the basis of "historical unobligated balances," that is , an accumulation of funds in certain accounts that were appropriated in prior years but were not spent .

base budget funding provided by the operation and maintenance ( o&m ) title of the act ( title ii ) amounts to a net reduction of $5.2 billion from the request .

in part , the apparent cut reflects a transfer of nearly $2.0 billion to title ix of the act , which funds oco .

the conferees justified additional reductions totaling $1.34 billion on the basis of either large unobligated balances or "historical underexecution," ( i.e. , a pattern of repeatedly spending less on military personnel in a given fiscal year than had been appropriated ) .

on the other hand , total procurement funding for the base budget ( title iii ) is $4.8 billion higher than the request .

while the act makes hundreds of additions and cuts to the funding requested for particular items , three broad themes all push the act's procurement total upward: $2.48 billion is added to buy aircraft and other equipment for national guard and reserve forces ; $2.31 billion is added to fully fund or acquire major components for additional six ships ( see table 9 ) ; and $2.13 billion is added to the $8.49 billion requested for procurement of f - 35 joint strike fighters ( see table 10 ) .

similarly , base budget funding in the act for research and development ( title iv ) is $3.8 billion higher than the request , partly because the legislation would add $2.3 billion to the $13.7 billion requested for science and technology ( s&t ) programs – that is , the part of the r&d effort focused on developing new and potentially useful scientific and engineering knowledge rather than on designing specific pieces of equipment intended for production .

the administration's fy2019 budget request continued the across - the - board modernization of the u.s. strategic arsenal that had been launched by the obama administration .

within that program , the initial house and senate versions of h.r .

6157 funded the major initiatives with some changes , many of which reflected routine budget oversight .

 ( see table 5 . ) .

the enacted version of the bill adds a total of more than $300 million to the amounts requested to develop three new long - range weapons .

specifically it adds: $69.4 million to the $345.0 million requested for a new , nuclear - armed intercontinental ballistic missile ( icbm ) to replace minuteman iii missiles deployed in the 1970s , an increase conferees said would meet an unspecified "unfunded requirement" ; $203.5 million for "program acceleration" to the $263.4 million requested to develop conventional prompt global strike weapon sufficiently accurate to strike a target at great range with a conventional ( i.e. , non - nuclear ) warhead ; and $50 million , also to meet an unspecified "unfunded requirement," to the $614.9 million requested to develop a long - range stand - off ( lrso ) weapon to replace the nuclear - armed air - launched cruise missile ( alcm ) carried by long - range bombers .

the act supports the general thrust of the administration's funding request for ballistic missile defense , with the sort of funding adjustments that are routine in the appropriations process .

for so - called mid - c ourse defense , intended to protect u.s. territory against a relatively small number of intercontinental - range warheads , the administration's program would expand the fleet of interceptor missiles currently deployed in alaska and california , while developing an improved version of that interceptor .

the program also is deploying shorter - range thaad , aegis , and patriot missiles to provide a so - called terminal defense intended to protect u.s. allies and forces stationed abroad and to provide a second - layer of protection for u.s. targets .

 ( see table 6 . ) .

the act cuts a total $301.7 million from the amounts requested for various projects associated with mid - course defense of u.s. territory on grounds that these funds were intended for purposes congress already had funded in the fy2018 defense appropriations act ( p.l .

115-141 ) .

that measure was enacted two months after the fy2019 budget request was sent to congress , reiterating the request for the funds in question .

the act adds more than $400 million to the amounts requested to develop and acquire missile defenses for south korea and u.s. forces stationed there .

north korea has tested long - range and short - range ballistic missiles as well as nuclear weapon .

the increase includes $284.4 million to develop a network linking thaad interceptor missiles and shorter - range patriot missiles based in south korea and japan with sensors that could track incoming north korean missiles .

the act also adds $140 million to the $874 million requested to procure thaad interceptors that are deployed in guam , in the middle east , and in south korea .

while congress and the administration weighed alternative ways to organize a new organization – a space force – to address long - standing criticisms of dod's acquisition of space satellites and associated launchers , the debate was not cited by the house and senate appropriations committees in their reports on the fy2019 defense appropriations bill .

nor was it cited by house and senate conferees in their joint explanatory statement to accompany the conference report on the bill .

the enacted bill funded – with largely modest changes – the administration's requests for several major defense - related space programs .

 ( see table 7 . ) .

the most sizeable departure from the administration's request was the addition of $200 million to the $245.4 million requested in r&d funding associated with the evolved expendable launch vehicle ( eelv ) , which is the program for acquiring satellite launch rockets and launch services for relatively heavy dod space payloads .

the act supports the general thrust of the administration's program to beef up the capacity of army and marine corps units to prevail in full - scale , high - tech combat with the forces of near - peer adversaries , namely russia and china .

the increased dod emphasis on conventional combat with major powers is rooted in the 2018 national defense strategy of which dod published an unclassified synopsis on january 19 , 2018 .

in addition to modernizing the ground forces' existing capabilities , the administration's fy2019 budget request included stepped - up investments to improve two capabilities the army identifies as among its top modernization priorities: mobile defenses against cruise missiles and drone aircraft ; and improved firepower and mobility for infantry units .

while taking some reductions from the amounts requested for some programs – cuts based on program delays , the availability of prior - year funds , and so forth – the bills would provide funding above the requested level to accelerate other programs .

 ( see table 8 . ) .

the act funded most of the roughly $2.5 billion requested to continue upgrading the army's fleet of m - 1 tanks , built between 1980 and 1996 .

for the program to continue modernizing the service's bradley armored troop carriers – which is roughly contemporary with the tank fleet – it would cut nearly a quarter of the $1.04 billion requested , mostly on grounds of a "change of acquisition strategy. .

the act provided more funds than requested in order to accelerate modernization of two other components of the army's current combat vehicle fleet , adding: $110.0 million to the $310.8 million requested to replace the chassis and powertrain of the m - 109 paladin self - propelled with the more powerful and robust chassis of the bradley troop carrier ; and $94.0 million to the $265.3 million requested to replace the flat underside of many types of stryker wheeled combat vehicles with a v - shaped bottom intended to more effectively deflect the explosive force of buried landmines .

the act generally funded programs to replace two older types of tracked vehicles , providing: $447.5 million ( of $479.8 million requested ) to continue procurement of the advanced multi - purpose vehicle ( ampv ) , intended to replace the vietnam war - vintage m - 113 tracked personnel carrier ; and $167.5 million , as requested , for procurement of the amphibious combat vehicle ( acv ) , a successor to the marine corps' equally dated aav - 7 amphibious troop carrier .

the administration requested a total of $449 million to develop and begin purchasing vehicles intended to boost the lethality and mobility of army infantry units – that is , forces not equipped with m - 1 tanks and other armored vehicles .

nearly 90% of those funds were for development of a relatively light - weight tank ( designated mobile protected firepower or mpf ) with the balance of the money intended to begin purchasing four - wheel - drive , off - road vehicles for reconnaissance missions and troop transport , designated light reconnaissance vehicle ( lrv ) and ground mobility vehicle ( gmv ) , respectively .

the act funds the three programs with some relatively small reduction reflecting concerns that their development or testing schedules are unrealistically ambitious .

the fy2019 budget request includes nearly $450 million for programs intended to beef up mobile army defenses against aircraft , including unmanned aerial systems and cruise missiles .

these include a stryker combat vehicle equipped to launch stinger missiles ( designated im - shorad ) and a larger , truck - mounted missile launcher ( designated ifpc ) .

the act cut the total r&d request for the programs by nearly 25% for various , relatively typical rationales including development program delays .

following what has long been the usual practice , the act adds to the dod budget $2.35 billion for procurement of aircraft , ground vehicles , and other equipment for national guard or other reserve component units .

these funds are provided in addition to the $3.64 billion worth of equipment for guard and reserve forces that was included in the administration's fy2019 budget request .

the increase includes a total of $1.30 billion in the national guard and reserve equipment account ( ngrea ) which is allocated among the six reserve force components: the army and air national guard , and the army , navy , marine corps , and air force reserve .

in their joint explanatory statement on the final version of the bill , house and senate conferees directed the funds to be used "for priority equipment that may be used for combat and domestic response missions. .

amounts are not earmarked for specific purchases , but conferees on the defense bill directed that "priority consideration" in using the funds be given to 18 types of items .

the 18 categories range in specificity from "digital radar warning receivers for f - 16s" to "cold - weather and mountaineering gear and equipment. .

other congressional initiatives include specific increases for national guard equipment: $640 million for 8 c - 130j cargo planes ; $168 million for 6 ah - 64e attack helicopters ; $156 million for 8 uh - 60 black hawk helicopters ; and $100 million for hmmwv ( "hum - vee" ) vehicles .

the act funds the major elements of the administration's shipbuilding program , which aims at enlarging and modernizing the navy's fleet .

the stated goals of the program are to improve the navy's ability to respond to increasingly assertive military operations by china in the western pacific and indian oceans , and to halt , if not reverse , the decline in the technological edge that u.s. forces have enjoyed for decades .

 ( see table 9 . ) .

the administration's $1.60 billion request to fund a ford - class aircraft carrier was intended as the fourth of eight annual increments to cover the estimated $12.6 billion cost of what will be the third ship of the ford class .

that ship , designated cvn - 80 and named enterprise , is slated for delivery to the navy at the end of fy2027 .

the act , which provides nearly the total amount requested , includes a provision that allows the navy – under certain conditions – to use the funds for a block buy contract that would fund procurement of components for both cvn - 80 and the planned fourth ship of the ford class , designated cvn - 81 .

proponents of such an arrangement contend that it could accelerate the delivery of the fourth ship and reduce the overall cost of the two vessels .

before the funds could be used for a block buy , dod would have to certify to congress an analysis demonstrating that the approach would save money , as required by section 121 of the companion fy2019 national defense authorization act , h.r .

5515 ( p.l .

115-232 ) .

the act adds to the administration's request $1.1 billion to accelerate the planned production of ships to support amphibious landings and large air - cushion craft to haul tanks and other combat equipment ashore .

this total includes: $350 million to begin construction of an lha - class helicopter carrier ; $350 million to begin construction of either an lpd - 17-class amphibious landing transport or a variant of that ship designated lx ( r ) ; $225 million for an expeditionary fast transport , a catamaran that can carry a few hundred troops and their gear hundreds of miles at 40 mph ; and $182.5 million to buy eight air - cushion landing craft ( instead of the five requested ) to haul tanks and other equipment ashore from transport ships .

generally speaking , the act funds the administration's requests for military aircraft acquisition , subject to relatively minor cuts reflecting routine congressional oversight .

the major departures from the request were increased funds to accelerate production of the f - 35 joint strike fighter and the addition of funds to buy helicopters and c - 130 cargo planes for the national guard .

the act's largest addition to the administration's request for a single weapons program is the addition of $1.70 billion to acquire 16 f - 35 joint strike fighters to the 77 f - 35s funded in the budget request .

the additional funds provides eight more aircraft in addition to the 48 requested for the air force , two more of the short - takeoff , vertical - landing ( stovl ) f - 35s for the marine corps ( in addition to the 20 requested ) , and six more of the aircraft carrier - adapted version – four for the navy ( in addition to the nine requested ) , and two for the marine corps .

other notable funding increases in the bill for procurement of combat aircraft include: $65.0 million to extend the life of a - 10 ground - attack planes by replacing their wings ; and $100.0 million to begin acquisition of a relatively low - tech ( and relatively inexpensive ) ground - attack plane designated oa - x for use against other - than - top - tier adversaries .

following are the full citations of crs products identified in tables by reference number only .

crs reports crs report rs22103 , vh - 71 / vxx presidential helicopter program: background and issues for congress , by jeremiah gertler crs report rs20643 , navy ford ( cvn - 78 ) class aircraft carrier program: background and issues for congress , by ronald o'rourke crs report rl31384 , v - 22 osprey tilt - rotor aircraft program , by jeremiah gertler crs report rl32418 , navy virginia ( ssn - 774 ) class attack submarine procurement: background and issues for congress , by ronald o'rourke crs report rl33741 , navy littoral combat ship ( lcs ) program: background and issues for congress , by ronald o'rourke crs report rl33745 , navy aegis ballistic missile defense ( bmd ) program: background and issues for congress , by ronald o'rourke crs report rl34398 , air force kc - 46a tanker aircraft program , by jeremiah gertler crs report r41129 , navy columbia ( ssbn - 826 ) class ballistic missile submarine program: background and issues for congress , by ronald o'rourke crs report r41464 , conventional prompt global strike and long - range ballistic missiles: background and issues , by amy f. woolf crs report r42723 , marine corps amphibious combat vehicle ( acv ) : background and issues for congress , by andrew feickert crs report r43049 , u.s. air force bomber sustainment and modernization: background and issues for congress , by jeremiah gertler crs report r43240 , the army's armored multi - purpose vehicle ( ampv ) : background and issues for congress , by andrew feickert crs report r43618 , c - 130 hercules: background , sustainment , modernization , issues for congress , by jeremiah gertler and timrek heisler crs report r44463 , air force b - 21 raider long - range strike bomber , by jeremiah gertler crs report r44968 , infantry brigade combat team ( ibct ) mobility , reconnaissance , and firepower programs , by andrew feickert crs report r44972 , navy frigate ( ffg[x] ) program: background and issues for congress , by ronald o'rourke insight , in focus crs insight in10931 , u.s. army's initial maneuver , short - range air defense ( im - shorad ) system , by andrew feickert crs in focus if10954 , air force oa - x light attack aircraft program , by jeremiah gertle .

