the federal government is the nation's largest employer , with over two million workers employed in the united states , u.s .

territories , and foreign countries .

a majority of these employees work in the competitive service of the executive branch .

applicants for competitive service positions compete with other applicants and are evaluated according to objective standards .

the executive branch includes two other service classifications — the excepted service and the senior executive service ( ses ) — with hiring and removal standards that diverge from those prescribed for the competitive service .

positions in the excepted service are specifically excepted from the competitive service by statute , by the president , or by the office of personnel management ( opm ) .

ses positions are also not in the competitive service .

the ses includes senior managerial , supervisory , and policy positions that are subject to a different pay scale , as well as different hiring and removal standards .

this report examines the three service classifications , and reviews some of the central features and notable differences among these classifications .

the competitive service consists of all civil service positions in the executive branch , except the following: positions that are specifically excepted from the competitive service by or under statute ; positions to which appointments are made by presidential nomination for confirmation by the senate , unless the senate otherwise directs ; and positions in the ses .

the ses is a cadre of high - level government administrators who manage major programs and projects within most federal agencies .

while they are considered federal employees within the civil service system , the ses is governed by a regulatory structure separate from the competitive and excepted services .

as defined in statute , ses positions are generally managerial or supervisory positions that are classified above the gs - 15 grade ( or certain equivalent positions ) and need not be appointed by the president and confirmed by the senate .

in these leadership roles , ses members may serve as intermediaries between top - level political appointees of an agency who seek to carry out the objectives of a particular president and career civil servants with institutional experience relating to relevant issues .

according to a 2018 report , there are currently more than 7,000 permanent ses positions .

there are two types of ses positions: ( 1 ) career reserved and ( 2 ) general .

career reserved positions must be filled with career appointees to shield certain ses roles from political influence .

generally , agency heads are to determine whether a particular ses position warrants a career reserved designation , to "ensure impartiality , or the public's confidence in the impartiality , of the government. .

opm regulations reflect the types of ses roles in which this designation is appropriate , including those involving adjudication and appeals , auditing , and law enforcement duties .

general positions may be filled by career appointees , as well as other noncareer and limited term ( i.e. , political ) appointees .

there are four types of ses appointments: career , noncareer , limited term , and limited emergency appointees .

the ses mainly consists of "career appointees" chosen through a merit - based competitive hiring process .

as part of this process , each agency must maintain a recruitment program for career appointees , as well as at least one executive board that reviews qualifications and makes recommendations regarding ses candidates .

an opm - convened qualification review board ( qrb ) must certify the executive and managerial qualifications of a selected candidate before a career appointment may be made to an ses position .

unlike career appointees , noncareer appointees are not subject to the competitive selection process , but agency heads must determine that these appointees meet the qualifications of the ses position .

while noncareer appointees are not qrb - certified , opm must approve these appointees .

limited term and limited emergency appointees make up a small subset of the ses , and their terms are non - renewable .

these appointments are used when a position is needed for a specified period ( such as to manage a special project ) , or a position is established to meet a "bona fide , unanticipated , urgent need. .

limited term and limited emergency appointments are also subject to opm approval .

to restrict the politicization of the ses , title 5 of the u.s. code ( title 5 ) limits the number of noncareer and limited term appointees who may serve in ses positions .

the ses pay structure is also distinct from the rest of the civil service .

title 5 specifies that the pay rate of each senior executive is based on the executive's individual performance or contribution to agency performance ( or both ) , as measured under a "rigorous" performance appraisal system .

each federal agency must maintain at least one of these appraisal systems , subject to opm standards , review , and approval .

performance appraisals of ses members may consider factors such as improvements in efficiency , productivity , and quality of work or service , cost efficiency , and performance timeliness .

in response to earlier concerns that ses appraisal systems were flawed because most executives received the highest rating , title 5 tasks opm , in collaboration with the office of management and budget , with the establishment and maintenance of a government - wide performance appraisal system certification process , in an effort to ensure that an agency's appraisal systems for ses employees make "meaningful distinctions based on relative performance. .

title 5 also sets out different pay rates for the ses , with a minimum rate of basic pay equal to 120 percent of the rate for gs - 15 , step 1 , and a maximum rate of basic pay equal to the rate for level iii of the executive schedule .

but ses members' annual aggregate pay ( that includes additional compensation such as bonuses , awards , and other payments in addition to basic pay ) is capped at the rate for level i of the executive schedule .

if a senior executive's total compensation exceeds the aggregate limitation , the executive receives the overage in the following calendar year .

to encourage federal agencies to establish and maintain an opm - certified performance appraisal system , title 5 allows for a higher range of ses pay for agencies that have these certified systems .

title 5 also articulates conditions and procedures for removing , suspending , or taking other adverse actions against a member of the ses .

career ses appointees who have successfully completed a one - year probationary period may be removed or subject to adverse action only for specified reasons .

for example , an ses career appointee may be removed from the civil service or suspended for more than 14 days only for misconduct , neglect of duty , malfeasance , or failure to accept a directed reassignment or to accompany a position in a transfer of function .

ses members must receive advance written notice about the action and opportunity to provide an answer or receive hearing , subject to exception .

the senior executive may also appeal the employment action to the mspb .

a career appointee receiving a single unsatisfactory performance rating may be reassigned or transferred within the ses or removed from the ses .

a career ses member who receives two unsatisfactory ratings in any period of five consecutive years , or twice in any period of three consecutive years receives less than fully successful ratings , must be removed from the ses .

affected ses career appointees must receive advance written notice of these actions .

while these appointees may not appeal these actions to the mspb , they may request an informal hearing before the board .

ses career appointees are also generally entitled to be placed in a civil service position at gs - 15 or above ( or an equivalent position ) .

in comparison , noncareer , limited term , and limited emergency appointees are generally not subject to the same removal protections and may be removed from the ses at any time .

the procedures for removal of noncareer and limited term appointees are largely not addressed in federal statute , and the terms and procedures for their removal are mainly at the discretion of the agency head .

in response to concerns about performance and accountability of ses members employed by the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , congress recently created special removal requirements that apply to these positions .

in 2017 , congress passed the department of veterans affairs accountability and whistleblower protection act , which amended an existing provision concerning removal procedures for these covered senior executives .

under the 2017 act , the va secretary has discretion to suspend , demote , remove , or take other actions against ses career appointees or other high - level executives if the secretary determines that the individual's misconduct or performance warrants such action .

to address ses job performance issues more expeditiously , ses employees at the va department are entitled to abbreviated notice and appeals rights , as compared to the removal procedures in place in other federal agencies .

