f ederal agricultural conservation assistance began in the 1930s with a focus on soil and water issues ass ociated with production and environmental concerns on the farm .

during the 1980s , agricultural conservation policies were broadened to include environmental issues beyond soil and water concerns , especially issues related to production , such as erosion and wetlands loss that had effects beyond the farm .

many of the current agricultural conservation programs were enacted as part of the food security act of 1985 ( 1985 farm bill ; p.l .

99-198 , title xii ) .

these programs have been reauthorized , modified , and expanded , and several new programs have been created , particularly in subsequent omnibus farm bills .

while the number of programs has increased and new techniques to address resource challenges continue to emerge , the basic federal approach has remained unchanged — voluntary farmer participation encouraged by financial and technical assistance , education , and basic and applied research .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) administers the suite of agricultural conservation programs through two primary agencies — the natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) and the farm service agency ( fsa ) .

figure 1 .

common conservation program abbreviationssource: crs .

the conservation title of the agriculture improvement act of 2018 ( 2018 farm bill ; p.l .

115-334 , title ii ) reauthorized and amended many of the largest conservation programs and created a number of new pilot programs , carve - outs , and initiatives .

the house - and senate - passed farm bills ( h.r .

2 ) each included a number of amendments to existing conservation programs , many of which did not overlap .

this generally resulted in the inclusion of a mix of amendments from each chamber being in the enacted bill .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) projects that total mandatory spending for the title will increase by $555 million during the first five years of the 2018 farm bill ( fy2019-fy2023 ) , compared to a continuation of funding levels authorized in the agricultural act of 2014 ( 2014 farm bill ; p.l .

113-79 ) .

mandatory spending for the title over 10 years ( fy2019-fy2028 ) is projected by cbo to be reduced by $6 billion , relative to the 2014 farm bill authorized levels .

generally , the bill reallocates funding within the conservation title among the larger programs and pays for increases in the short term with reductions in the long term .

the 2018 farm bill reauthorized and amended all of the major usda agricultural conservation programs .

generally , farm bill conservation programs can be grouped into the following types based on similarities: working lands , land retirement , easement , conservation compliance , and partnership and grants ( see figure 1 and figure 2 for a list of conservation programs ) .

most of these programs are authorized to receive mandatory funding ( i.e. , they do not require an annual appropriation ) , and include funding authorities that expire with most other farm bill programs at the end of fy2023 .

other types of conservation programs — such as watershed programs , emergency programs , and technical assistance — are authorized in legislation other than the farm bill .

most of these programs have permanent authorities and receive appropriations annually through the discretionary appropriations process .

these programs are not generally addressed in the context of a farm bill and are not covered in detail in this report , except for cases where the 2018 farm bill made amendments to the program .

this section provides a general discussion of programmatic - specific amendments made to various conservation programs and subprograms .

for a detailed section - by - section analysis of amendments in the 2018 farm bill , including statutory and u.s. code citations , see appendix .

unless otherwise noted , conservation programs discussed in this section are authorized to receive mandatory funding through the borrowing authority of the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) .

for additional analysis of conservation program funding , see the " budget and baseline " section .

beginning with the agriculture and food act of 1981 ( 1981 farm bill ; p.l .

97-98 ) , agricultural conservation has been a stand - alone title in all farm bills .

the breadth of the conservation title has grown with each passing omnibus farm bill .

debate over the 2018 farm bill focused on the differences within the conservation title of the house - and senate - passed bills ( h.r .

2 ) .

the conference agreement resolved these differences to create a final version of the title in the enacted law that represents a mix of proposals from the two versions .

overarching themes of the conservation title include ( 1 ) targeting of funds or acres in existing programs , ( 2 ) a shifting of funds among the different types of conservation programs , including a continued emphasis on working lands programs , and ( 3 ) provisions that address environmental regulations through voluntary conservation measures .

the 2014 farm bill focused on simplifying and consolidating programs within the conservation title .

conversely , the 2018 farm bill does not create new programs , but it does require that a number of existing programs direct a specific level of funding or acres , or percentage of a program's funding , to a resource - or interest - specific issue , initiative , or subprogram .

table 1 highlights some of the directed policies created by the 2018 farm bill and compares them with prior law .

some of these policies existed prior to the 2018 farm bill , but did not include a specified funding or acreage level .

through these directed policies congress has specified a level of support or required investment that usda is to achieve through program implementation .

one potential consequence of these directed policies may be reduced flexibility of the implementing agency to allocate funding based on need , as well as reduced total funds or acres available for activities of the larger program that may not meet a resource - specific provision .

most of the conservation programs in the 2018 farm bill are authorized to receive mandatory funding , so these directed policies also have funding , unless congress subsequently directs otherwise .

most farm bill conservation programs are authorized to receive mandatory funding .

according to cbo , the conservation title makes up 7% of the total projected 2018 farm bill spending over 10 years , which is $60 billion of the total $867 billion ( see table 2 and figure 3 ) .

historically , funding for the conservation title has experienced both increases and decreases within farm bills .

the 2018 farm bill conservation title is budget neutral over the 10-year baseline ; however , it is projected to increase funding in the first five years ( +$555 million over fy2019-fy2023 ) and decrease funding in the last five years ( - $561 million over fy2024-fy2028 ) .

while most titles received an increase in authorized mandatory funding over the projected 10-year baseline , three titles , including conservation , did not .

the bulk of mandatory spending for conservation is authorized for working lands and land retirement activities .

while recent farm bills have increased funding for easement and partnership programs , they remain relatively small compared to three main programs — eqip , csp , and crp ( see table 2 and figure 4 ) .

the 2018 farm bill conservation title is considered budget neutral over the ten - year baseline and generally reallocates funding among the larger existing programs .

over time , periods of high commodity prices , changing land rental rates , and new conservation technologies have led to a shift in farm bill conservation policy away from land retirement and toward an increased focus on working lands programs .

much of this shift occurred following the 2008 farm bill and continued in the 2014 farm bill as the level of total mandatory program funding for land retirement programs declined relative to working lands programs ( see figure 4 ) .

increasingly , the separation between land retirement programs and working lands programs has become blurred by an increase in compatible use allowances for grazing and pasture use under land retirement programs .

most conservation and wildlife organizations support both land retirement and working lands programs ; however , the appropriate "mix" continues to be a subject of debate .

additionally , some conservation program supporters are divided over the relative benefits of shorter - term land retirement programs ( crp ) versus longer - term easement programs ( acep ) .

unlike land retirement programs , easement programs impose a permanent or longer - term land - use restriction that the land owner voluntarily places on the land in exchange for a government payment .

supporters of easement programs cite a more cost - effective investment in sustainable ecosystems for long - term wildlife and land preservation benefits .

supporters of short - term land retirement programs cite the increased flexibility and broader participation compared with permanent or long - term easement programs .

the 2018 farm bill did not amend the duration of acep easements , but did create two new subprograms under crp that would provide additional options for longer - term crp contracts ( 30 years under clear30 ) and shorter - term crp contracts ( 3-5 years under shipp ) .

in recent years , congress has placed greater emphasis on programs that partner with state and local communities to target conservation funding to local resource concerns .

these partnership programs leverage private funding with federal funding to multiply the level of assistance in a selected area .

the 2014 farm bill repealed a number of these partnership programs and replaced them with rcpp .

the 2018 farm bill amends and expands the number of partnering opportunities under rcpp , crep , and cig .

however , based on available funding , these programs remain relatively small compared to others in the conservation title .

usda has cited voluntary conservation practices as a way to address environmental concerns and potentially reduce the need for traditional regulatory programs .

a number of provisions in the conservation title speak to the relationship between voluntary conservation measures and environmental regulation .

one such provision is regulatory certainty .

regulatory certainty refers to using voluntary measures to address a specific resource concern in exchange for the "certainty" that additional measures will not be required under future regulations .

a new regulatory certainty section in the 2018 farm bill ( §2503 ( f ) ) authorizes usda to provide technical assistance under the farm bill conservation programs to support regulatory assurances for producers and landowners , under select conditions .

the 2018 farm bill also makes existing regulatory certainty measures permanent , including the working lands for wildlife initiative , which was created in 2012 as a partnership between nrcs and the u.s .

fish and wildlife service ( fws ) .

under this partnership agreement , private landowners who voluntarily make wildlife habitat improvements on their land through nrcs conservation programs , and agree to maintain them for 15-30 years , receive in return a level of certainty they will be exempted from potential future regulatory actions related to at - risk species under the endangered species act .

the 2018 farm bill makes this partnership agreement permanent and allows for the initiative to be expanded to include crp .

another environmental regulatory - related provision in the enacted 2018 farm bill ( §2410 ) is a sense of congress statement encouraging watershed - level partnerships between nonpoint sources and regulated point sources to advance the goals of the federal water pollution control act ( clean water act , 33 u.s.c .

§1251 et seq .

 ) .

this appendix includes a series of tables , arranged by subtitle , included in title ii of the agriculture improvement act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-334 ) .

u.s. code citations are included in brackets in the "prior law" column .

corresponding section numbers in the 2018 farm bill are included in brackets in the "enacted 2018 farm bill" column .

funding for most title ii programs is covered in the "funding and administration" subtitle ( subtitle e , see table a - 6 ) .

where appropriate , funding levels are repeated within a program's corresponding subtitle table .

tables are generally organized by section number of the 2018 farm bill , except where it is appropriate to cross - references relevant amendments to provide a complete picture of the program .

