since the 1950s and the creation of the first federal student aid programs , one aim of federal higher education policy has been to promote access to postsecondary education , particularly for students with financial need .

in recent years , the federal government has annually made available more than $100 billion in federal grants , loans , and work - study funds to millions of students to help cover the cost of higher education .

as congress continues to focus on expanding access to postsecondary education through federal student aid policies , understanding various characteristics of the population enrolling in postsecondary education may be helpful in informing policy deliberations .

in academic year ( ay ) 2015-2016 , there were approximately 19.3 million students enrolled as undergraduates in postsecondary education in the 50 states and the district of columbia .

in ay2007-2008 , around the time of the last reauthorization of the higher education act ( hea ) , there were approximately 20.5 million undergraduate students enrolled in postsecondary education .

the composition of the current undergraduate population , how the composition has changed over time , and the types of institutions in which students enroll are issues that are likely to be of interest to congress as it considers the reauthorization of the hea .

this report focuses on the income of the undergraduate student population .

the report will explore the relationship between student income and certain student demographics such as race and dependency status , and explore how the income distribution of the undergraduate population compares with that of the national population of persons who do not have a postsecondary degree .

the analysis presented in this report relies on two data sources: the national postsecondary student aid study ( npsas ) and the current population survey annual social and economic supplement ( cps asec ) .

this section describes each data source , along with some of the limitations of the data .

the amount of federal student aid that is made available to a student is largely determined by the student's income .

individuals who are interested in applying for federal student financial aid are required to complete the fafsa .

information reported on the fafsa is shared with state agencies and institutions of higher education to help determine federal and nonfederal student aid .

thus , an important characteristic of postsecondary students with regard to federal policy is their income .

this section of the report explores changes in the income distribution of students enrolled in postsecondary education over time using the npsas variable for income as a percentage of the poverty guidelines .

the poverty guidelines are issued by the department of health and human services ( hhs ) every year , and many social programs such as the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) , the children's health insurance program , the national school lunch program , and certain parts of medicaid use poverty guidelines to determine participant eligibility for benefits .

the poverty guidelines are also used to determine monthly payment amounts under the student loan income - driven repayment plans and in student loan rehabilitation agreements .

table 1 provides the 2014 hhs poverty guidelines and multiples that were used in npsas: 2016 .

using these guidelines , crs created the following five poverty bands for its analysis: below 100% , 100% to 199.99% , 200% to 299.99% , 300% to 499.99% , and 500% and above .

for purposes of this report , "low - income students" are considered to have income that falls within the first two poverty bands ( below 200% of the poverty guidelines ) .

this characterization of low - income status is consistent with standards used in some education and social service programs that use the poverty guidelines to determine eligibility for assistance .

it is used here primarily as a descriptor of lower - income categories in the populations being examined , and no suggestion is being made with regard to whether the first two poverty bands should be used as thresholds in "low - income" determinations for the receipt of means tested assistance .

as previously mentioned , one advantage of using the poverty guidelines is that they are indexed for inflation , which is useful when looking at trends in income over time .

another advantage is that they account for families of different sizes .

for example , 200% of the poverty threshold for a family of four is $47,700 .

this same income level represents more than 300% of the poverty threshold for a single individual and for a family of two .

the data presented thus far suggest differences in the trends in enrollment of undergraduate students from different income groups .

to further explore the current population of students , crs examined certain demographic characteristics of the undergraduate student population and how those characteristics are related to income using the most recent npsas .

the npsas data suggest that low - income students have enrolled in postsecondary education at higher levels in more recent years .

to explore the extent to which the influx of students is related to changes in the income distribution of the national population , this section uses the cps asec to compare the income distribution of the national population with that of the undergraduate population .

given that the data suggest noteworthy trends for low - income students , the discussion in this section generally focuses on persons with income below 200% of the poverty guideline .

figure 6 provides a comparison of the income distribution of the national population aged 15 to 65 and the postsecondary population over three time periods .

the data suggest that while the low - income national population grew from 2007 to 2011 , the population of low - income undergraduate students grew at a higher rate than the national population of low - income persons .

specifically , from 2007 to 2011 the number of persons with income below 200% of the poverty guidelines grew from 58.5 million to 71.0 million , an increase of 22%.during the same time , the number of low - income students enrolled as undergraduates grew from 8.2 million to 11.7 million , an increase of 44% .

between 2011 and 2015 , there was a slight increase in the number of low - income persons ( about 2 million ) in the national population , while the number of low - income students dropped ( by about 1 million ) .

however , the drop in low - income students seems to be associated with the overall drop in postsecondary enrollment .

in terms of proportion , low - income persons constitute a much smaller portion of the national population than of the undergraduate postsecondary population .

specifically , low - income persons constituted 29% of the national population in 2007 , and 34% of the national population in 2011 and 2015 .

among the enrolled undergraduate population , low - income persons accounted for 40% in 2007 and more than 50% in 2011 and 2015 .

figure 7 illustrates the income distribution of the population aged 15-23 who did not have a postsecondary degree and were not enrolled in postsecondary education .

this population could have been considered "potential enrollees" and thus may have had characteristics similar to the enrolled population .

due to data limitations , "potential enrollees" who were aged 24 and older could not be considered .

the data suggest that from 2007 to 2011 , the number of low - income students aged 15-23 grew at a faster rate than the national population of persons in this age range .

specifically , from 2007 to 2011 the number of low - income potential enrollees grew from 10.8 million to 12.2 million , an increase of 13% , while the number of low - income enrolled students aged 15-23 grew from 4.0 million to 5.5 million , an increase of 37% .

in 2015 , the number of low - income persons aged 15-23 enrolled as undergraduates decreased by 6% , while the national population of the same age range decreased by 4% .

again , the drop in enrollment of low - income students appears to be related to the large decrease in total student enrollment .

in terms of proportion , low - income persons aged 15-23 constituted a smaller portion of the undergraduate population than of the national population in 2007 .

however , in 2011 and 2015 low - income persons in this age range constituted similar shares of the national and undergraduate populations .

since the last reauthorization of the higher education act , the number and proportion of low - income undergraduate students ( defined in this report as students with income below 200% of the poverty guidelines ) has increased , even as total enrollment has decreased in more recent years .

low - income students now constitute more than 50% of the postsecondary undergraduate population .

this report's analysis also found the following: certain student characteristics such as race , age , and dependency status show trends that tend to be associated with income .

independent undergraduate students who have historically been labeled as "non - traditional" constitute a large portion of enrolled postsecondary students .

these "non - traditional" students generally tend to have lower incomes than more traditional students .

nonwhite students account for nearly 50% of the undergraduate population , and they tend to have lower income than white students .

the majority of low - income students attend community colleges and a disproportionately high share attend private for - profit institutions .

low - income students were more likely to attend open admission or minimally selective institutions .

the changing composition of the student population could have implications for policies designed to promote access to postsecondary education .

one historical aim of student aid programs has been to increase postsecondary access for those students who demonstrate financial need .

the findings in this report suggest that there has been an influx of low - income students enrolling in postsecondary education since the last hea reauthorization .

when compared with national income data , low - income individuals are overrepresented in the postsecondary population .

this could suggest that federal policies have been effective at promoting access for low - income persons .

data also show that the number of students in the middle - and upper - income categories has declined somewhat in recent years .

this finding could imply that there are challenges that these students face in enrolling in postsecondary education that may not be addressed in current federal policies .

related to access , there is growing interest in the extent to which students who enroll are completing a postsecondary credential .

research suggests that private nonprofit and public four - year institutions tend to have higher completion rates than public two - year institutions and private for - profit institutions .

data show that low - income students tend to be overrepresented at public two - year and for - profit institutions and less represented at public and private nonprofit four - year institutions .

policymakers face consideration of whether federal policies could play a role in encouraging students at various income levels to enroll at the highest performing types of schools .

data also show that undergraduate students historically labeled as "non - traditional" and minority students constitute about 50% of the undergraduate population .

some research suggests that non - traditional and minority students face a unique set of challenges when enrolling and completing postsecondary education .

policymakers face consideration of the extent to which hea programs are designed to support the success of non - traditional and minority students .

another way in which the analyses presented here may be relevant to policy discussions is in identifying the distribution of students across poverty bands .

when designing programs that provide assistance to lower - income individuals , poverty bands are often employed as a mechanism for targeting .

family units in npsas correspond with hea dependency definitions and reflect the individuals whose assets and income are considered in calculating an expected family contribution ( efc ) .

these family units may differ from a family unit in cps asec .

to facilitate the analysis in this report , crs used person - level data in the cps asec data set to create new family units that are more comparable to the family units considered in calculating the efc .

this appendix briefly describes the methodology crs used for dividing cps asec larger "family household" units into smaller family units that resemble the family members and corresponding income reported on the fafsa for the purposes of calculating a student's efc .

family units: cps asec and the efc formulas a family household in cps asec is a household maintained by a family and may include a related subfamily and unrelated subfamilies who live in the household .

a family generally consists of "a group of two persons or more residing together and related by birth , marriage , or adoption. .

a related subfamily is "a married couple with or without children , or one parent with one or more of their own single ( never married ) children under 18 years old , living in a household and related to , but not including , the householder or spouse. .

an unrelated subfamily is "a family that does not include among its members the householder and relatives of the householder. .

generally , when calculating a student's efc , determining the relevant family members whose income would be included depends on the student's personal characteristics .

the various aspects of the cps make it possible to "separate" household members that would be a distinct family for the purposes of calculating a student's efc .

for example , a married person without children would be considered "independent" using the efc formula , and the family would include the person and his or her spouse .

an unrelated subfamily would also most likely be treated as a separate family by the efc formula .

as such , related subfamilies and unrelated subfamilies in cps asec were treated as separate family units from the primary family for purposes of this report's analysis .

the efc formula considers several criteria for identifying a person as "independent. .

to capture a large portion of potentially independent students in cps asec who were not addressed through the separation of subfamilies from families , all unmarried persons age 24 and older who do not have children were treated as a separate family unit in this report's analysis .

while students can qualify as independent on the basis of characteristics other than age , marital status , and having dependents , it was assumed that any remaining independent students not captured in the analysis would constitute a small portion of the population and thus would not have a substantial impact .

income: cps asec and efc formula using the newly created efc family unit described above , family income was calculated by taking the sum of each person's income in the unit .

in some cases , this calculation of family income would likely include persons whose income would not be included under the efc formula ( eg , the income of a student who is a dependent , the income of a student's siblings who live in the household with the student's parents ) .

to facilitate the analysis , it was assumed that the income of the additional persons would be a negligible amount and would not greatly affect the family income .

the definition of income for the purposes of the efc formula is somewhat different from income reported in the cps asec .

total income under the efc formula considers adjusted gross income and several forms of untaxed income but excludes some forms of taxable income .

the cps asec measure of income includes money income before taxes or tax credits and excludes capital gains or noncash benefits .

to facilitate the analysis , it was assumed that the two measures of income are comparable .

