since 2002 , canada has been the united states' top agricultural export market .

mexico was the second - largest export market until 2010 , when china displaced mexico as the second - leading market with mexico becoming the third - largest u.s. agricultural export market .

in fy2018 , u.s. agricultural exports t otaled $143 billion , of which canada and mexico jointly accounted for about 27% .

usda's economic research service estimates that in 2017 each dollar of u.s. agricultural exports stimulated an additional $1.30 in business activity in the united states .

that same year , u.s. agricultural exports generated an estimated 1,161,000 full - time civilian jobs , including 795,000 jobs outside the farm sector .

u.s. agricultural exports to canada and mexico are an important part of the u.s. economy , and the growth of these markets is partly the result of the north american market liberalization under the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) .

on september 30 , 2018 , the trump administration announced an agreement with canada and mexico for a u.s. - mexico - canada agreement ( usmca ) that would possibly replace nafta .

nafta entered into force on january 1 , 1994 , following the passage of the implementing legislation by congress ( p.l .

103-182 ) .

nafta was structured as three separate bilateral agreements: one between canada and the united states , a second between mexico and the united states , and a third between canada and mexico .

provisions of the canada - u.s. trade agreement ( custa ) , which went into effect on january 1 , 1989 , continued to apply under nafta ( see table 1 ) .

custa opened up a 10-year period for tariff elimination and agricultural market integration between the two countries .

the agricultural provisions agreed upon for custa remained in force as provisions of the new nafta agreement .

while tariffs were phased out for almost all agricultural products , nafta ( in accordance with the original custa provisions ) exempted certain products from market liberalization .

these exemptions included u.s. imports from canada of dairy products , peanuts , peanut butter , cotton , sugar , and sugar - containing products and canadian imports from the united states of dairy products , poultry , eggs , and margarine .

canada liberalized its agricultural sector under nafta , but liberalization did not include its dairy , poultry , and egg product sectors , which continued to be governed by domestic supply management policies and are protected from imports by high over - quota tariffs .

quotas that once governed bilateral trade in these commodities were redefined , under nafta , as tariff - rate quotas ( trqs ) to comply with the uruguay round agreement on agriculture ( uraa ) , which took effect on january 1 , 1995 .

a trq is a quota for a volume of imports at a favorable tariff rate , which was set at zero under nafta .

imports beyond the quota volume face higher over - quota tariff rates .

the united states and mexico agreement under nafta did not exclude any agricultural products from trade liberalization .

numerous restrictions on bilateral agricultural trade were eliminated immediately upon nafta's implementation , while others were phased out over a 14-year period .

remaining trade restrictions on the last handful of agricultural commodities ( such as u.s. exports to mexico of corn , dry edible beans , and nonfat dry milk and mexican exports to the united states of sugar , cucumbers , orange juice , and sprouting broccoli ) were removed upon the completion of the transition period in 2008 .

under nafta , mexico eliminated all the tariffs and quotas that formerly governed agricultural imports from the united states .

in addition to directly improving market access , nafta set guidance and standards on other policies and regulations that facilitated the integration of the north american agricultural market .

for example , nafta included provisions for rules of origin , intellectual property rights , foreign investment , and dispute resolution .

nafta's sanitary and phytosanitary ( sps ) provisions made a significant contribution toward the expansion of agricultural trade by harmonizing regulations and facilitating trade .

because nafta entered into force before uraa , nafta's sps agreement is considered to have provided the blueprint for uraa's sps agreement .

regarding trade in agricultural products , the office of the u.s. trade representative ( usitc ) asserts that usmca would build upon nafta to make "important improvements in the agreement to enable food and agriculture to trade more fairly , and to expand exports of american agricultural products. .

for usmca to enter into force , congress would need to ratify the agreement .

it must also be ratified by canada and mexico .

the timeline for congressional approval of usmca would likely occur under the trade promotion authority ( tpa ) timeline established under the bipartisan congressional trade priorities and accountability act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-26 ) .

at various times , president trump has stated that he intends to withdraw from nafta .

some observers have suggested that delays in congressional action on usmca could make it harder for canada to consider usmca approval this year because of upcoming parliamentary elections in october 2019 .

usmca seeks to expand upon the agricultural provisions of nafta by further reducing market access barriers and strengthening provisions to facilitate trade in north america .

an important change in usmca compared to nafta is that the united states agreement with canada would expand trqs for imports of u.s. agricultural products into canada .

other important changes from nafta include the agreement between the three countries — canada , mexico , and the united states — to further harmonize trade in products of agricultural biotechnology and apply the same health , safety , and marketing standards to agricultural and food imports from usmca partners as for domestic products .

since 2002 , canada and mexico have been two of the top three export markets for u.s. agricultural products ( competing with japan until 2009 , when china moved into the top three ) .

in recent years , the two countries have jointly accounted for about 40% of the total value of u.s. agricultural exports .

intraregional trade in north america has increased substantially since the implementation of custa and nafta and in the wake of mexico's market - oriented agricultural reforms , which started in the 1980s ( figure 1 ) .

the value of total u.s. agricultural product exports to canada and mexico rose from under $7 billion at the start of custa in fy1990 to almost $10 billion at the start of nafta in fy1994 and peaked at $41 billion in fy2014 .

the lower level of exports since fy2014 is partly due to a drought - related decline in livestock production in parts of the united states ; increased canadian production of corn , rapeseed , and soybeans ; increased use of u.s. corn as ethanol feedstock ; growth in u.s. export markets outside of nafta ; and increased competition from outside of nafta .

since mid - 2018 , u.s. exports of certain products have been adversely affected by the imposition of retaliatory tariffs by canada and mexico in response to the trump administration's application of a 25% tariff on all u.s. steel imports and a 10% tariff on all u.s. aluminum imports under section 232 of the trade expansion act of 1962 .

similar to the growth in u.s. agricultural exports , u.s. imports of agriculture and related products from canada and mexico grew from about $6 billion in fy1990 to $8 billion in fy1994 , and u.s. agricultural exports continued to increase after nafta came into force on january 1 , 1994 , reaching $48 billion in fy2018 .

for fy2019 , usda projects that total u.s. agricultural exports to canada and mexico will to decline to $41.2 billion , while u.s. imports from those countries are projected at $49.6 billion .

many studies have assessed the effects of nafta on agriculture and the possible effects if nafta were to be terminated .

it is difficult to isolate the effects of nafta from the market liberalization begun under custa and from mexico's unilateral trade liberalization measures in the 1980s and early 1990s , which included joining the general agreement on tariffs and trade in 1986 .

nevertheless , nafta is credited with facilitating trade in north america by reducing tariffs and other market access barriers and by providing a stable and improved trading environment in the region .

studies conducted by usda indicate that u.s. agricultural exports to canada and mexico have been higher than they would have been in the absence of nafta .

one such study concluded that nafta particularly expanded trade in those commodities that underwent the most significant reductions in tariff and nontariff barriers , including u.s. exports to canada of wheat products , beef and veal , and cotton and u.s. exports to mexico of rice , cattle and calves , nonfat dry milk , cotton , processed potatoes , apples , and pears .

an october 2018 study commissioned by the farm foundation examines the potential economic benefits associated with ( 1 ) usmca compared with the provisions provided under nafta , ( 2 ) usmca in an environment with prevailing retaliatory tariffs on u.s. agricultural products in response to u.s. tariff increases on imports of steel and aluminum , and ( 3 ) the effect of a complete u.s. withdrawal from usmca / nafta .

the methodology used by the study assumes that each of the three trade policy scenarios would need to remain in place for at least three to five years or until the market equilibrium stabilizes following the initial policy shock .

thus , the estimated effects from the study can be considered as the long - run impacts .

the study considers only proposed changes under usmca to market access for u.s. agricultural exports to canada , such as changes in trqs and tariff rates .

it does not consider other changes proposed for agriculture or for other sectors such as manufacturing and automobiles .

the study's conclusions under these three scenarios follow .

1 .

comparing usmca to nafta , the study estimates that usmca would generate a net increase in annual u.s. agricultural exports to canada of $450 million — about 1% of current u.s. exports under nafta .

this estimated increase would reflect increases in exports of dairy products ( +$280 million ) and meat ( +$210 million ) , which would be partially offset by a decline in exports of other agricultural products ( - $40 million ) .

2 .

under the scenario where usmca would enter into force but the retaliatory tariffs imposed by canada and mexico on u.s. agricultural exports would remain in place , the study projects u.s. agricultural export losses from the retaliatory tariffs of $1.8 billion annually , which would more than offset the projected gains of $450 million from usmca ratification .

3 .

under the scenario of a u.s. withdrawal from nafta without usmca ratification , tariffs on u.s. exports to canada and mexico would be expected to return to the higher wto most - favored - nation ( mfn ) rates , the highest level of applied tariffs rates under wto commitments .

in this circumstance , the study finds that u.s. agricultural and food exports to canada and mexico would decline by about $12 billion , or 30% of the value of u.s. agricultural exports to these markets in fy2018 .

this loss is expected to be partially offset by an increase of $2.6 billion in u.s. exports to other countries for a net loss in export revenues of $9.4 billion .

a loss of this order would represent a decline of 24% compared with the total value of u.s. agricultural exports to these countries in fy2018 .

to date , similar studies assessing the effect of usmca on u.s. agriculture as a whole are not available .

the proposed usmca would have to be approved by congress and ratified by mexico and canada before entering into force .

on august 31 , 2018 , pursuant to tpa , president trump provided congress a 90-day notification of his intent to sign a free trade agreement with canada and mexico .

on january 29 , 2019 — 60 days after an agreement was signed , and as required by tpa — u.s .

trade representative robert lighthizer submitted to congress changes to existing u.s. laws that would be needed to bring the united states into compliance with the proposed usmca .

a report by the usitc on the possible economic impact of tpa is not expected to be completed until april 20 , 2019 , due to the 35-day government shutdown .

the report has been cited by some members of congress as key to their decisions on whether to support the agreement .

some policymakers have stated that the path to ratifying usmca by congress is uncertain partially because the three countries have yet to resolve disputes over tariffs on u.s. imports of steel and aluminum , as well as retaliatory tariffs that canada and mexico have imposed on u.s. agricultural products .

the conclusion of the proposed usmca did not resolve these tariff disputes .

on january 30 , 2019 , senator chuck grassley called on the trump administration to lift tariffs on steel and aluminum imports from canada and mexico before congress begins considering legislation to implement the usmca .

representatives of the u.s. business community , agriculture interest groups , other congressional leaders , and canadian and mexican government officials have also stated that these tariff issues must be resolved before the usmca enters into force .

other members of congress have raised issues regarding labor and environmental provisions of usmca .

speaker pelosi has stated that she wants "stronger enforcement language" and that the usmca talks should be reopened to tighten enforcement provisions for labor and environmental protections .

some trade observers believe that delays in congressional action on usmca could make it harder for canada to consider usmca approval this year because of upcoming parliamentary elections in october 2019 .

