the united states was the driving proponent of nato's creation in 1949 and has been the unquestioned leader of the alliance as it has evolved from a regionally focused collective defense organization of 12 members to a globally engaged security organization of 29 members .

successive u.s .

administrations have viewed u.s. leadership of nato as a cornerstone of u.s. national security strategy , bringing benefits ranging from peace and stability in europe to the political and military support of 28 allies , including many of the world's most advanced militaries .

for almost as long as nato has been in existence , it also has faced criticism .

one chief concern of critics in the united states , including some members of congress , has been that european allies' reliance on u.s. security guarantees have fostered an imbalanced and unsustainable "burdensharing" arrangement by which the united states carries an unfair share of the responsibility for ensuring european security .

president donald trump has amplified these concerns , and his assertions that nato is a "bad deal" have caused some analysts and policymakers to reassess the costs and benefits to the united states of its long - standing leadership of the alliance .

although successive u.s. presidents have called on the allies to increase defense spending , none has done so as stridently as president trump .

he is also the first u.s. president to publicly suggest that the united states could modify its commitment to nato should the allies fail to meet agreed defense spending targets .

trump administration officials stress that the united states remains committed to nato , as articulated in the administration's national security and defense strategies .

they highlight the administration's successful efforts in 2017 and 2018 to substantially increase funding for the u.s. force presence in europe .

president trump's supporters , including some members of congress , also argue that trump's forceful statements have succeeded in securing defense spending increases across the alliance that were not forthcoming under his predecessors .

nevertheless , many supporters of nato , including some allied governments , continue to question the president's commitment to the alliance and worry that his condemnations could damage nato cohesion and credibility .

in the face of these concerns , congress has demonstrated significant bipartisan support for nato and u.s. leadership of the alliance .

in january 2019 , following reports that the president has considered seeking to withdraw the united states from nato , the house of representatives passed legislation reaffirming u.s. support for the alliance and limiting the president's authority to withdraw ( h.r .

676 , passed by a vote of 357-22 ) ; similar legislation has been introduced in the senate ( s.j.res .

4 ) .

many analysts view the bipartisan , house - senate invitation to nato secretary general jens stoltenberg to address a joint session of congress on april 3 , 2019 , as an additional sign of continued congressional support .

at the same time , congress continues to assess nato's utility and value to the united states and some members are concerned about several key challenges that continue to face the alliance , including burdensharing , managing relations with russia , and divergent threat perceptions within the alliance .

this report provides context for ongoing discussions about nato's value to the united states and the extent to which nato serves u.s. strategic interests .

a historical overview focuses on the perceived benefits to the united states of nato membership from nato's founding to the present day .

sections on burdensharing and russia address key challenges facing the alliance .

the report concludes with a discussion of u.s. policy and considerations for congress .

an appendix provides data on defense spending by nato members .

broadly speaking , nato has evolved through four phases since its inception in 1949: t he cold war era between 1949 and 1991 ; t he post - cold war transformation of the 1990s , marked by the start of nato enlargement to former warsaw pact countries and debates over "out - of - area" military operations prompted by wars in the western balkans ; t he post - september 11 , 2001 , focus on crisis management and stabilizing afghanistan ; and s ince 2014 , a renewed focus on deterring russia and heightened concern about threats emanating from the middle east and north africa .

nato's current strategic concept , adopted in 2010 , articulates three broad activities for nato: collective defense , crisis management , and cooperative security .

the far - reaching nature of these priorities reflects both the increasingly complex global security environment and the diverse range of threat perceptions inherent in an alliance of 29 members .

some observers express concern that nato may lack the collective political will and the requisite military capacities to fulfill these objectives , which in turn could lead to an erosion of political and public support for the alliance .

others counter that despite such concerns , nato's capacity to enhance security for its member states remains unparalleled and that the alliance has demonstrated flexibility in adapting to meet a wide range of evolving security threats .

since nato's creation in 1949 , the united states has been viewed as the unrivaled leader of the alliance .

the united states continues to be the world's preeminent military power and u.s. defense spending long has been significantly higher than those of any other nato ally .

as early as the 1950s , however , u.s. political and military leaders — including some members of congress — expressed concern about european dependence on the u.s. security umbrella in europe and the longer - term political and military implications of this dependence .

to promote a more equitable sharing of the transatlantic security burden , members of congress and other u.s. leaders have focused most often on seeking to compel european allies to increase their national defense budgets in order to take on a greater share of the security burden .

in the 1980s , for example , the u.s. congress enacted legislation that would place a cap on u.s. force strength in europe if the allies did not meet a target to grow national defense budgets annually by a rate of 3% higher than inflation .

more recently , the allies have agreed to ensure that national defense budgets reach at least 2% of gdp by 2024 ( discussed in more detail below ) .

analysts on both sides of the atlantic have argued , however , that a relatively narrow focus on defense inputs ( i.e. , the size of defense budgets ) could be wasted if not accompanied by an equal , if not greater , focus on defense outputs ( i.e. , military capabilities and the effectiveness of contributions to nato missions and activities ) .

the alliance's target to devote at least 20% of each member's national defense expenditure to new equipment and related research and development reflects this goal .

nato secretary general jens stoltenberg also has emphasized a broader approach to measuring contributions to the alliance , using a metric of "cash , capabilities , and contributions. .

others add that such a broader assessment of allied contributions would be more appropriate given nato's wide - ranging strategic objectives , some of which may require capabilities beyond the military sphere .

russia's annexation of crimea and subsequent invasion of eastern ukraine in 2014 prompted a sweeping reassessment of nato's post - cold war efforts to build a cooperative relationship with moscow .

in the words of then - nato deputy secretary general alexander vershbow , "for 20 years , the security of the euro - atlantic region has been based on the premise that we do not face an adversary to our east .

that premise is now in doubt. .

since 2014 , russia also has increased its military activities in northern europe , particularly through reportedly deploying nuclear - capable missiles to kaliningrad , enhancing its air patrolling activities close to allied airspace , and increasing its naval presence in the baltic sea , the arctic ocean , and the north sea .

in response to russian aggression in ukraine , nato has moved to implement what its leadership characterized as the greatest reinforcement of nato's collective defense since the end of the cold war .

although the allies have continued to support and contribute to nato deterrence initiatives , some express concern about the effectiveness and sustainability of these efforts .

many analysts , including the authors of a february 2016 report by the rand corporation , contend that "as presently postured , nato cannot successfully defend the territory of its most exposed members. .

some allies , including poland and the baltic states , have urged a more robust allied military presence in the region to "make it plain that crossing nato's borders is not an option. .

others , including leaders in western european countries like germany and italy , have stressed the importance of a dual - track approach to russia that complements deterrence with dialogue .

for these allies , efforts to rebuild cooperative relations with moscow may be given as much attention as efforts to deter russia .

accordingly , nato continues to resist calls to permanently deploy troops in countries that joined after the collapse of the soviet union due to concerns in these member states that this would violate the terms of the 1997 nato - russia founding act ; nato's enhanced forward presence has been referred to as "continuous," but rotational .

former german foreign minister ( and current german president ) frank - walter steinmeier encapsulated concerns about nato's deterrence posture in 2016 when he likened a military exercise of nato member states and partner countries taking place in poland to "saber - rattling and war cries. .

he added , "whoever believes that a symbolic tank parade on the alliance's eastern border will bring security , is mistaken. .

nato and u.s. officials subsequently rebutted steinmeier's comments .

discussions over nato's strategic posture could continue to be marked by these divergent views over the threat posed by russia and by debate over the appropriate role for nato in addressing the wide - ranging security challenges emanating from the middle east and north africa ( mena ) .

on threats from the mena region , several allies are reluctant to endorse a bigger role for nato in issues — such as terrorism and migration — on which the european union ( eu ) has traditionally taken the lead .

furthermore , many analysts contend that significant budgetary and political constraints facing many allied governments could limit nato's capacity to deter russia while addressing security threats to nato's south .

since nato's founding , successive u.s .

administrations have viewed u.s. membership in , and leadership of , nato as a key pillar of u.s. national security strategy .

as outlined above , throughout nato's evolution , u.s. leadership has given the united states a strong voice in formulating strategic objectives for nato that align with u.s. national security objectives .

u.s. military objectives in europe also have shifted over time , especially since the end of the cold war .

today , about 74,000 u.s. military service members , including two brigade combat teams ( bcts ) , are stationed in europe , compared to more than 400,000 troops at the height of the cold war .

throughout the 1990s and 2000s , united states european command ( eucom ) shifted its activities in europe to non - warfighting missions , including building defense capacity and capability in former warsaw pact states and logistically supporting other u.s. combatant commands .

events in recent years , particularly russia's actions in ukraine since 2014 and increased military activities near nato borders , have tested the strategic assumptions underpinning eucom's posture .

while president trump has criticized nato , his administration's national security strategy and national defense strategy both identify european security and stability as key u.s. national security interests and emphasize the u.s. commitment to nato and article 5 .

administration officials and many members of congress underscore that the administration has requested significant increases in funding for u.s. military deployments in europe under the european deterrence initiative ( edi , previously known as the european reassurance initiative , or eri ) .

proponents of nato argue that u.s. membership in and leadership of nato brings a range of important benefits to the united states .

these include , but are not limited to , the following: peace , stability , conflict prevention , and deterrence .

many analysts believe that nato has played a vital role in keeping the peace in europe for the last 70 years and preventing a repeat of the two world wars of the first half of the 20 th century .

nato proponents add that a divided nato with a less committed united states could benefit russia's widely acknowledged efforts to undermine nato and the eu .

treaty - based defense and security support from 28 allies , including many of t he world's most advanced militaries , including a nuclear deterrent and missile defense systems based in europe .

despite the criticisms of european defense spending trends , non - u.s. allies still possess significant military capabilities , which they have deployed in support of u.s. security objectives .

an u nrivaled platform for constructing and operating international military coalitions .

through its history , nato has developed an integrated command structure to carry out collective defense and crisis management operations that is unprecedented in terms of size , scale , and complexity .

this includes advancing allied interoperability by designing command and control systems , holding multinational training exercises , and creating policies for standardizing equipment amongst its members .

u.s. military bases in strategically important locations .

u.s. leadership of nato has allowed the united states to station u.s. forces in europe at bases that enable quicker air , sea , and land access to other locations of strategic importance , including the middle east and africa .

economic stability .

the eu , which includes 22 nato allies , is the united states' largest trade and investment partner .

by promoting security and stability in europe , nato helps protect this extensive economic relationship that accounts for 46% of global gdp .

nevertheless , questions about the value of nato to the united states have led some to reassess the benefits and costs of u.s. membership .

critics of nato highlight a number of costs incurred by the united states — both qualitative and quantitative — due to its leadership of nato .

these include the following: loss of autonomy .

whether at the strategic or the operational level , forging agreement with 28 other governments is undoubtedly more difficult than maintaining full national control .

analysts note , for example , that u.s. military planners' negative experience working with european counterparts during the nato intervention in kosovo in 1999 ( european allies' reportedly rejected bombing targets proposed by u.s. commanders ) was a key factor behind the u.s. decision to conduct initial military operations in afghanistan outside the nato command structure .

some have argued that ad hoc coalitions of like - minded allies under unified u.s. command could be more desirable than working within established nato structures .

heightened risks to u.s. forces .

some critics argue that the article 5 commitment to defend a nato ally in the event of an attack could draw the united states into a conflict that it might otherwise avoid .

others note that article 5 commits an ally to respond to an attack by "taking such action as it deems necessary. .

continued european dependence .

some critics contend that european allies' dependence on the u.s. security guarantee limits their incentive to invest in defense capabilities that would make them more capable partners for the united states .

at the same time , president trump's criticisms of nato and individual allies have caused some in europe to question the united states' continued reliance as a security partner .

provoking russia .

some critics of nato argue that nato's post - cold war enlargement to include former members of the warsaw pact and the baltic states represented an unnecessary and counter - productive provocation of russia and ensured long - term rivalry between russia and "the west. .

a negative b udgetary impact .

u.s membership in nato carries with it certain financial commitments , including annual contributions to nato's common fund ( about $570 million in 2018 ) .

the u.s. missile defense capability in europe is also under nato command , and the united states contributes an estimated $800 million annually to additional nato capabilities such as allied ground surveillance and strategic airlift .

although the united states could potentially reduce its military footprint in europe , analysts point out that without a reduction in overall u.s. force structure , the department of defense would still cover the costs of redeployed personnel .

additionally , as noted above , u.s. military bases in europe offer strategic and logistical advantages beyond enabling u.s. commitments to nato .

congress was instrumental in creating nato in 1949 and has played a critical role in shaping u.s. policy toward the alliance ever since .

while many members of congress have criticized specific developments within nato — regarding burdensharing , for example — congress as a whole has consistently demonstrated strong bipartisan support for active u.s. leadership of and support for nato .

this support has manifested itself through an array of congressional action including financial support through the authorization and appropriations processes and legislation enabling nato enlargement and nato military operations and deterrence efforts .

congress also has been at the forefront of the burdensharing debate within nato since the alliance's inception and has often called on u.s .

administrations to do more to secure increased allied commitments to nato .

congressional support for nato has traditionally served to buttress broader u.s. policy toward the alliance .

during the trump administration , however , demonstrations of congressional support for nato have at times been viewed more as an effort to reassure allies about the u.s. commitment to nato after president trump's criticisms of the alliance .

trump administration officials stress that the administration remains strongly committed to nato and to european security ( as articulated in the national security and defense strategies ) , and congress has supported the administration's requests to increase funding for key u.s. defense activities in europe such as the european deterrence initiative .

nevertheless , during the trump administration both chambers of congress have passed legislation expressly reaffirming u.s. support for nato at times when some allies have questioned the president's commitment .

this includes legislation passed by the house in january 2019 ( h.r .

676 , see below ) seeking to limit the president's ability to unilaterally withdraw from nato ; similar legislation has been introduced in the senate ( s.j.res .

4 ) .

some analysts portrayed house speaker nancy pelosi and senate majority leader mitch mcconnell's joint invitation to nato secretary general jens stoltenberg to address a joint session of congress on april 3 , 2019 , in commemoration of nato's 70 th anniversary as an additional demonstration of nato's importance to the congress .

examples of legislation in support of nato passed in congress since 2017 include the following: h.res .

397 ( 115 th congress ) , solemnly reaffirming the commitment of the united states to nato's principle of collective defense as enumerated in article 5 of the north atlantic treaty .

passed by the house by a vote of 423-4 on june 27 , 2017 .

h.r .

5515 / p.l .

115-232 ( 115 th congress ) , john s. mccain national defense authorization act for fy2019 .

after the senate agreed to go to conference with the house on h.r .

5515 , senator reed ( ri ) made a motion to instruct conferees to reaffirm the commitment of the united states to nato .

the senate agreed to the motion by a vote of 97-2 .

h.res .

256 ( 115 th congress ) , expressing support for nato and the countries of central and eastern europe .

passed by the house by unanimous consent on july 11 , 2018 .

h.r .

676 ( 116 th congress ) , nato support act .

passed by the house by a vote of 357-22 on january 22 , 2019 .

the bill prohibits the appropriation or use of funds to withdraw the united states from nato .

although congress has expressed consistent bipartisan support for nato and its cornerstone article 5 mutual defense commitment , congressional hearings on nato in the 115 th and 116 th congresses have reflected disagreement on the impact president trump is having on the alliance .

some in congress argue that president trump's criticism of allied defense spending levels has spurred recent defense spending increases by nato members that were not forthcoming under prior administrations despite long - standing u.s. concern .

they point out that nato secretary general jens stoltenberg has acknowledged that president trump "is having an impact" in securing $41 billion of additional defense spending by european allies and canada since 2016 .

others in congress counter that president trump's admonition of u.s. allies and his questioning of nato's utility has damaged essential relationships and undermined nato's credibility and cohesion .

they contend that doubts about the u.s. commitment to nato could embolden adversaries , including russia , and ultimately weaken the commitment of other allies to the alliance .

some analysts argue that european allies who feel belittled by the u.s. president might be less likely to support future nato operations advocated by the united states .

critics also tend to downplay president trump's role in securing recent defense spending increases by nato allies .

they argue that russian aggression in europe has been a greater factor behind rising defense budgets , particularly in central and eastern europe .

despite disagreement over president trump's impact on the alliance , most members of congress continue to express support for robust u.s. leadership of nato , in particular to address potential threats posed by russia .

many members have called for enhanced nato and u.s. military responses to russian aggression in ukraine and others have advocated stronger european contributions to collective defense measures in europe .

congressional consideration of edi could enable further examination of u.s. force posture in europe and the u.s. capacity and willingness to uphold its collective defense commitments .

deliberations could also highlight longer - standing concerns about european contributions to nato security and defense measures .

in light of these considerations , members of congress could focus on several key questions regarding nato's future .

these might include the following: addressing the strategic value of nato to the united states and the leadership role of the united states within nato ; examining whether the alliance should adopt a new strategic concept that better reflects views of the security threat posed by russia and new and emerging threats in the cyber and hybrid warfare domains ( nato's current strategic concept was adopted in 2010 ) ; examining nato's capacity and willingness to address other security threats to the euro - atlantic region , including from the middle east and north africa , posed by challenges such as terrorism and migration ; examining the possible consequences of member states' failure to meet agreed defense spending targets ; assessing u.s. force posture in europe and the willingness of european allies to contribute to nato deterrence efforts and u.s. defense initiatives in europe such as the ballistic missile defense program and edi ; revisiting the allies' commitment to nato's stated "open door" policy on enlargement , especially with respect to the membership aspirations of georgia and ukraine ; and developing a nato strategy toward china , particularly given u.s. and other allies' concerns about the security ramifications of increased chinese investment in europe .

