through its investigative powers , congress gathers information it considers necessary to oversee the implementation of existing laws or to evaluate whether new laws are necessary .

this "power of inquiry" is essential to the legislative function and derives directly , though implicitly , from the constitution's vesting of legislative power in the congress .

the information that congress seeks , whether to inform itself for lawmaking purposes or to conduct oversight , often lies in the executive branch's possession .

and while executive branch officials comply with most congressional requests for information , "experience has taught that mere requests" can sometimes be "unavailing," and that "information which is volunteered is not always accurate or complete .

 .

 .

. .

the supreme court has therefore determined that "some means of compulsion [is] essential" for congress "to obtain what is needed. .

when congress finds an inquiry blocked by the withholding of information , or where the traditional process of negotiation and accommodation is considered inappropriate or unavailing , a subpoena — either for testimony or documents — may be used to compel compliance with congressional demands .

an individual — whether a member of the public or an executive branch official — has a legal obligation to comply with a duly issued and valid congressional subpoena , unless a valid and overriding privilege or other legal justification permits non - compliance .

the subpoena , however , is only as effective as the means by which it is potentially enforced .

without a process by which congress can coerce compliance or deter non - compliance , the subpoena would be reduced to a formalized request rather than a constitutionally based demand for information .

congress currently employs an ad hoc combination of methods to combat non - compliance with subpoenas .

the two predominant methods rely on the authority and participation of another branch of government .

first , the criminal contempt statute permits a single house of congress to certify a contempt citation to the executive branch for the criminal prosecution of an individual who has willfully refused to comply with a committee subpoena .

once the contempt citation is received , any later prosecution lies within the control of the executive branch .

second , congress may try to enforce a subpoena by seeking a civil judgment declaring that the recipient is legally obligated to comply .

this process of civil enforcement relies on the help of the courts to enforce congressional demands .

congress has only rarely resorted to either criminal contempt or civil enforcement to combat non - compliance with subpoenas .

in most circumstances involving the executive branch , committees can obtain the information they seek through voluntary requests or after issuing ( but not yet seeking enforcement of ) a subpoena .

even where the executive branch is initially reluctant to provide information , congress can use the application of various forms of legislative leverage , along with an informal political process of negotiation and accommodation , to obtain what it needs .

congress exercises substantial power over the executive branch by controlling agency authority , funding , and , in the case of the senate , confirmation of executive officers .

the use or threatened use of these powers in a way that would impose burdens on an agency can encourage compliance with subpoenas ( or make it more likely that requested information will be provided without need to issue a subpoena ) and solidify congress's position when trying to negotiate a compromise during an investigative dispute with the executive branch .

but legislative leverage and the subpoena enforcement mechanisms do not always ensure congressional access to requested information , particularly from the executive branch .

recent controversies could be interpreted to suggest that the existing mechanisms are at times inadequate — at least in the relatively rare instance that enforcement is necessary to respond to a current or former executive branch official who has refused to comply with a subpoena .

four times since 2008 , the house of representatives has held an executive branch official ( or former official ) in criminal contempt of congress for denying a committee information subpoenaed during an ongoing investigation .

in each instance the executive branch determined not to bring the matter before a grand jury .

in three of the four instances , the house also looked to the federal courts for civil enforcement of the outstanding subpoena .

the committees involved eventually obtained much of the information sought through those lawsuits , but only after prolonged litigation , and , in one of the cases , only after a judicial decision that could be viewed as potentially hindering congress's access to executive branch information in the future .

the house's decision to resort to criminal contempt of congress and civil enforcement in these cases was not without controversy , as in each instance the executive official asserted that a constitutional privilege limited congress's right to the information sought .

this report will not address whether the officials in each case invoked a valid privilege or whether the privilege asserted was adequate to justify withholding information from congress .

nor will this report address whether , under the circumstances , it was appropriate for congress to exercise its contempt power .

rather , this report will examine the legal enforcement of congressional subpoenas in a contemporary and historical context and discuss legal issues associated with alternative subpoena - enforcement frameworks that congress may consider to obtain information from the executive branch .

besides leveraging its general legislative powers , congress currently relies on two formal legal mechanisms to enforce subpoenas: criminal contempt of congress and civil enforcement of subpoenas in the federal courts .

historically , the house and senate relied on their own institutional power to not only enforce congressional subpoenas , but also to respond to other actions that either house viewed as obstructing their legislative processes or prerogatives .

indeed , the criminal contempt statute was not enacted until 1857 , and the courts do not appear to have entertained a civil action to enforce a congressional subpoena against an executive official until the watergate era .

for much of american history the house and senate instead used what is known as the inherent contempt power to enforce their investigative powers .

the inherent contempt power is a constitutionally based authority given to each house to unilaterally arrest and detain an individual found to be "obstruct[ing] the performance of the duties of the legislature. .

the power is therefore broader in scope than the criminal contempt statute in that it may be used not only to combat subpoena non - compliance , but also in response to other actions that could be viewed as "obstructing" or threatening either house's exercise of its legislative powers .

in practice , the inherent contempt power has been exercised using a multi - step process .

upon adopting a house or senate resolution authorizing the execution of an arrest warrant by that chamber's sergeant - at - arms , the individual alleged to have engaged in contemptuous conduct is taken into custody and brought before the house or senate .

a hearing or "trial" follows in which allegations are heard and defenses raised .

although generally occurring before the full body , it would appear likely that the contempt hearing could also permissibly take place before a congressional committee who reports its findings to the whole house or senate .

if judged guilty , the house or senate may then direct that the witness be detained or imprisoned until the obstruction to the exercise of legislative power is removed .

although the purpose of the detention may vary , for subpoena non - compliance the use of the power has generally not been punitive .

rather , the goal is to detain the witness until he or she discloses the information sought , but not beyond the end of the congress .

despite its title , "inherent" contempt is more accurately characterized as an implied constitutional power .

the supreme court has repeatedly held that although the contempt power is not specifically granted by the constitution , it is still "an essential and appropriate auxiliary to the legislative function," and thus implied from the general vesting of legislative powers in congress .

the court has viewed the power as one rooted in self - preservation , concluding that the "power to legislate" includes an "implied right of congress to preserve itself" by dealing "with direct obstructions to its legislative duties" through contempt .

the court has also suggested that congress may effectuate this implied power through the necessary and proper clause , which authorizes congress to "make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers .

 .

 .

. .

the 1857 criminal contempt provision , for example , has been viewed as "an act necessary and proper for carrying into execution the powers vested in .

 .

 .

each house. .

to that end , it seems understood that the criminal contempt statute was intended to supplement each house's inherent contempt power , rather than to replace it .

the supreme court has specifically articulated this view and , in fact , gone further to suggest that "congress could not divest itself , or either of its houses , of the essential and inherent power to punish for contempt. .

historical practice also supports this conclusion , as congress continued to use the inherent contempt power after enactment of the criminal contempt statute .

as applied to subpoena enforcement , the supreme court has affirmed the existence of each house's constitutionally based authority to arrest and detain individuals for refusing to comply with congressional demands for information .

the 1927 case of mcgrain v. daugherty may be viewed as the high - water mark of the judiciary's recognition of this power .

mcgrain arose from a senate investigation into the alleged failure of the attorney general to prosecute federal antitrust violations associated with the teapot dome scandal .

as part of that investigation , a subpoena was issued to mallie daugherty , the brother of the attorney general and president of an ohio bank , for relevant testimony .

when daugherty refused to comply , the senate exercised its inherent contempt power and ordered its sergeant - at - arms to take mr. daugherty into custody .

once arrested , daugherty filed a writ of habeas corpus with the local district court , which , upon review , held the house's action unlawful and directed that daugherty be discharged from the sergeant - at - arm's custody .

the supreme court reversed and upheld the house's authority to arrest and detain a witness in order to obtain information for legislative purposes — noting that "[t]he power of inquiry — with process to enforce it — is an essential and appropriate auxiliary to the legislative function. .

in an oft - quoted passage , the court declared: a legislative body cannot legislate wisely or effectively in the absence of information respecting the conditions which the legislation is intended to affect or change ; and where the legislative body does not itself possess the requisite information — which not infrequently is true — recourse must be had to others who do possess it .

experience has taught that mere requests for such information often are unavailing , and also that information which is volunteered is not always accurate or complete ; so some means of compulsion are essential to obtain what is needed .

although broadly conceived , the court has policed the outer confines of the inherent contempt power .

in jurney v maccracken , the court clarified that no act is punishable for contempt "unless it is of a nature to obstruct the performance of the duties of the legislature. .

the court identified two scenarios to which the power to punish would not extend: ( 1 ) where congress lacks a "legislative duty to be performed" or ( 2 ) where "the act complained of is deemed not to be of a character to obstruct the legislative process. .

the first scenario is reflected in kilbourn v. thompson , a case in which the court held that no person may be made subject to the contempt power unless the subject matter of the investigation giving rise to the contempt was within the body's authority .

in kilbourn , the court ordered the release of a witness held under the contempt power after determining that the house had exceeded its authority when it authorized an investigation into a bankrupt private real - estate pool , of which the united states was a creditor pursuing payment in the bankruptcy court .

the court viewed the investigation — and therefore the contempt — as exceeding the house's constitutional authority because congress had "no general power of making inquiry into the private affairs of the citizen. .

instead , the court concluded that by interfering in an issue properly resolved in the bankruptcy courts , the house had "assumed power .

 .

 .

[that was] in its nature clearly judicial. .

the second scenario set forth in maccracken is reflected in marshall v. gordon .

there it was held that a "manifestly ill - tempered" letter written to a committee chair was not related enough to obstructing the powers of the house to constitute a contempt .

the marshall opinion began by establishing that the exercise of the contempt power is appropriate only as "necessary to preserve and carry out the legislative authority given" to congress .

the power could , for example , be used to remedy physical obstruction of the legislative body in the discharge of its duties , or physical assault upon its members for action taken or words spoken in the body , or obstruction of its officers in the performance of their official duties , or the prevention of members from attending so that their duties might be performed , or finally with contumacy in refusing to obey orders to produce documents or give testimony which there was a right to compel .

the court concluded that because the marshall contempt was approved in response to the writing of an "irritating" letter , and "not because of any obstruction to the performance of legislative duty," it was "not intrinsic to the right of the house to preserve the means of discharging its legislative duties" and thus invalid .

despite its potential reach , the inherent contempt power has been described by some observers as cumbersome , inefficient , and "unseemly. .

presumably for these reasons , it does not appear that either house has exercised its inherent contempt power to enforce subpoenas or to remove any other obstruction to the exercise of the legislative power since the 1930s .

even so , the mere threat of arrest and detention by the sergeant - at - arms can be used to encourage compliance with congressional demands .

for example , senator sam ervin , when serving as chairman of the senate select committee on presidential campaign activities , invoked the inherent contempt power several times to encourage compliance with the committee's requests for information during its investigation of the nixon administration .

although the power has long lain dormant , it remains a tool that congress may use to enforce subpoenas .

given the difficulties associated with congress's current approach to subpoena enforcement , the house or senate may find it desirable to consider potential alternative frameworks .

before turning to specific alternatives , it is necessary briefly to establish certain foundational separation - of - powers principles that are generally implicated in any discussion of congress's authority to compel compliance with subpoenas issued to the executive branch .

congress's ability to issue and enforce its own subpoenas is essential to the legislative function and an "indispensable ingredient of lawmaking. .

that said , the prevailing enforcement mechanisms of criminal contempt of congress and civil enforcement , both of which rely on the assistance and participation of the other branches of government , have certain drawbacks that arguably limit their effectiveness in ensuring timely compliance with congressional subpoenas by executive branch officials .

as discussed , alternatives to the current framework are available , but both the constitutional separation of powers and the practical limitations arising from the political nature of congressional executive information access disputes would likely need to be considered in any potential effort at reform .

