south africa is a majority black , multiracial country of nearly 58 million people .

south african president cyril ramaphosa was elected by the parliament in february 2018 after his predecessor , jacob zuma , resigned .

zuma did so under the threat of a parliamentary no confidence vote after defying a decision by leaders of his african national congress ( anc ) removing him as its national presidential nominee .

the anc , the majority party in parliament , replaced zuma with then - vice president ramaphosa , whom the anc elected as its leader in late 2017 .

zuma had faced intense pressure to step down after years of weak economic growth and multiple corruption scandals under his tenure .

ramaphosa is leading a reform agenda to address these challenges .

he is serving out the rest of zuma's term , which ends in may 2019 , and is eligible to run for two additional five - year terms of his own .

local and international expectations of him are high , but he faces diverse fiscal , structural , and political challenges .

u.s. - south africa ties are cordial , based in part on shared democratic values and broad bilateral accord on regional development goals , and the state department describes south africa as a strategic u.s partner .

u.s. high - level bilateral engagement with south africa is not , however , as frequent or as multifaceted as that with some other u.s. strategic country partners .

south africa has also not been the focus of substantial congressional legislative attention in recent years .

in general , as set out below , south africa - related congressional activity has mainly focused on u.s. healthcare assistance , trade issues , and consultations during periodic congressional travel to the country .

given south africa's economic and political influence in africa and on african and developing country positions in multilateral contexts — which often do not align with those of the united states — some members of congress may see a scope for increased congressional and other u.s. engagement with south africa .

there is a large u.s. diplomatic presence in south africa , which has periodically hosted high - level u.s. leadership visits , including two presidential visits by former president barack obama .

south africa has been a top african recipient of u.s. assistance for years .

for over a decade , such assistance has centered primarily on healthcare , notably hiv / aids - related programs implemented under the u.s. president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) , announced by president george w. bush in 2003 .

the united states has also supported south african - implemented development and crisis response activities in other african countries .

in 2010 , the obama administration and the south african government initiated a u.s. - south african strategic partnership .

while it remains in effect , a biennial dialogue that accompanied the partnership was last held in 2015 .

the partnership has focused on cooperation in such areas as health , education , food security , law enforcement , trade , investment , and energy , all long - standing u.s. priorities .

since 2014 , south africa has been the largest u.s. trade partner in africa .

south africa is also a key regional export and investment destination for u.s. firms .

south africa has long enjoyed a significant trade surplus in goods with the united states , but there is a substantial u.s. surplus in trade in services .

in general , while u.s. - south african economic ties are positive , trade has been a source of occasional friction .

differences over foreign policy issues also periodically roil ties .

south african officials are critical of israel's policies toward the palestinians , for instance , and south africa maintains cordial relations with iran , a key u.s. adversary .

there have also been divergences on other issues , as illustrated by a lack of congruence between south african and u.s. votes in the united nations , and regarding responses to the crisis in venezuela .

south africa also opposed the trump administration's decision to withdraw the united states from the u.n .

framework convention on climate change , a shift from the general bilateral policy congruence that prevailed on this issue during the obama administration .

south african officials have periodically made remarks suggesting anti - u.s. biases .

anti - u.s. rhetoric , when it occurs , may be influenced by historic grievances over u.s. policy toward the anc during the era of apartheid — a codified , state - enforced system of racial segregation and socioeconomic and legal discrimination favoring the white minority that was operational until the early 1990s .

during the anti - apartheid struggle , the reagan administration categorized the anc as a terrorist organization and president reagan vetoed the comprehensive anti - apartheid act of 1986 ( p.l .

99-440 ) .

the reagan administration had sought to promote change within the apartheid regime — with which it shared anti - communist goals — by engaging it in a dialogue - based approach dubbed "constructive engagement. .

the trump administration has not pursued any major changes in bilateral ties , but in late 2018 , president trump acted to fill the post of u.s. ambassador to south africa , vacant since late 2016 , by nominating south african - born luxury handbag designer lana marks to the position .

the senate did not act on her nomination by the end of the 115 th congress ; she was renominated in early 2019 .

in early 2017 , president trump spoke to president zuma by telephone on "ways to expand" trade and advance bilateral cooperation in other areas , including counter - terrorism and , according to the south african government , multilateral and african peace and stability issues .

no notable new engagement has since occurred , but in august 2018 , president trump sparked controversy in south africa and among some u.s. observers after posting a tweet on land reform .

it stated that the south african government was "seizing land from white farmers" and referred to "farm seizures and expropriations and the large scale killing of farmers. .

his comments drew criticism and were questioned on factual and other grounds by u.s. and south african commentators and by the south african government .

while the south african government is pursuing efforts to change the constitution to allow for the uncompensated expropriation of land , such expropriation was not underway in 2018 .

congress has long played an active role in u.s. - south african relations .

this was particularly true during the struggle against apartheid , from the late 1960s until the first universal franchise vote in 1994 .

starting in the 1960s , congress sought to induce democratic change by repeatedly imposing conditions and restrictions on u.s. relations with the apartheid regime .

these actions culminated in congress's passage of the sanctions - focused comprehensive anti - apartheid act of 1986 ( p.l .

99-440 ) — an action that overrode president reagan's veto .

congressional attention toward south africa remained strong during its continuing transition over the following decade .

in recent years , congressional engagement with south africa has mainly focused on oversight of foreign aid program — particularly south africa's relative progress in building its capacity to address its hiv / aids crisis and gradually assuming greater responsibility for hiv program financing and implementation , key goals under pepfar .

efforts to bolster trade and investment ties with south africa , as with africa generally , have also drawn attention in recent congresses .

in 2015 and 2016 , congressional action , including congress's mandating of a special review of south africa's eligibility for u.s. trade benefits , helped to resolve a poultry and meat - related trade dispute .

several members also sought to reverse the trump administration's 2018 application of steel and aluminum tariffs to south africa , which had raised concerns in the country .

no south africa - centered bills have been introduced in the 116 th congress , and none were introduced in the 115 th congress , apart from three commemorative resolutions .

members periodically travel to south africa to foster such aims as improved bilateral and u.s. - africa ties and enhanced trade and investment relations .

south africa is influential on the african continent due to its investment and political engagement in many african countries and its active role and leadership within the inter - governmental african union ( au ) .

it also has one of the largest , most diverse and developed economies , and has made substantial progress in spurring post - apartheid socioeconomic transformation .

for summary data on the country , see figure 2 .

many negative socioeconomic effects of apartheid persist , however .

apartheid ended after a tumultuous negotiated transition , between 1990 and 1994 , when south africa introduced a system of universal suffrage and multi - party democracy — after a decades - long struggle by the anc and other anti - apartheid groups .

following the release of long - imprisoned anc leader nelson mandela and the anc's legalization in 1990 , political dialogue led to an interim constitution in 1993 and elections in 1994 , in which mandela was elected president .

further post - electoral negotiations led to the adoption in 1996 of a new constitution and the creation of the truth and reconciliation commission ( trc , in operation until 2002 ) .

the trc documented crimes and human rights abuses by the apartheid regime and anti - apartheid forces from 1960 until 1994 , and oversaw processes of restorative justice , accountability , and assistance for victims of such abuses .

it has since served as a model for similar efforts around the world .

mandela died in 2013 .

the anc currently holds 249 of 400 national assembly seats .

it has held a parliamentary majority since the first post - apartheid elections in 1994 and , since the national assembly elects the president , also controlled the executive branch .

successive anc - led governments have sought to redress the effects of apartheid , notably through efforts to improve the social welfare of the black majority and by promoting a pan - racial , multiethnic national identity .

while racial relations have improved , divisions remain ; references to race in politics and social media sometimes spur heated debate , and racially motivated criminal acts periodically occur .

despite diverse investments and policies aimed at overcoming the negative effects of apartheid , many of its most damaging socioeconomic effects endure , posing persistent , profound challenges for development and governance .

among these are high levels of poverty , social inequality , and unemployment , as well as unequal access to education , municipal services , and other resources .

such problems disproportionately affect the black population .

racial disparities have gradually declined , but most black south africans live in poverty and their average per capita incomes are roughly one - sixth as large as those of the historically privileged white minority .

income and consumption distribution are notably unequal .

recent measures suggest the wealthiest top 10% and top 20% in south africa enjoy the highest share of income of any country .

south africa's gini coefficient — a measure of income or consumption inequality — is consistently among the highest globally , and is often the highest .

there are also significant regional , rural - urban , and intra - racial socioeconomic disparities .

large segments of the poor majority lack access to decent housing and adequate infrastructure services ( eg , electricity and water ) , especially in rural areas and in the vast , high - density informal settlements surrounding most cities .

known as townships , such settlements are populated mostly by poor black and mixed race "coloured" inhabitants .

lack of legal property ownership sometimes subjects township dwellers to municipal squatter eviction and slum clearance operations .

there is also extreme racial disparity in access to land , despite implementation of land redistribution and restitution initiatives since 1994 .

under such programs , the state has purchased large amounts of land intended to be transferred to populations that had limited or no ability to own land under the apartheid system — primarily those of black , "coloured" or indian descent .

while , black ownership and other access to land has risen markedly in some provinces since 1994 , redistribution and restitution processes have been slow and resulted in les extensive transfers than initially projected .

as a result , the small minority white population continues to own over 70% of land nationally .

this has spurred growing demands for uncompensated state expropriation of private land and pushed the anc to pursue an ongoing effort to amend the constitution to permit such expropriation .

south africa also faces a range of other socioeconomic challenges .

labor strikes and unrest are common , particularly in the mining sector .

rates of violent crime — notably murder and rape , along with gender violence more broadly , and gun crime — are high .

the causes are diverse .

south africa also faces criminal justice system capacity challenges .

although the country has a relatively well - resourced national police force , there are periodic reports of vigilante mob justice , and police sometimes use heavy - handed , abusive tactics to respond to crime and public unrest .

several police leaders have been implicated in professional misconduct inquiries or corruption .

south africa also faces broad challenges to social cohesion linked to grievances and fractures stemming from socioeconomic inequality and marginalization , social biases , and criminal activity .

examples include periodic xenophobic mob attacks on african immigrants and their businesses , crime - motivated attacks on white farmers , and frequent de facto residential racial and socioeconomic segregation .

while many of the poor live in townships , the wealthy , including many whites , often live in gated , highly secured communities .

another key challenge is south africa's high hiv prevalence .

statistics south africa , a state agency , estimates that 18.99% of adults were hiv - positive in 2018 , up from 2017 ( 18.88% ) .

despite this moderate increase , which is partially attributable to increased survival rates due to improved access to anti - retroviral treatment , there has been a steady decline in the annual growth rate of hiv prevalence ( total cases ) and incidence ( new infections ) .

national efforts to counter hiv have received considerable international support , notably under u.s. pepfar programs .

citizens' expectations and their demands for rapid socioeconomic transformation have exceeded what the south african state has been able to provide , due to fiscal , technical , and governance shortfalls .

despite large investments in housing , services , infrastructure , and state technical capacities , public goods and services delivery rates and quality have often been inadequate .

this has spurred frequent , sometimes violent demonstrations .

while known as service protests , they center on many issues , including local public corruption and cronyism , and can have political repercussions .

in april 2018 , president ramaphosa cut short an overseas trip to address a spate of interrelated unrest that featured service delivery protests , attacks on foreigners , anger over alleged corruption by the affected province's then - premier ( governor ) , and clashes between local rival anc members .

in 2015 and 2016 , south africa also experienced mass student protests , some violent , over university education costs and alleged institutional racism in higher education .

the current government is implementing a pledge , made just before the end of the zuma administration , to fund free higher education for the poor and freeze certain other fees .

despite such challenges , and indications of an increased politicization of the state bureaucracy under zuma , many national state agencies ( eg , the central bank , the statistical agency , the courts , some ministries , and the treasury ) possess substantial institutional and technical capacity .

south africa ranked second globally on the international budget partnership's 2017 open budget index , a measure of public budget transparency .

while some state - owned enterprises ( soe ) are struggling to recover from reported mismanagement and malfeasance under zuma , these entities manage large , sophisticated national transport , telecommunication , energy , and other infrastructure systems .

the state also administers a large welfare system that supported about 17.6 million grants as of september 2018 and had a 2017 / 2018 annual budget of about $10.5 billion .

it is viewed by many observers as a key anti - poverty tool , albeit a costly one that is expected to grow in size and expense .

despite its role in helping to reduce extreme poverty , the system's administration has been the subject of considerable controversy in recent years .

the anc party is ideologically leftist , but in practice it has melded pragmatic support for private sector - led growth with state - centric economic planning under what it terms the "developmental state" model .

the anc's political credibility is largely founded on its leading role in the anti - apartheid struggle and its efforts to end south africa's deep - rooted , enduring social inequalities .

it has struggled to build on this legacy , however , amid the country's persistent challenges .

increasingly , voters appear to be judging the anc on its current performance , and it faces a growing number of opposition parties .

nevertheless , notwithstanding a marginal loss of electoral strength in recent elections , it has maintained its parliamentary dominance .

rivalry within the anc at the provincial and local levels — often regarding appointments to local state bodies and the selection of slates of delegates to national party decision - making bodies — is often fierce , and numerous cases has led to political assassinations .

national assembly elections take place under a party - list proportional representation system , in which voters select a party and each party allocates its share of elected seats according to an internal party list .

as a result , internal anc politics and leadership selections play a key role in national politics .

the most important anc post is that of party president , since the anc usually nominates its party leader to serve as national president .

the congress of south african trade unions ( cosatu ) and the south african communist party ( sacp ) also exert influence within the anc .

they do so through a compact called the tripartite alliance , under which the anc appoints top members of cosatu and the sacp to party leadership and state posts , and the latter organizations do not independently contest elections .

the alliance weakened during zuma's tenure due to sacp and cosatu criticism of zuma , intra - cosatu splits linked to the emergence of new unions , and discontent within the anc's labor constituency .

the democratic alliance ( da ) is the second - largest party in parliament , with 89 of 400 national assembly seats .

the da has its origins in various historical liberal - leaning party coalitions .

for many years , its leaders were predominantly white , but it has built an increasingly strong base among blacks .

now led by a charismatic young black leader , mmusi maimane , the da has often confronted the anc in parliament , at times in league with the economic freedom fighters ( eff ) , a populist hard - left party centered on black empowerment .

the eff was formed in 2013 by a former dissident anc youth league leader , julius malema , and won 25 seats in the 2014 elections , becoming the third - largest party .

malema , a political firebrand , is a former key zuma supporter who later broke with zuma .

the anc expelled him in 2012 , and he became one of zuma's most vocal critics , notably regarding corruption — though he and his eff co - founder have themselves faced corruption allegations .

the eff styles itself as a workers' party and draws its support from socioeconomically marginalized groups ( eg , jobless youth , low - wage workers , and poor communities ) .

the eff operates as a disruptive force , both in its radical policy proposals and through its often - boisterous obstruction of parliamentary proceedings .

the inkatha freedom party , with origins in zulu - dominated kwazulu - natal province , was a fierce anc rival during the end of the anti - apartheid period .

it is now a self - described centrist party and holds 10 seats , making it south africa's fourth largest political party .

the remaining 27 seats are distributed among nine small parties .

a key target campaign demographic for all parties is the "born free" generation , those born in 1994 or later , who make up roughly 47% of the population and about 14% of the eligible electorate .

they share discontent over corruption , public services , and poverty with their older counterparts , and suffer even higher unemployment rates , but they are reportedly less engaged in formal politics and vote at lower rates than older citizens .

south africa has the most diversified , industrialized economy in africa .

it also has one of the top - five - highest gdps per capita ( $6,560 in 2018 ) in sub - saharan africa , and is one of very few upper - middle - income countries in the region .

as earlier noted , however , income distribution is highly unequal .

south africa is a top producer of mined raw and processed commodities ( eg , platinum , steel , gold , diamonds , and coal ) .

other major industries include automobile , chemical , textile , and food manufacturing .

these sectors , part of an overall industrial base that contributed just under 26% of gdp in 2017 , are important sources of jobs .

there are also well - developed tourism , financial , energy , legal , communications , and transport sectors , which are part of an overall services sector that contributed nearly 62% of gdp in 2017 .

recent gdp trends are provided in table 2 .

south africa regularly hosts large global development and business events , and south african firms are active across africa , particularly in the mobile phone , retail , and financial sectors .

some also operate internationally , and the johannesburg stock exchange is among the 20 largest global bourses .

south africa is also a famed wine producer and exports diverse agricultural products , but only about 10% of its land is arable and agriculture makes up less than 3% of gdp .

despite its substantial economic strength , south africa's annual gdp growth , which stood in the 5% range in the mid - 2000s , has slowed .

it dropped from almost 2.5% in 2013 to under 0.6% in 2016 .

despite a rise to 1.3% in 2017 , the international monetary fund ( imf ) projects a decline to 0.8% in 2018 .

while the nominal value of gdp has slowly risen in constant local rand terms since 2010 , exchange rate volatility has caused the value of gdp in dollars to fluctuate greatly , which has major implications for the country's terms of trade , international debt servicing , and integration into global manufacturing chains .

in dollar terms , gdp fell from a peak of $417 billion in 2011 to $296 billion in 2016 , as the rand weakened sharply against the dollar , before rising to $349 billion in 2017 , as the rand appreciated .

global factors contributing to low growth in recent years have included weak investor confidence — attributed to uncertain economic policy trends and alleged poor governance under zuma — and periods of weak prices and sluggish global demand for key commodity exports , especially to china .

while weak commodity prices may hurt south african export earnings , they can also reduce the cost of raw material imports used by many local producers , including exporters .

south africa has a generally open foreign direct investment ( fdi ) regime , although investors face high taxes , currency exchange volatility , substantial regulatory burdens , large locally entrenched firms , and black economic empowerment policy compliance costs ( see below ) .

moreover , some foreign investors have expressed discontent over the enactment in late 2015 of a law known as the protection of investment act , which removed most special fdi rights and requires foreign investors to settle most disputes through the south african legal system .

this has raised concern about potentially unequal treatment under the law and the possibility of expropriation , which south african law permits in some narrow instances .

fdi flows into south africa have dropped sharply in recent years .

they totaled $1.3 billion in 2017 , down from $8.3 billion in 2013 and a peak of $9.2 billion in 2008 .

meanwhile , outward flows have risen sharply , and were valued at more than five times the worth of inflows in 2017 .

see table 3 for information on summary trade and fdi trends .

the auto industry has been an important source of job - intensive fdi ; south africa has long hosted ford plants , and other automakers ( eg , toyota , bmw , and nissan ) have announced significant manufacturing capacity investments in recent years .

rail locomotive manufacturing has also attracted fdi .

the world economic forum ( wef ) ranked south africa as the second most competitive economy in 2018 in sub - saharan africa ( after mauritius ) , but assesses it as 67 th globally .

the wef cites as economic strengths south africa's large market size , relatively good infrastructure , advanced financial system , and innovation capability , but views its research and development capacities as inadequate .

the country's world bank doing business 2018 rankings ( 82 nd globally and fourth in africa ) are middling , and its ranking has dropped over the past decade .

the survey also suggests that ease of doing business varies within sub - regions of the country , and that national improvements are possible .

south africa's private sector is relatively dynamic , although firms face a highly unionized labor force , rigid labor laws and , in some industries , sector - wide wage and working condition agreements negotiated between large firms and unions .

such factors arguably tend to protect incumbent jobholders , reduce labor market flexibility , and limit formal sector economic opportunities for the unemployed and poor — thus contributing to the country's chronically high unemployment rates .

south africa has long had a minimum wage in select sectors , but has only recently enacted a general minimum wage law .

sectoral labor agreements have mixed outcomes .

they can help firms and industry groups to maintain predictable and stable labor costs and work rules , but often favor the incumbent firms and unions who negotiate them .

oligopolies in some sectors also hinder competition and spur high prices for some locally produced goods .

there are also skill and geographical mismatches between labor demand and supplies , and low skill levels in some segments of the labor force .

this is , in part , an enduring legacy of population and economic controls and discriminatory education and training patterns under apartheid .

chronically high unemployment may also suggest that the labor pool is under - utilized , whether due to skills deficits or a lack of jobs , which may undercut income earning , spending , demand , and other economic growth potentials .

information and communication ( ict ) adoption rates are low and uneven , and education quality ranks poorly in international comparisons , despite large investments in the sector , which has negative impacts on workforce capabilities .

key tools for reversing structural racial disparities are black economic empowerment ( bee ) policies , which seek to promote racial equality and economic inclusion using market - based incentives .

as a condition of obtaining public contracts , private firms must also comply with bee requirements , in particular a scorecard - based system ranking firms by factors such as racial inclusiveness in ownership and management , investment in skills development for historically disadvantage persons , and prioritization of commercial ties with other bee - compliant firms .

bee policies can impose compliance costs on firms and limit hiring choices , and have been criticized in some instances for favoring the interests of middle - and upper - income blacks .

the private sector also faces state competition , as state - owned firms enjoy regulatory preferences in some sectors , even though their performance has often been poor .

according to the imf , soes play a major role , often with limited competition , in providing key products / services , such as power , telecommunications , and transportation ( eg , ports , airways ) .

their performance thus affects not only the public finances and the borrowing costs of the whole economy , but also economic growth and job creation through the cost of important inputs for a wide range of businesses and households .

[…g]enerally , there is a need to allow private firms to compete on a more equal footing with large soes .

south africa's sovereign credit ratings are low and have fallen sharply in recent years .

rising public deficits and debt are also a challenge .

other domestic factors hindering growth include social service delivery challenges and unmet infrastructure needs , which undercut productivity potentials and hurt south africa's attractiveness as an investment destination .

electricity generation deficits and plant maintenance delays have led to periodic rolling power blackouts ( see below ) .

the country also has faced several recent droughts , including one that resulted in extreme water shortages in cape town , a global tourist destination with a population of 3.7 million people .

continuing water shortage challenges are likely .

ramaphosa has been spearheading an initiative to attract $100 billion worth of new investment over five years .

as of october 2018 , the government had solicited $55 billion in fdi commitments .

local and foreign firms reportedly pledged $20 billion worth of cross - sectoral investments during the government - led south africa investment conference in late october 2018 .

this augmented more than $35 billion in prior investment commitments , mostly from china , saudi arabia , the uk , and the united arab emirates .

the government is also continuing a range of efforts to reduce unemployment , poverty , and socioeconomic inequality , to improve education and healthcare , and to unite a geographically and racially divided society .

such actions are guided by the 20-year national development plan ( ndp ) .

crafted by a ramaphosa - headed commission and issued under zuma , it is supplemented by multiple shorter - term , sector - specific plans .

the ndp emphasizes investments in social services and state operational capacities .

it fosters efforts to boost employment and incomes , including labor - intensive growth strategies and state investment in large - scale infrastructure , especially in the transport , communications , and power sectors .

ndp implementation has been hampered by the poor governance and policy inconsistency under zuma , the intractability and extensive scope of the country's challenges , and financing limitations .

south africa has been the largest u.s. trade partner in africa since 2014 , though its global significance is relatively moderate .

in 2017 , it was the 35 th - largest source of u.s. imports and the 43 rd - largest u.s. export destination globally .

bilateral trade in goods in 2017 totaled $13 billion ( $5 billion in u.s. exports and $8 billion in u.s. imports ) , down from a peak of $16.7 billion in 2011 , while trade in services in 2017 totaled $4.8 billion ( $2.9 billion in u.s. exports and $1.9 billion in u.s. imports ) .

in 2017 , the stock of u.s. fdi in south africa stood at $7.34 billion , and centered on manufacturing ( 51% ) , notably of chemicals and food , professional and technical services ( 9.6% ) , and wholesale trade ( 8% ) .

south african fdi stock in the united states totaled $4.1 billion .

a u.s. - south africa trade and investment framework agreement ( tifa ) signed in 2012 facilitates bilateral trade and investment dialogues , and there is a bilateral tax enforcement and cooperation treaty , and a double taxation treaty .

south africa also is eligible for duty - free benefits under the african growth and opportunity act ( agoa , p.l .

106-200 , title i , reauthorized in 2015 for 10 years under p.l .

114-27 ) , but not for special agoa apparel benefits .

its $2.9 billion in agoa exports to the united states in 2017 ( 21% of all such exports ) made it the largest non - oil - focused agoa beneficiary and the second largest overall , although the value of its exports under agoa has fallen since peaking at $3.6 billion in 2013 .

an april 2018 u.s. international trade commission study , u.s. trade and investment with sub - saharan africa: recent developments , found potential for significantly greater bilateral trade in a range of goods .

during the 2015 agoa reauthorization debate , various stakeholders raised questions about south africa's continued agoa eligibility .

two issues drew particular attention .

the first was concern over south africa's reciprocal trade agreements with other advanced economies , in particular the european union ( eu ) .

some in the u.s. private sector argued that the agreement places them at a competitive disadvantage vis - à - vis eu firms , as it gives the latter preferential tariff treatment in south africa .

 ( in contrast , agoa gives south african firms preferential access to u.s. markets , but does not give u.s. firms reciprocal access to south african markets. ) .

agoa eligibility criteria include rules on reciprocal third - party agreements , but no country has lost its eligibility under these criteria .

the second issue was concern over the large size and advanced character of south africa's economy — particularly relative to its african peers — which some have argued make it a u.s. competitor in some sectors .

south africa is the only country to make significant use of agoa in the export of advanced manufactured products , in particular motor vehicles and related parts .

in 2017 , south africa's auto exports under agoa were worth $1.2 billion and comprised over a fourth of all african non - oil exports under the program .

some stakeholders cited these two issues to argue that stricter income requirements were needed to ensure that agoa benefits target the least - developed countries in africa , and to encourage south africa to negotiate a reciprocal u.s. trade agreement .

others contended , conversely , that south africa's exports of high - value items show that agoa preferences were working as intended , by helping to improve south africa's economic development .

they also asserted that removing south africa from agoa might undermine intra - regional trade , since south africa is a key trade partner of many other african countries , which agoa is designed to encourage .

while no significant changes were made affecting south africa's agoa eligibility , these issues may continue to draw congressional scrutiny .

south african import restrictions on certain agriculture products also temporarily threatened its agoa eligibility — both before and after the 2015 agoa reauthorization — and led to a bilateral trade dispute .

it focused on south african anti - dumping duties and other restrictions on imports of certain u.s. poultry , pork , and beef products .

the dispute was resolved in 2016 , when south africa lifted these restrictions following intensive bilateral engagement initiated under an out - of - cycle 2015 review of south africa's eligibility .

the trump administration's use of section 232 of the trade expansion act of 1962 ( p.l .

87-794 , as amended ) to impose tariffs have roiled bilateral trade ties .

in march 2018 , the trump administration imposed additional u.s. tariffs on steel ( 25% ) and aluminum ( 10% ) under section 232 .

in 2017 , u.s. imports from south africa of affected steel and aluminum products were worth $279 million and $340 million , respectively .

in september , several members of congress requested an exemption from these tariffs for south africa , which had unsuccessfully sought their removal .

in october , the south african government reported that the trump administration had granted section 232 duty exclusions for u.s. imports of 161 aluminum and 36 steel products , largely allaying south african concerns .

the action came in response to u.s. firms' requests for these exclusions , which are for products not produced in the united states in sufficient amounts or of satisfactory quality , according to the commerce department .

an additional u.s .

section 232 investigation on autos and auto parts could result in the imposition of additional u.s. tariffs on such products — reportedly up to 25% — including from south africa .

in july 2018 , a south african government representative argued against such tariffs on a variety of grounds at a u.s. commerce department hearing on the matter .

on february 17 , 2019 , the commerce department submitted a report on its investigation to president trump .

he has 90 days to act on recommendations in the report , which were not publicly disclosed .

other issues with implications for south africa's agoa participation include intellectual property concerns set out by the u.s. - based international intellectual property alliance ( iipa ) , regarding south africa's 2017 copyright amendment bill .

the iipa testified at an august 2018 u.s. trade representative annual agoa eligibility review hearing that the bill would weaken ipr holders' rights , make south africa noncompliant with agoa and other international ipr agreements , impose burdens on ipr holders , and disincentivize intellectual property development .

south africa's government , academics , and the u.s. and europe - based computer and communications industry association disputed such claims .

the national assembly passed the bill in late 2018 and it now must be considered by the upper house .

south africa's move to expropriate land without compensation could also potentially affect south africa's agoa eligibility , although there are no overt signs of such a shift .

a range of other issues with implications for u.s. investment in south africa are addressed in the state department's annual investment climate statements publication .

u.s. - south africa bilateral relations are generally friendly , although there are periodic differences over foreign policy issues .

while there is often broad u.s. - south african accord on selected multilateral issues ( eg , nuclear proliferation ) , african regional development goals and , in some cases , responses to political or military crises in the region , in multilateral fora , south africa backs developing country positions that are at times inconsistent with stated u.s. interests .

south africa has also criticized some u.s. - backed international interventions ( eg , in iraq and libya ) and taken stances toward cuba , the palestinian cause , and iran that are at odds with u.s. positions .

it has also forged increasingly close economic ties with china .

such ties may be viewed negatively by the trump administration ; it has alleged that chinese activities in africa are "corrupting elites , dominating extractive industries , and locking countries into unsustainable and opaque debts and commitments. .

south africa experienced a rise in alleged corruption and deterioration in economic performance during the zuma administration .

since taking office in early 2018 , president ramaphosa has taken steps to reverse these trends .

multiple inquiries into public sector corruption and malfeasance are under way , along with efforts to reform soes .

the ultimate success of these efforts will depend on the degree to which public sector agency performance improves , guilty parties are successfully prosecuted , and management and regulatory reforms are implemented .

such efforts are likely to be politically challenging for ramaphosa , since they may threaten the influence of some top anc party members and state office holders with ties to former president zuma , who retains clout within the anc .

ramaphosa also faces pressure from the political left on issues such as land reform and planned expropriation of land .

he will have to balance such pressures with the demands of private property owners and investors .

his relative power to pursue policy and institutional reforms will also depend , in part , on the success of the anc in the may 2019 elections and his degree of influence within the party .

reversing a long - anemic pattern of growth will also likely prove challenging .

ramaphosa has made some progress , eliciting substantial investment pledges , initiating a youth employment scheme , and pushing reforms that may allow soes to contribute substantially more to economic growth .

many of the reasons for the weak growth , however , are structural , long - term phenomena that are not amenable to quick fixes .

nevertheless , south africa's economy is large and diversified , and may have the capacity to expand moderately in the coming years , notably if the large pool of unemployed can be better integrated into the economy .

if south africa can make positive economic progress , there is potential for increased international trade , including trade with the united states — although additional u.s. trade restrictions , particularly potential section 232 tariffs on autos and parts , could hinder trade growth .

because of its market size and economic position , south africa is well placed to grow as a key u.s. investment and export destination in africa .

this may also be aided by ongoing u.s. government and private sector efforts to expand trade and investment ties — including by tapping opportunities created by south africa's long - term infrastructure investment efforts .

there is also possible scope for greater u.s. - african cooperation regarding development in south africa and the sub - continent more broadly , as demonstrated by south africa's role as a strategic partner under the feed the future and tap programs .

usaid's power africa program is based in south africa and could potentially play a role in helping south africa to address its electrical sector challenges .

south africa could also provide a source of partnership and potential investment targets for the emergent u.s. international development finance corporation .

while there have been occasional strains in u.s. - south african relations on some international issues , south africa's two - year membership on the u.n. security council could also provide a springboard for greater bilateral cooperation on international matters of interest to both countries .

