congress has long deliberated on drinking water quality and infrastructure , which have been brought to the forefront of national attention by several events .

such events include the detection of elevated lead levels in tap water in flint , mi , and other cities ; hurricanes and other natural disasters that damaged or destroyed community drinking water infrastructure ; and local source water contamination events ( eg , chemical spills and algal blooms ) .

representatives of state drinking water agencies , private sector engineers , and others report that much of the nation's drinking water infrastructure is deteriorating , threatening public health , and increasing operations and maintenance costs .

in 2012 , the american water works association ( awwa ) reported that much of the drinking water infrastructure ( more than 1 million miles of buried pipe ) was constructed in the 19 th and 20 th centuries and is nearing the end of its useful life .

while disagreement exists over the scope and costs of improvement and replacements , estimates of the funding needs are substantial .

in march 2018 , the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) issued its sixth drinking water infrastructure needs survey and assessment .

in this survey , epa estimated that public water systems would need to invest $472.60 billion for drinking water capital improvements over the next 20 years to achieve compliance and ensure the provision of safe drinking water .

although all projects identified in the needs survey would promote health objectives , epa reported that 12% of the 20-year estimated need was directly attributed to statutory compliance .

the majority ( 88% ) of needs are for ongoing investments , such as repair of aging drinking water infrastructure .

in 2012 , awwa conducted a broader drinking water infrastructure survey that reported that the costs to replace aging drinking water infrastructure and expand water service to growing populations will increase to more than $1 trillion over the next 25 years .

communities nationwide may face financial challenges as they manage the need to repair or replace aging drinking water infrastructure .

as of early 2019 , epa's database indicated that some 50,000 public water systems in the united states regularly serve 25 or more of the same individuals .

about 80% of these community water systems are relatively small , serving 3,300 or fewer people .

these small systems have a narrow rate base from which to finance drinking water infrastructure improvements .

in addition , older cities may face declining populations and declining utility revenues from which utilities can finance drinking water infrastructure repairs .

in 2012 , awwa estimated that the costs to address aging drinking water infrastructure may as much as triple household water bills .

due to these financing concerns , communities may be challenged to protect water supplies , respond to contamination incidents , and afford projects to repair or replace aging drinking water infrastructure .

congress deliberated on several of these drinking water infrastructure issues while developing america's water infrastructure act of 2018 ( awia ; p.l .

115-270 ) , enacted on october 23 , 2018 .

title i of the act , "the water resource development act of 2018," authorizes a wide variety of water resource and infrastructure policies , programs , and projects for the u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) .

water resource development act bills are often considered on a biennial schedule and have primarily addressed usace projects .

title iii of awia primarily addresses hydropower activities of the federal energy regulatory commission .

title ii and iv of the act include provisions that address epa water infrastructure programs and other authorities .

this report analyzes the drinking water provisions of title ii and iv rather than providing a comprehensive summary of awia .

title ii constitutes the most comprehensive reauthorization of the safe drinking water act ( sdwa ) since 1996 .

it amends sdwa to promote compliance with sdwa requirements , reauthorize appropriations for the drinking water state revolving fund ( dwsrf ) program , expand program eligibilities , increase emphasis on assisting disadvantaged communities , make sdwa compliance more affordable , and improve consumer confidence in public water supplies .

title ii also authorizes new grant programs to reduce lead contamination in school drinking water , assist small and disadvantaged communities , and develop public water system resilience , among other purposes .

title iv addresses several other water quality and infrastructure issues by authorizing and revising activities and programs for epa , the bureau of reclamation within the department of the interior , and other federal agencies .

title iv of awia extends , authorizes , and amends drinking - water - related activities and provisions administered by epa .

specifically , these provisions authorize a water efficiency program and activities and revise the water infrastructure finance innovation act ( wifia ) program , which provides credit assistance for water infrastructure projects .

title iv of awia also includes several amendments to the clean water act to address stormwater by expanding a municipal sewer overflow grant programs to include stormwater management projects , reauthorizing appropriations for said municipal sewer overflow grant program , and directing epa to establish a task force for stormwater management .

the first section of this report provides select legislative background on awia .

the second section describes the reauthorizations , revisions , and additions to sdwa .

the third section discusses a provision in awia that addresses requirements that apply to federal financial assistance for drinking water improvements .

the fourth section describes a provision in awia that addresses assistance for drinking water repairs in disaster areas .

the fifth section includes the revisions in awia to federal water infrastructure financial assistance programs .

the final section provides a discussion of the provisions of awia that address water efficiency .

in addition , the appendices contain tables of plans , reports , and regulations required by awia ; cross - references of the awia provisions , provisions in sdwa , and the u.s. code citations ; and summaries of the other epa - related provisions of awia that are not discussed in this report , such as the stormwater provisions in title iv .

several provisions of awia title ii , "drinking water system improvement," amend sdwa to revise existing drinking water programs , reauthorize appropriations , and establish new drinking water infrastructure grant programs .

sdwa authorizes the regulation of contaminants in public water systems .

enacted in 1974 , the act was last broadly amended in 1996 .

the act is implemented through programs that ( 1 ) establish national primary drinking water regulations and monitoring and reporting requirements for contaminants present in water delivered by public water systems , ( 2 ) promote water system compliance through technical and financial assistance and capacity development programs , and ( 3 ) address public water systems' preparedness for emergencies .

the act established a federal - state partnership in which states , tribes , and territories may be delegated primary implementation and enforcement authority ( i.e. , primacy ) for the drinking water program .

one key component of sdwa is the requirement that epa establish national primary drinking water regulations for contaminants that may adversely affect human health and are likely to be present in public water supplies .

epa has issued regulations for more than 90 contaminants .

these include numerical standards or treatment techniques for drinking water disinfectants and their byproducts , microorganisms , radionuclides , organic chemicals , and inorganic chemicals .

the sdwa amendments of 1996 ( p.l .

104-182 ) reauthorized appropriations for most sdwa programs through fy2003 .

although the authority has expired for most appropriations , congress has continued to appropriate funds for the ongoing sdwa programs .

even though the authorization of appropriations may expire , program authority ( i.e. , an agency's "enabling" authority ) does not expire unless there is a "sunset" date for that authority or if congress repeals it through subsequent laws .

awia section 2019 requires gao to report to congress on any duplicative or substantially similar requirements of state and local environmental law to federal cross - cutting requirements .

in 2015 , gao concluded that the existing federal financing mechanisms to rehabilitate or replace aging water infrastructure are complex and that small water systems lack the technical expertise to apply for federal financial assistance .

regarding federal cross - cutting requirements , gao reported that water systems often face duplicative state requirements when applying for financial assistance for drinking water infrastructure .

representatives of public water systems have testified that compliance with federal cross - cutting requirements is burdensome , as dwsrf projects must often comply with similar state and local requirements .

section 2020 of awia authorizes the appropriation of $100.0 million , available for 24 months , for grants to certain public water systems in specified disaster areas .

section 2020 of awia allows additional subsidization ( eg , grants , forgiveness of loan principal , negative interest rate loans , or zero - interest rate loans ) for eligible public water systems regardless of whether they meet the statutory designation of disadvantaged .

section 2020 ( a ) ( 3 ) defines eligible public water system as a water system that ( 1 ) serves an area for which the president declared a major disaster ( after january 1 , 2017 ) and provided disaster assistance or ( 2 ) is capable of extending drinking water services to underserved areas .

projects eligible for these subsidies are those that restore or increase compliance with national drinking water standards , including expanding drinking water service to underserved areas .

to access this subsidization , this section requires states to submit a supplemental intended use plan with relevant information on the public water system project , the intended use of the funds , estimated cost , and projected start date .

this section also exempts puerto rico from the 20% state - match for any funds received under this section , which is generally required by sdwa section 1452 ( e ) .

the water resources reform and development act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-121 ) included wifia , which authorized both epa and usace to administer a five - year pilot program to help finance a broad range of water infrastructure projects .

the epa - administered wifia program provides credit assistance ( eg , direct loans ) to eligible entities for different types of drinking water and wastewater infrastructure projects ( eg , desalination or water recharge ) .

eligible projects for epa - administered assistance from wifia include projects that are eligible for the clean water state revolving fund ( cwsrf ) and the dwsrf .

however unlike the dwsrf , wifia - financed projects generally need not be associated with sdwa compliance or public health goals .

qualifying projects for wifia assistance must generally cost $20.0 million or more .

in an effort to encourage nonfederal and private sector financing , wifia assistance generally cannot exceed 49% of project costs .

in fy2017 , congress appropriated $25.0 million to cover epa's subsidy costs of wifia loans and $5.0 million for administrative purposes .

for fy2018 , congress provided $63.0 million for the epa - administered wifia program in the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) .

of this amount , congress directed $55.0 million for wifia projects , which epa estimated would be leveraged into $5.50 billion of credit assistance .

epa began issuing loans in 2018 .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2019 , included $60.0 million to cover epa's subsidy costs of wifia loans and $8.0 million to support program administration .

these appropriations are available until expended .

initiated by epa in 2006 , watersense is a voluntary labeling program that identifies and promotes water - efficient products , buildings , and services .

prior to the enactment of awia , watersense was not explicitly authorized in law .

it is similar to the department of energy's ( doe ) energystar voluntary labeling program to promote energy efficiency .

section 4306 of awia amends the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) to establish the watersense program at epa .

section 4306 authorizes epa to establish specifications that products and services must meet to earn a watersense label , some of which differ from the original program .

awia stipulates that products and services earning the watersense label must reduce water use , decrease strain on water systems , conserve energy , and preserve water resources .

section 4306 requires epa to set detailed performance criteria for water efficiency .

every six years , epa must review the water efficiency criteria and update them as necessary .

awia authorizes epa to establish the watersense performance criteria based on technical specifications and testing protocols of relevant voluntary consensus standards organizations .

it also requires epa to consider reviewing and revising watersense performance criteria established prior to january 1 , 2012 , by december 31 , 2019 .

section 4306 establishes epa's oversight responsibilities for the watersense program .

these responsibilities include auditing the use of the watersense label , testing protocols , and managing the accreditation process for watersense certification bodies .

this section directs epa and doe to coordinate to prevent duplicative or conflicting requirements in the watersense and energystar programs .

awia explicitly requires the inclusion of certain products and services in the watersense program .

these include irrigation technologies and services , point - of - use water treatment devices , plumbing products , water reuse and recycling technologies , various landscaping and gardening products and services , whole house humidifiers , and water - efficient buildings .

section 2007 of awia directs epa to administer a competitive grant program to accelerate the development of innovative water technology that addresses drinking water supply , quality , treatment or security .

among the selection criteria for grants , epa must prioritize projects that provide additional drinking water supplies with minimal environmental impact .

eligible grant recipients include research institutions , regional water organizations , nonprofit organizations , and institutions of higher education , which can partner with private entities .

the maximum single grant award for any one recipient is $5.0 million .

grant recipients may use these grants for developing , testing , or deploying water technologies or providing technical assistance to deploy existing innovative water technologies .

epa must submit a report to congress that details advancements in water technology associated with this grant program .

this section authorizes $10.0 million to be appropriated each year for fy2019 and fy2020 to support this grant program .

with awia , the 115 th congress passed an omnibus water infrastructure and project authorization bill that affects several federal agencies .

the act includes the most comprehensive amendments to the safe drinking water act since 1996 , with overarching themes involving drinking water infrastructure affordability and water system compliance capacity and sustainability .

the amendments authorize new competitive grant programs and activities that are broadly intended to help communities afford drinking water infrastructure improvements needed to achieve compliance with federal drinking water standards and protect public health .

other new sdwa programs authorize grants for projects and activities that ( 1 ) improve drinking water system sustainability and resiliency , ( 2 ) develop water system capacity to respond to contamination or other events , and ( 3 ) address lead in school drinking water .

awia's dwsrf provisions constitute the first major revision of the program since its establishment in 1996 .

as with the competitive grant programs , these revisions are intended to facilitate communities' access to dwsrf financial assistance .

among other purposes , awia's dwsrf revisions authorize the use of dwsrf funds for ( 1 ) source water protection activities , ( 2 ) providing additional financing flexibility for public water systems , ( 3 ) replacing and repairing aging infrastructure , and ( 4 ) increasing subsidies for disadvantaged communities .

awia authorizes additional water infrastructure assistance with revisions to the wifia program .

in addition to making the program permanent , awia authorizes an additional appropriation for wifia assistance under certain conditions .

these revisions further authorize epa to partner with bureau of reclamation and other relevant agencies to allow for implementation of wifia credit assistance for a broader range of eligible water infrastructure projects .

appendix a .

reports , plans , and regulations in awia ( p.l .

115-270 ) appendix b .

cross reference: awia , sdwa , and u.s. code sections appendix c. other epa - related provisions of awi .

