international trophy hunting is a multinational , multimillion - dollar industry practiced in countries on almost every continent .

trophy hunting is broadly defined as the killing of animals for recreation with the purpose of collecting trophies such as horns , antlers , skulls , skins , tusks , or teeth for display .

international and domestic trophy hunting has a long history in the united states , and u.s. citizens import more wildlife trophies than citizens of any other country — over 650,000 trophies in 2017 alone .

many of these trophies are deer , geese , and other common species that were hunted in neighboring countries , such as canada .

however , some of these trophies are rare and threatened animals hunted in countries throughout africa and parts of asia and south america .

the practice of international trophy hunting , especially of rare and endangered species , has generated controversy for a number of reasons , including its relation to conservation ( including of wildlife populations ) , ethical considerations , and its effect on local economies where the animals are hunted .

proponents of trophy hunting contend that the practice is a potential source of funding for the conservation of species in exchange for the hunting of a proportionally small number of individuals .

further , they argue that trophy hunting can create incentives for conserving habitat and ecosystems where hunted animals roam and , in some impoverished areas in range countries , can provide a means of income , employment , and community development .

critics of trophy hunting contend that the practice can lead to the decline of rare and endangered species and that the pathway of moving funds from hunting to conservation can be fraught with corruption and mismanagement .

further , some argue that it is unethical to kill animals for sport and that the life of an animal should not be valued according to how much a hunter would pay to kill it .

determining the effects of international trophy hunting on species — with regard to either killing animals or conserving them through hunting revenue — can be challenging for several reasons , namely due to lack of data , according to scientists .

difficulty gathering data from range countries can hinder attempts to develop an accurate sense of how hunting affects animals .

for example , limited data may misrepresent the number of trophies harvested or animals killed , corruption can blur the route of money from hunters to conservation efforts , and a lack of information on conservation plans and practices associated with domestic laws and regulations can lead to questions about the effectiveness of these conservation efforts .

from a scientific perspective , teasing out the effects of trophy hunting from those of other factors that affect a species also can be challenging .

several factors affect the viability of animal populations in the wild , including habitat alteration or destruction , prey or resource availability , genetic makeup of the population , changes in climate , presence of non - native species , poaching , subsistence or market hunting , and trophy hunting , among others .

measuring the condition of a population usually involves taking into consideration several of these factors , and more than one factor typically affects the population's condition .

many scientific studies on trophy hunting's effects on wildlife populations contain disclaimers of insufficient data to measure the effect of hunting on a species .

some studies have reported that unregulated hunting has contributed to the decline of several species .

for example , in the 1980s , hunting reportedly played a part in the decline of both the dorcas gazelle ( gazella dorcus ) and the nubian bustard ( neotis nuba ) from sahelian africa .

some scientists contend that there are no documented extinctions solely resulting from trophy hunting .

congressional interest in trophy hunting hinges on several aspects of the practice and its potential consequences .

there is interest among some members of congress and constituents in international trophy hunting of rare and threatened species , such as african lions , elephants , and rhinoceroses .

as the largest importer of sport - hunted trophies in the world , the united states can play a role in shaping policy , which likely bolsters this interest .

the killing of cecil the lion in africa in 2015 drew particular public interest and attention in congress .

the incident stimulated debate on trophy hunting and raised questions about the relative importance of trophy hunting versus other threats to a species .

congress's role in addressing international trophy hunting is limited in some aspects , because the range country oversees most controversial aspects of the activity .

however , congress can address the import of wildlife trophies into the united states and can use laws and regulations to indirectly influence trophy - hunting practices in range countries .

congress has addressed international trophy hunting through several bills and through oversight of the implementation of the endangered species act ( esa ; 16 u.s.c .

§§1531-1543 ) and the convention on the international trade in endangered species of wild fauna and flora ( cites ) .

in addition , some trump administration policies have stimulated congressional interest in trophy hunting , such as one to evaluate permits issued for importing sport - hunted trophies of listed animals into the united states on a case - by - case basis , a change from the previous practice of evaluating the range country before issuing permits for hunting these animals .

further , the trump administration established an international wildlife conservation council , which is charged with providing advice to the secretary of the interior on the benefits of u.s. citizens hunting overseas .

this report discusses the history and scope of international trophy hunting in the united states , selected u.s. laws and international agreements that address trophy hunting , and potential issues for congress to consider regarding international trophy hunting .

it does not cover domestic trophy hunting .

international sport hunting is largely regulated through laws of the range country , the country importing trophies , and international agreements .

hunters generally must consider regulations of all three entities and apply for applicable permits to hunt and transport trophies .

this section will discuss the regulations associated with each category .

the controversies surrounding international trophy hunting are rooted in the ecological , ethical , and economic considerations of the practice .

numerous factors affect a species , and teasing out the effects of trophy hunting is challenging due to a lack of long - term monitoring of hunted populations .

most studies also report that with appropriate and consistent management , trophy hunting can be potentially beneficial for species ; however , with poor management , trophy hunting can be detrimental for species .

this section will analyze several identified ecological and economic factors that are affected by international trophy hunting .

congress might consider whether international trophy hunting is a benefit or detriment to wildlife conservation .

there does not appear to be consensus among stakeholders as to whether international trophy hunting is being applied and used as an effective conservation tool throughout range countries where it is practiced .

several observers note that more data need to be collected on how species respond to trophy hunting in the short and long terms and how revenue from trophy hunting is managed in range countries .

proponents of trophy hunting contend that it can be used as a conservation tool if managed in a sustainable and scientifically based manner .

they argue that revenue from hunting operations can be channeled into conservation programs and activities that aim to support hunted species and their habitat .

some contend that governance ( eg , having laws in place that require hunting fees to be made available for conservation ) is critical for trophy hunting to contribute to conservation .

conservation benefits associated with trophy hunting are seen as wide and varied .

some contend that trophy hunting incentivizes land managers to conserve populations of hunted species , which include threatened and endangered species .

in some instances , it may protect species from poaching and use hunting quotas to manage species in a sustainable manner .

additionally , efforts to support trophy hunting can lead to the protection and management of rangelands , which support hunted species and other wildlife in the ecosystem .

local communities can benefit from trophy hunting as part of a tourism framework that could bolster economies through the development of hotels , restaurants , and other tourism - related activities .

in certain areas where tourism is sparse , some have noted that trophy hunting can provide income to sustain communities .

south africa provides economic incentives to maintain white and black rhinoceros populations through limited trophy hunting , along with other forms of tourism .

some economists note that countries sometimes use revenue to fund the operational costs of government wildlife management authorities , counterpoaching enforcement activities , and development assistance to local communities .

in zambia , for example , hunting revenues have been used to train and hire village scouts for antipoaching activities in game management areas and to support community development projects for clinics , shelters , and schools .

critics of trophy hunting as a conservation tool question the effectiveness of trophy - hunting management .

they note several aspects of trophy - hunting management that could be weak and negatively affect conservation of species and the ecosystem .

critics also question the premise that significant funds from trophy hunting are used to conserve hunted species and the ecosystems they use ; these critics cite issues such as corruption as a barrier to ensuring revenues are used for conservation .

for example , corruption may result in local people allowing and sometimes assisting poachers .

corruption can take the form of exceeding quotas , allowing hunting outside of rangelands , accepting bribes to overlook illegal activities , and using funds for nonconservation activities .

for example , some contend that corruption detrimentally affects conservation effectiveness of trophy hunting in ethiopia ; funds reportedly are funneled to uses other than for conservation .

tanzania also suffers from mismanagement of both resources and funds , according to some studies .

from failing to implement new policies designed to include communities in the trophy - hunting revenue cycle to operating a public auction system that allows discretionary spending by officials , leading to corruption and patronage , tanzania is alleged to have misgoverned trophy hunting .

this mismanagement led , in part , to a decreasing lion population , according to some .

scientists also noted that a lack of community involvement in the practice of trophy hunting led communities to defend themselves from lion encroachment , thus adding to the population's decline .

critics contend that offtake rates for some trophy hunted species are unsustainable and could affect populations .

some quotas for hunting animals do not use the best scientific information or are fixed and do not reflect changes in the population .

in addition , some quotas do not accurately specify which individual animals may be hunted and their ages , which may have long - term negative genetic consequences on the population .

hunting the wrong individual animals also could have social consequences ( eg , infanticide ) in some instances and could affect the viability of a population .

moreover , by not having a defined area or population to manage , hunting could result in several groups hunting the same population of animals without coordination , leading to overhunting quotas or other negative effects on the population .

fenced areas for hunting also could have negative effects on the ecosystem by preventing the migration of nonhunted species and allowing for the introduction of exotic species .

in addition , critics argue that if local communities do not receive revenues from trophy hunting , they might be alienated , which could have consequences for maintaining and monitoring the hunted species .

many communities report hunting revenue failing to reach them due to potential corruption and other factors .

for example , some communities in tanzania claim that hunting organizations fail to pay local communities the 5% of revenue upon which the parties agreed .

some stakeholders contend that trophy hunting in any form is unethical .

they argue in favor of using other alternatives for generating income from natural resources in its stead ( eg , birdwatching and safari ) .

international trophy hunting is an issue for congress for several reasons , including the practice's recreational qualities ; its effect on wildlife , especially charismatic species ; constituent interest in the practice ; its relevance to laws that regulate the trade of threatened and endangered animals ; and its ethical considerations , among other things .

for example , some argue that the killing of cecil the lion in 2015 heightened congressional interest because lions are charismatic species and some are against killing threatened species due to ethical concerns .

congress and the trump administration have addressed international trophy hunting through the implementation of laws and the dissemination of regulations that address the import of sport - hunted trophies into the united states .

further , the trump administration has established the international wildlife conservation council to provide recommendations to the secretary of the interior on various aspects of u.s. international trophy hunting .

the role of congress in this issue is limited by the jurisdiction of the united states overseas ; hunting quotas , conservation activities , and the flow of revenue from international trophy - hunting activities are largely dictated by the range country .

however , the congressional role is potentially meaningful in several areas discussed below .

some scientists and policymakers contend that fully evaluating the effects of trophy hunting on species conservation depends on monitoring and collecting more data on hunting operations and hunted species in range countries .

data from most hunting operations are largely self - reported .

in some cases , they are gathered by the range country and international ngos .

some policy experts contend that the united states could incentivize range countries and hunters to collect and report more data .

for example , some argue that congress could provide overseas development assistance for international programs and grants for ngos to conduct studies on the effects of trophy hunting on wildlife populations and the distribution of revenue generated by trophy - hunting operations .

some contend that congress or fws could require permit applicants to solicit certain data from hunting operations that would verify the operations' conservation activities and the distribution of hunting revenue .

some might propose that international multilateral organizations , such as cites , could encourage or require range countries to conduct oversight and report data on hunting operations and wildlife operations .

this might take the form of long - term monitoring of hunted wildlife populations and systematic surveying of how trophy hunting affects local communities .

for example , cites collects data on specific species , such as african elephants .

the monitoring the illegal killing of elephants program aims to help range states improve their ability to monitor elephant populations , identify changes in the illegal and natural deaths of elephants , and apply these data to improve law enforcement and strengthen regulatory measures to conserve and manage elephants .

this program is supported by parties to cites and works with range countries and third parties to collect data .

some might contend that a similar program could be used to monitor and collect data on trophy hunting of selected iconic species , such as african lions , pangolins , and leopards .

critics of these approaches could argue that there are limited resources and incentives available for range countries to collect data on trophy hunting and monitoring .

in addition , they might contend that data provided by hunting operations could be falsified or could fail to account for corruption and other illegal activities associated with the distribution of hunting revenue .

they might question self - reporting by range countries , specifically , whether the data are accurate and affected by corruption .

some contend that to alleviate this issue , data should be transparent and fully identified when planning regulatory actions either through cites or individual countries .

congress can address international trophy hunting by u.s. hunters through the process of issuing permits to import trophies .

in most cases , hunters need a permit to import a trophy from a listed species into the united states .

the type of permit varies according to the status of the species under u.s. law or cites .

currently , fws is evaluating permit applications on a case - by - case basis , which involves reviewing individual hunting operations and potentially conservation programs in the range country .

it is unclear what standards or methodology fws uses to evaluate each permit on a case - by - case basis .

some might advocate for congress to enact legislation that would direct the secretary of the interior to create and disseminate specific standards for evaluating trophy - import permits , including increasing the amount of information on the condition of the hunted species .

some might argue that equivalent standards across species for measuring whether hunting could enhance the survival of a population ( eg , criteria used by esa ) or be nondetrimental to a population ( eg , criteria used by cites ) could create consistency in evaluating trophy - import permits and lower the time needed to issue them .

in addition , some members argued that making permit applications and decisions publicly available could increase oversight over the process .

h.r .

6885 in the 115 th congress would have authorized this approach .

however , other stakeholders could contend that a consistent approach for evaluating permits might not be applicable to all species being hunted or to all hunting operations being considered .

for example , evaluating the conservation and hunting of listed species at the country level could mask individual hunting operations that might have different standards and conservation priorities than the range country as a whole .

some stakeholders might petition congress to establish a third - party certification system to evaluate hunting operations that frequently appear on permit applications for importing trophies .

the certification system could employ standards that reflect best practices for trophy hunting ; some of these practices could include transparency in funding flows , support for local communities in proximity to hunts , equitable allocations of hunting concessions , and a quota system for hunted animals .

a certification system might also alleviate concerns of questionable data sources for certain countries by having a standardized system for evaluating hunting operations .

under certain situations , a certification system could have a provision that allows for a moratorium on hunting a species to allow it to be replenished in the wild .

the international union for the conservation of nature has created a set of guiding principles and recommendations for sustainable trophy hunting that could be converted into standards .

the principles include biological sustainability ; net conservation benefit ; socioeconomic benefit ; adaptive management in planning , reporting , and monitoring hunting ; and accountable and effective governance .

certification systems are used with other natural resources .

for example , two primary wood certification programs affect wood consumed in the united states .

the forest stewardship council is an independent , international ngo that certifies that wood comes from well - managed forests that meet an established set of criteria .

one key criterion is that the "chain of custody" information is provided ; ideally , this information includes the names and locations of each handler of the wood from the forest where it originated to the shop where the product is being sold .

a second certification program is offered by the sustainable forest initiative ( sfi ) .

sfi also contains a set of guidelines and principles that must be followed to earn sfi certification , which is done for north american forests and does not have a chain - of - custody requirement .

approximately 120 million hectares are certified under this program in north america .

as congress debates whether international trophy hunting is a benefit or a detriment to wildlife conservation , it might consider promoting alternative forms of trophy hunting in the wild .

some contend that trophy hunting in enclosed ranges could give hunting operations greater control over wildlife populations .

the practice of hunting animals that are enclosed within a private game ranch is referred to as captive hunting or , in some cases , canned hunting .

the species in captive hunts usually are larger megafauna , such as lions , and typically are bred in captivity for game ranches .

proponents of captive hunting contend that it guarantees hunting success for the hunter , allows hunts to be shorter and less expensive , produces better trophies , drives conservation through economic incentives , and allows for easier management of populations , because they are in a contained environment where hunting can be limited .

critics of captive hunting have a different perspective that drives the controversy behind the practice ; they contend that killing animals in a contained environment with no chance of escape is unethical and detracts from the sport of hunting .

this concept is termed fair chase and is considered the "ethical , sportsmanlike , and lawful pursuit and taking of any free - ranging wild , big game animal in a manner that does not give the hunter an improper or unfair advantage over the game animals. .

they argue that animals bred in captivity are not equivalent to wild animals and therefore do not have conservation value or enhance the long - term survival of the wild population .

in addition , animals bred in captivity can suffer from limited genetic diversity , and fenced game ranches fragment habitat and limit the free range of wild animals .

central to the controversy behind captive hunting are lion populations in south africa .

captive hunting is prevalent in south africa , where over 80% - 90% of the lions hunted are believed to be captive .

consumers of these hunts are largely from the united states ( approximately 60% of captive lion trophies are exported to the united states ) and the eu ( approximately 40% of captive lion trophies are exported to the eu ) .

some in south africa want to ban the hunting of lions bred in captivity ; others note that it is a multi - million dollar industry that generates jobs and argue that the practice should stay .

captive breeding of species listed under esa with trophy hunting also occurs in the united states .

several species listed under esa are bred in captivity on ranches in the united states for reintroduction to the wild and , in some cases , for trophy hunting .

ranchers can obtain an enhancement - of - survival permit to allow for the limited killing of some animals in a population .

the aim is that the revenue generated from hunting surplus captive - bred animals will aid in the captive breeding and reintroduction of the species into the wild .

some also contend that limited trophy hunting of captive - bred populations could reduce hunting pressure in the wild .

there are several examples of how certain species have thrived on ranches and bolstered their international populations ; the scimitar - horned oryx ( oryx dammah ) , addax ( addax nasomaculatus ) , and dama gazelle ( gazella dama ) are captive - bred in the united states and have an exemption under esa that allows for sport hunting and trophies .

the objective is to generate funds from hunting to bolster captive breeding that aims to enhance the propagation and survival of the species in the wild .

congress could address captive hunting through permit regulations , either supporting permits that request trophies imported from captive hunting operations or denying permits from these areas .

another alternative to trophy hunting in wild areas is to ban trophy hunting outright .

the range country would make this decision , with little to no participation from the united states .

several countries have banned trophy hunting , as discussed in the section on " range country ," above .

some contend that banning hunting could benefit wildlife populations even with the loss of revenue from hunting fees .

they argue that other forms of tourism ( eg , wildlife viewing ) could sustain financial flows and incentivize conservation .

opponents of a ban on trophy hunting contend that trophy hunting has a positive impact in supporting biodiversity through increased revenue flows and rangeland conservation .

they note that hunting bans result in lower revenues for wildlife conservation and communities and could be detrimental to certain communities that depend on hunting revenues .

furthermore , they contend that banning trophy hunting could affect habitat conservation ; such a ban could allow for increased habitat conversion to agriculture or livestock rangelands , which has caused species declines due to poaching and human - wildlife conflicts .

banning trophy hunting in fringe regions within a country , where the only form of tourism that can be sustained is trophy hunting , can have negative economic effects , according to some .

a ban on trophy hunting in northern botswana revealed negative consequences on the communal economy in areas that were previously hunting grounds .

according to one study , the revenue generated by hunting expeditions represented around two - thirds of total tourism income .

the ban on trophy hunting also led to halting certain cbnrm programs due to loss of funding for these opportunities .

the ban on lion hunting particularly affected botswana's economy , causing it to fall by almost 10% of gdp , according to some sources .

in some cases , the banning of hunting correlates with animal population declines .

for example , in kenya , which instituted a hunting ban in 1977 , almost all the common wildlife species have declined from their previous levels since the ban to 2016 .

concurrently , livestock numbers , notably sheep and goats , increased by 76.3% during the same period .

kenya's population increased from 14.5 million in 1977 to 48.5 million in 2016 .

based , in part , on these data , scientists note that demographic pressure and livestock encroachment on wildlife rangelands appear to be the decisive factors leading to wildlife declines in kenya .

