title ix of the education amendments of 1972 ( title ix ) provides an avenue of legal relief for victims of sexual abuse and harassment committed by professors , teachers , coaches , and others at educational institutions .

the statute prohibits discrimination "on the basis of sex" of any person in an educational program or activity receiving federal funding .

though title ix makes no explicit reference to sexual abuse or harassment , the supreme court has held that a school district can violate the statute , and be held liable for damages , based on a deliberately indifferent response to a teacher's sexual abuse or harassment of a student .

the court has also held that a school board may be liable under title ix for a deliberately indifferent response to student - on - student sexual harassment .

meanwhile , federal agencies that administratively enforce the statute , such as the department of education ( ed ) , have also determined that educational institutions can be held responsible for instances of sexual harassment under title ix in certain circumstances .

title ix is thus primarily enforced in two ways: ( 1 ) through private rights of action directly against schools by or on behalf of students subject to such harassment in certain circumstances ; and ( 2 ) by federal agencies that provide funding to educational programs .

with respect to the latter enforcement prong , like several other federal civil rights statutes , title ix makes compliance with its antidiscrimination mandate a condition for receiving federal funding in any education program or activity .

title ix applies to federal - funded schools at all levels of education .

for instance , all public school districts receive some federal financial assistance , as do most institutions of higher education through participation in federal student aid programs .

notably , when any part of a school district or institution of higher education receives federal funds , all of the recipient's operations are covered by title ix .

the text of title ix does not expressly mention sexual abuse or harassment , while current regulations implementing the statute also do not explicitly address sexual harassment ( although the regulations do require schools to designate at least one employee to function as a title ix coordinator ) .

in each of the last several presidential administrations , however , the department of education ( ed ) has issued guidance documents that instruct schools regarding their responsibilities under title ix when addressing allegations of sexual harassment .

in response , educational institutions have developed procedures and practices to investigate and respond to allegations of sexual harassment and assault .

and ed recently issued another notice of proposed rulemaking , after having revoked some of its prior guidance to schools in 2017 .

as discussed in this report , if adopted , the regulations would significantly change educational institutions' responsibilities for responding to sexual harassment allegations .

to place the proposed title ix regulations in context , this report provides background on the legal landscape that informs the proposal .

first , the report examines how federal courts have understood title ix's requirements in the context of private rights of actions brought by students directly against educational institutions seeking damages for sexual abuse or harassment .

the report continues by examining how federal agencies have enforced title ix , with particular focus on ed's guidance documents that direct schools on how to respond to sexual harassment and assault allegations .

the report then considers various constitutional challenges brought by students against public universities , which claim that some universities' responses to allegations of sexual harassment have violated the due process rights of the accused .

with this backdrop set , the report examines ed's proposed regulations with an emphasis on how they would alter the responsibilities of schools in complying with title ix .

title ix of the education amendments of 1972 states that "no person in the united states shall , on the basis of sex , be excluded from participation in , be denied the benefits of , or be subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving federal financial assistance," subject to certain exemptions .

in other words , recipients of federal funding , which administer an educational program or activity , are prohibited from discriminating on the basis of sex .

the statute , however , does not expressly provide for a private right of action by which victims of sex discrimination may recover for a title ix violation .

nor does the statute expressly prohibit sexual harassment , abuse , or molestation as forms of unlawful sex discrimination , or otherwise define unlawful sexual abuse or harassment .

title ix also does not delineate the circumstances in which a school or educational program may be liable for such conduct .

given the absence of statutory text "to shed light on congress' intent," federal courts have played a primary , if not exclusive , role in establishing the remedial scheme by which victims of sexual harassment or abuse may seek relief under title ix through a private right of action .

the supreme court first interpreted title ix to provide for a judicially implied private right of action against a federal - funded educational institution for sexual harassment , and later , an implied damages remedy in such actions .

since then , and in the absence of legislative amendments to title ix on those issues , the court has also created the legal standard for establishing liability under title ix for sexual abuse or harassment committed by a teacher , and other students .

the court , and numerous federal courts of appeals , have described this judicially created liability standard — which draws upon the "deliberate indifference" standard as applied under 42 u.s.c .

§ 1983 — as a "high bar for plaintiffs to recover under title ix. .

critically , in a title ix private right of action for damages , an educational institution ( or other federally funded program or activity ) is not strictly liable for a principal's or teacher's sexual harassment or abuse of a student .

in other words , the fact that sexual harassment or abuse occurred and was committed by these individuals is not the basis for a funding recipient's liability under the supreme court's remedial scheme .

rather , title ix liability turns on the recipient's response to its actual knowledge of that conduct .

a recipient will be liable only when its response was so deficient as to amount to "deliberate indifference" to the alleged harassment or abuse .

in addition to the private rights of action discussed above , title ix is also enforced by federal agencies that provide funding to educational programs .

title ix makes nondiscrimination based on sex a condition for receiving federal financial assistance in any education program or activity .

in this administrative enforcement context , if a school is found to have violated title ix , the ultimate sanction is termination or suspension of federal funds , rather than a legal judgment requiring payment of damages to a particular student .

agencies are authorized to issue regulations ( subject to presidential approval ) and orders to enforce the statute and are responsible for monitoring recipients' compliance with title ix .

while a number of federal agencies issue funds for educational programs , and thus are responsible for enforcing the statute with respect to recipients of financial assistance for educational programs , two agencies play particularly prominent roles in enforcing title ix .

pursuant to the education amendments of 1974 , the secretary of education ( ed ) is specifically directed to promulgate regulations concerning the prohibition of sex discrimination at education programs that receive federal assistance .

because ed is , among other things , "the primary administrator of federal financial assistance to education," the agency plays a lead role in enforcing title ix against educational institutions .

and according to an executive order , the attorney general coordinates the implementation and enforcement of title ix across the executive branch .

subject to the coordinating function of the attorney general , the department of justice's civil rights division and ocr collaborate in enforcing title ix consistent with a memorandum of understanding reached between the agencies , which notes that ocr has primary responsibility for enforcing the statute directly against recipients of financial assistance from ed through complaint investigations and compliance reviews .

accordingly , ed has promulgated regulations implementing title ix that apply to traditional educational institutions of all levels that receive federal assistance , including elementary and secondary schools , as well as institutions of higher education .

those regulations specifically bar educational institutions from excluding individuals or denying the benefits of any education program or activity on the basis of sex .

ed regulations also require that recipients of federal financial assistance that operate education programs designate an employee ( commonly referred to as the title ix coordinator ) to coordinate efforts to comply with ed regulations regarding sex - based discrimination .

further , schools must establish grievance procedures that provide "prompt and equitable resolution" of complaints alleging prohibited actions .

pursuant to its role in enforcing title ix , ocr may conduct periodic reviews of institutions , or directed investigations , to ensure that recipients of federal funds are complying with applicable requirements .

ocr also receives complaints from individuals alleging violations of title ix by educational institutions and investigates allegations .

when violations of the statute are found through these means , the office can seek informal resolution through a resolution agreement .

according to ocr , if negotiations do not reach a resolution agreement , it may then take more formal enforcement measures , including seeking to suspend or terminate an institution's funding .

notably , neither title ix's text nor ed's current regulations directly address sexual harassment .

in the administrative context , ed's ocr has issued a series of guidance documents that have interpreted title ix to bar sexual harassment and define distinct responsibilities for educational institutions with regard to such allegations .

these documents — while sometimes subject to change — generally reflect a different analysis for assessing a school's title ix liability for harassment than the supreme court case law addressing private rights of action for damages for sexual abuse or harassment .

in particular , ed has applied a constructive notice requirement that prompts a school's title ix responsibility to respond , rather than "actual notice" to "an appropriate person" as required in the context of suits for damages .

in addition , while the supreme court has explained that a school's response will result in liability only where "clearly unreasonable," ed has articulated baseline standards for how schools must respond to comply with title ix .

finally , while the supreme court rejected holding schools responsible for sexual harassment under theories of vicarious liability , ed has held schools responsible for sexual harassment under title ix where a teacher commits misconduct in the scope of their employment .

in response to the foregoing guidance from ed , as well as increased oversight from ocr between 2011 and 2016 , schools developed a variety of procedures to ensure that their responses to allegations of sexual assault complied with title ix .

generally speaking , the specific type of procedures for investigating allegations of sexual harassment vary considerably across educational institutions .

while title ix provides ed with some discretion in terms of administrative enforcement of the statute's bar on sex - based discrimination , including the ability to require public and private schools to develop certain procedures for handling complaints ( as long as those schools receive federal funds ) , this discretion is constrained with respect to state actors ( including public universities ) by due process protections that set a baseline for the procedural protections afforded to the accused .

in the public university context , a number of students subject to disciplinary sanctions for misconduct thus challenged the disciplinary procedures in state and federal courts as unconstitutional .

in particular , a number of students faced with disciplinary action by public universities have raised constitutional challenges to the title ix procedures used to find them responsible for sexual misconduct , arguing that universities violated the due process clause in the handling of their case .

with the foregoing considerations in the background , in september 2017 ocr withdrew the 2011 dear colleague letter and 2014 questions and answers document .

ed explained that it would begin the rulemaking process to codify a school's responsibilities under title ix .

in the interim , ed stated that it would continue to rely on the 2001 guidance ; it also issued a new question and answer document indicating how the department would address sexual misconduct during that time .

the document notifies schools that they may , in certain circumstances , resolve complaints through mediation .

it also notifies schools that they may choose to allow appeals either by both parties or solely by the party found to have committed sexual misconduct and not the alleged victim .

on november 29 , 2018 , ed issued a notice of proposed rulemaking in the federal register .

if adopted , the proposal would significantly alter the responsibilities of schools in responding to allegations of sexual harassment .

among other things , the proposed regulation would ( 1 ) define in narrower terms what conduct qualifies as sexual harassment under title ix ; ( 2 ) require "actual notice" of harassment , rather than constructive notice , to trigger a school's title ix responsibilities ; ( 3 ) provide that a school's response to allegations of sexual harassment will violate the statute only if amounting to deliberate indifference ; and ( 4 ) impose new procedural requirements that reflect concern for due process when schools investigate allegations and make determinations of culpability .

as discussed above , the antidiscrimination mandate of title ix , enacted in 1972 , prohibits discrimination "on the basis of sex" in educational programs in general terms .

the statute does not expressly refer to or address sex discrimination in the form of sexual abuse , sexual harassment , or sexual assault .

nor does the statute address when , by whom , or under what circumstances such conduct will amount to a title ix violation .

given the statute's silence on these issues , federal courts have largely determined when relief is available for individual victims of sexual abuse or harassment .

indeed , in creating the remedial scheme for a private right of action to address such claims , the supreme court sought to "'infer how the [1972] congress would have addressed the issue'" if there had been an express provision in the statute , an approach that the court observed "inherently entails a degree of speculation , since it addresses an issue on which congress has not specifically spoken. .

likewise , given the sparse statutory language , federal agencies have issued shifting guidelines at to the responsibilities of educational institutions in complying with title ix .

as a general matter , congress enjoys substantial discretion to modify the terms of title ix to clarify the appropriate standard in private suits for damages as well as in the administrative enforcement context .

congress could , for instance , amend title ix to define the specific conduct that amounts to a violation of the statute regarding sexual abuse or harassment .

in addition , an amendment could also clarify whether liability for harassment should be handled differently in elementary and secondary schools , as opposed to the university context .

likewise , legislation could distinguish between harassment by teachers from that between students .

further , because the private right of action under title ix has been judicially implied , rather than expressly codified in statute , congress could modify the legal standards that apply in a private suit for damages .

finally , aside from directly amending title ix , congress could also direct federal agencies to alter their administrative enforcement of the statute .

for example , congress could direct ed to promulgate regulations that distinguish between various types of sexual harassment or treat harassment differently depending on the context .

