the federal communications commission ( fcc ) is an independent federal agency , with its five members appointed by the president , subject to confirmation by the senate .

it was established by the communications act of 1934 ( 1934 act , or "communications act" ) and is charged with regulating interstate and international communications by radio , television , wire , satellite , and cable .

the mission of the fcc is to ensure that the american people have available , "without discrimination on the basis of race , color , religion , national origin , or sex , a rapid , efficient , nationwide , and worldwide wire and radio communication service with adequate facilities at reasonable charges. .

the 1934 act is divided into titles and sections that describe various powers and concerns of the commission .

title i — fcc administration and powers .

the 1934 act originally called for a commission consisting of seven members , but that number was reduced to five in 1983 .

commissioners are appointed by the president and approved by the senate to serve five - year terms ; the president designates one member to serve as chairman .

title ii — common carrier regulation , primarily telephone regulation , including circuit - switched telephone services offered by cable companies .

common carriers are communication companies that provide facilities for transmission but do not originate messages , such as telephone and microwave providers .

the 1934 act limits fcc regulation to interstate and international common carriers , although a joint federal - state board coordinates regulation between the fcc and state regulatory commissions .

title iii — broadcast station requirements .

much existing broadcast regulation was established prior to 1934 by the federal radio commission , and most provisions of the radio act of 1927 were subsumed into title iii of the 1934 act .

title iv — procedural and administrative provisions , such as hearings , joint boards , judicial review of the fcc's orders , petitions , and inquiries .

title v — penal provisions and forfeitures , such as violations of rules and regulations .

title vi — cable communications , such as the use of cable channels and cable ownership restrictions , franchising , and video programming services provided by telephone companies .

title vii — miscellaneous provisions and powers , such as war powers of the president , closed captioning of public service announcements , and telecommunications development fund .

since the 110 th congress , the fcc has been funded through the house and senate financial services and general government ( fsgg ) appropriations bill as a single line item .

previously , it was funded through what is now the commerce , justice , science appropriations bill , also as a single line item .

the fcc annually collects and retains regulatory fees to offset costs incurred by the agency and to carry out its functions .

since 2009 the fcc's budget has been derived from regulatory fees collected by the agency rather than through a direct appropriation .

the fees , often referred to as "section ( 9 ) fees," are collected from license holders and certain other entities ( eg , cable television systems ) .

the regulatory fees do not apply to governmental entities , amateur radio operator licensees , nonprofit entities , and certain other non - commercial entities .

the fcc is authorized to review the regulatory fees each year and adjust them to reflect changes in its appropriation from year to year .

the commission originally implemented the regulatory fee collection program by rulemaking on july 18 , 1994 .

the most recent regulatory fee order was released by the commission on august 29 , 2018 .

the fcc's budgets from fy2010 to fy2020 are in figure 1 .

one fcc - related hearing has been held in the 116 th congress .

on april 3 , 2019 , the house committee on appropriations subcommittee on financial services and general government held a hearing on the fy2020 fcc budget .

the hearing addressed issues including 5g deployment , federal preemption of state and local tower siting requirements , merger reviews , robocalls , and net neutrality .

no bills that would affect the operation of the fcc have been introduced in the 116 th congress .

the fcc operates under a public interest mandate first laid out in the 1927 radio act ( p.l .

632 , 69 th congress ) , but how this mandate is applied depends on which of two regulatory philosophies is relied upon to interpret it .

the first seeks to protect and benefit the public at large through regulation , while the second seeks to achieve the same goals through the promotion of market efficiency .

additionally , congress granted the fcc wide latitude and flexibility to revise its interpretation of the public interest standard to reflect changing circumstances , and the agency has not defined it in more concrete terms .

these circumstances , paired with changes in fcc leadership , have led to significant changes over time in how the fcc regulates the broadcast and telecommunications industries .

this evolution can be illustrated in changes to the agency's strategic goals under former chairman tom wheeler to current chairman ajit pai , which , in turn , led to the repeal in 2017 of the fcc's 2015 net neutrality rules and to changes in the agency's structure in 2019 .

as the fcc continues to conduct its business into the future , the changing regulatory philosophies of the fcc chairmen may continue to drive how the fcc defines its long - term , strategic goals .

this , in turn , may affect how the agency structures ( and restructures ) itself and how it decides regulatory questions , including a continued review of net neutrality .

congress may determine that the public interest standard should remain more static , rather than fluctuating dramatically depending on the regulatory philosophy of the chairman .

no legislation on this topic has been introduced in congress , signaling to some observers that it intends to continue allowing the fcc to define it .

 table a - 1 .

senate and house hearings in the 115 th congress regarding the operation of the fcc are detailed in table a - 2 and table a - 3 , respectively .

links to individual hearing pages are included in these tables .

