this report summarizes and analyzes selected forest management provisions enacted in the 115 th congress and compares them with prior law or policy .

these provisions were enacted through two legislative vehicles the stephen sepp wildfire suppression funding and forest management activities act , enacted as division o of the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 , commonly referred to as the fy2018 omnibus ) and signed into law on march 23 , 2018 .

the agricultural improvement act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-334 , title viii ) , signed into law on december 20 , 2018 .

this law is commonly referred to as the 2018 farm bill .

both laws included provisions that address forest management through three general perspectives: ( 1 ) management of forested federal land , ( 2 ) federal programs to support forest management on nonfederal lands , known as forest assistance programs , and ( 3 ) programs to promote or conduct forestry research ( to benefit both federal and nonfederal forests ) .

this report focuses primarily on the provisions related to management of forested federal land .

the federal forest management provisions change how the forest service ( fs , within the department of agriculture ( usda ) ) and the bureau of land management ( blm , within the department of the interior ( doi ) ) manage their lands .

fs is responsible for managing the 193 million acres of the national forest system ( nfs ) , and blm manages 246 million acres of public lands under its jurisdiction .

this report begins with background information on the nfs and blm's public lands and an overview of two laws: the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) , and the healthy forests restoration act ( hfra ) .

these laws , among others , authorize specific forest management activities and establish procedures relevant to the respective agency's decisionmaking processes for those activities .

the 115 th congress enacted provisions that affect how fs and blm implement those activities and procedural requirements .

the report summarizes and analyzes the provisions in the following categories: project planning and implementation , wildland fire management , forest management and restoration programs , and miscellaneous .

within each of those categories , the report broadly discusses relevant issues , summarizes the changes made in the 115 th congress , and discusses potential issues for congress related to that category .

some provisions or sections are covered in more depth than others , generally reflecting the complexity of the issue , nature of the enacted changes , or level of congressional interest .

a separate section at the end of the report discusses overall issues for congress .

the appendix contains side - by - side tables comparing all of the forest - related provisions in each law to prior law ( including provisions related to forestry assistance programs and forestry research ) .

the fy2018 omnibus and the 2018 farm bill both changed certain fs and blm planning and project implementation requirements .

for example , both laws expanded various hfra authorities the fy2018 omnibus ( §203 ) amended hfra to expand the definition of an authorized fuel reduction project to include the installation of fuel breaks ( eg , measures that change fuel characteristics in an attempt to modify the potential behavior of future wildfires ) and fire breaks ( eg , natural or constructed barriers to stop , or establish an area to work to stop , the spread of a wildfire ) .

thus , projects to build fuel or fire breaks may be planned and implemented using the procedures authorized under hfra , such as requiring analysis of a specific number of alternatives depending on the proposed action's location .

the 2018 farm bill reauthorized ( through fy2023 ) the use of the procedures intended to expedite priority projects in i&d areas .

it also added projects to reduce hazardous fuels as a priority project category ( §8407 ( b ) ) .

this means that hazardous fuels reduction projects may be planned and implemented using the farm bill ce , if those actions are located within i&d areas and meet the other eligibility requirements .

in addition , both the fy2018 omnibus and the 2018 farm bill each established a new statutory nepa ce .

the 2018 farm bill also included provisions affecting the interagency consultation requirements under the endangered species act ( esa ) .

these changes are each discussed in the following sections .

the federal government's wildland fire management responsibilities — fulfilled primarily by fs and doi — include fuel reduction , preparedness , prevention , detection , response , suppression , and recovery activities .

the fy2018 omnibus and 2018 farm bill contained provisions that changed how congress appropriates funding specifically for wildfire suppression purposes , added specific requirements for wildfire risk mapping ( part of preparedness ) , and added specific reporting requirements .

this section provides some background information on wildland fire appropriations and then discusses those changes in more detail .

the laws also changed aspects of fs and doi's hazardous fuel reduction programs .

this included reauthorizing the use of procedures intended to expedite the priority projects in nfs areas designated as i&d areas and expanding the definition of an authorized fuel reduction project , as discussed previously in the " planning and project implementation requirements " section .

congress provides discretionary appropriations for wildland fire management to both fs and doi through the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill .

funding for doi is provided to the department , which then allocates the funding to the office of wildland fire and four agencies — blm , the bureau of indian affairs , the national park service , and the u.s .

fish and wildlife service .

within fs's and doi's respective wildland fire management ( wfm ) account , funding is provided to the suppression operations program to fund the control of wildfires that originate on federal land .

this includes firefighter salaries , equipment , aviation asset operations , and incident support functions in direct support of wildfire response , plus personnel and resources for post - wildfire response programs .

if their suppression funding is exhausted during a fiscal year , fs and doi are authorized to transfer funds from their other accounts to pay for suppression activities ; this is often referred to as fire borrowing .

overall appropriations to fs and doi for wildland fire management have increased considerably since the 1990s .

a significant portion of that increase is related to rising suppression costs , even during years of relatively mild wildfire activity , although the costs vary annually and are difficult to predict .

fs and doi frequently have required more suppression funds than have been appropriated to them .

this discrepancy often leads to fire borrowing , prompting concerns that increasing suppression spending may be detrimental to other agency programs .

in response , congress has typically enacted supplemental appropriations to repay the transferred funds and / or to replenish the agency's wildfire accounts .

wildfire spending — like all discretionary spending — is currently subject to procedural and budgetary controls .

in the past , congress has sometimes — but not always — effectively waived some of these controls for certain wildfire spending .

this situation prompted the 115 th congress to explore providing wildfire spending outside of those constraints , as discussed below .

forest restoration activities seek to establish or reestablish the composition , structure , pattern , and ecological processes and functioning necessary to facilitate resilience and resistance to disturbance events ( eg , insect or disease infestation , catastrophic wildfire , ice or windstorm ) .

for example , forest restoration may include activities such as removing small - diameter trees ( called thinning ) to reduce tree density , potentially mitigating against the spread of some insect or disease infestations .

or , forest restoration may include prescribed fire to reduce the building up of understory vegetation or biomass , to mitigate the potential for a wildfire to increase in intensity and severity , and to facilitate post - fire recovery .

blm's authority to conduct restoration projects is derived primarily from flpma .

fs's authority is derived primarily from its responsibilities to: protect the nfs from destruction as specified in the organic administration act of 1897 ; manage the national forests for multiple use and sustained yield as specified in musy ; and maintain forest conditions designed to secure the maximum benefits and provide for a diversity of plant and animal communities as specified in the forest and rangeland renewable resources planning act of 1974 , as amended by nfma .

congress also has authorized specific forest restoration programs for fs and blm , or has authorized forest restoration to be one of many activities or land management objectives for other programs .

the 115 th congress established two new programs for fs ( watershed condition framework and water source protection ) , and amended three existing programs: the collaborative forest landscape restoration program ( cflrp , available only for fs ) , stewardship contracting authority , and the good neighbor authority .

among other provisions , aspects of these programs allow fs and blm to partner with various stakeholders in different ways to identify forest restoration needs and perform specified forest management and restoration activities .

these programs are elements of the fs's "shared stewardship" approach to address land management concerns at a landscape - scale and across ownership boundaries .

these programs are generally perceived as offering opportunities to accelerate forest restoration to mitigate against insect and disease infestations or reduce the risk of catastrophic wildfires to federal lands and surrounding communities .

in addition , proponents point to other potential benefits to the surrounding communities , such as providing forest products to support local industries , promoting new markets for restoration by - products ( eg , small diameter trees , woody biomass ) , and fostering collaboration .

these programs are generally supported by many stakeholders , although some have raised concerns about specific aspects of each program .

both the fy2018 omnibus and the 2018 farm bill enacted various other provisions related to federal forest land , such as designating nfs lands as part of the national wilderness preservation system .

other miscellaneous provisions are related to land acquisition , exchange and disposal ; the issuance of special use authorizations for the use or occupancy of federal lands ; secure rural schools act payments , activities , and resource advisory committees ; and forest management on tribal lands .

congress may consider several issues related to the forestry provisions enacted by the 115 th congress , including oversight of the agencies' implementation of the new laws .

congress may also be interested in the implication of these changes or how these provisions address concerns with federal forest management generally , and forest restoration specifically .

for example , the forest service has identified around 52-58 million acres of nfs lands at high or very high fire risk or insect infestation and in need of restoration treatments .

fs reports that they accomplish around 2-6 million acres of treatments annually .

at that pace , it would take at least 9 but possibly up to 29 years to eliminate the backlog of treatment needs , and that does not account for maintaining already treated areas to the desired resource conditions .

some estimate that hazardous fuels are accumulating three times faster than the rate of treatment .

to address these concerns , fs has proposed to increase the scale , scope , and implementation of forest management projects generally , and forest restoration treatments specifically .

fs , and others , identify administrative process barriers as one of many factors impeding progress towards these restoration goals .

more specifically , some identify agency decisionmaking processes , particularly related to implementation of the national environmental policy act and opportunities for the public to challenge agency decisions administratively and judicially , as preventing the agencies from implementing projects at the pace and scale necessary to address forest health concerns .

others may point to fs - specific implementation issues related to nepa as contributing to planning delays more than involvement from the public or administrative or judicial challenges .

other stakeholders identify other administrative barriers — such as inadequate program funding levels and training — as preventing the agency from implementing project planning requirements in a more efficient manner .

many of the provisions enacted by the 115 th congress aim to improve agency efficiencies by expanding the applicability of procedures intended to expedite the planning and review process for projects , such as hazardous fuel reduction and forest restoration projects .

for example , proponents of this approach contend that expanding the use of healthy forests restoration act authorities and allowing the agencies to plan more projects over larger areas under nepa categorical exclusions would expedite project implementation and allow fs and blm to achieve progress towards their restoration goals .

some , however , contend that changes made to the agency's decisionmaking processes — such as through the establishment of ces — are changing the basic legal framework for federal forest management , and making it increasingly difficult for citizens to participate or challenge government decisions .

in addition , some stakeholders contend that expanding the use of these authorities could result in environmental impacts that exacerbate forest health concerns .

many of these issues have been ongoing for decades .

for example , concerns about deteriorating forest health conditions and high fuel levels were raised after wildfires in yellowstone national park in 1988 .

in 1994 , the congressionally chartered national commission on wildfire disasters recommended federal land management agencies invest more in reducing hazardous fuels in high - risk ecosystems , and observed that "the question is no longer if policy - makers will face disastrous wildfires and their enormous costs , but when. .

a 1995 study recommended fs increase hazardous fuel treatments to up to 3 million acres per year by 2005 .

as another example , in 1999 , gao recommended fs develop a strategy to identify long - term options for reducing fuels to address forest health issues and mitigate wildfire risk .

in 2006 oig raised concerns with fs' hazardous fuels reduction program and recommended fs develop guidance and controls to identify , prioritize , implement , monitor , and report on hazardous fuels reduction projects and funding .

a 2016 oig report assessed fs' progress towards implementing the recommendations from that 2006 report and found continued issues with fs prioritizing , tracking , and reporting of hazardous fuels reduction projects .

concerns about fs project implementation also have been ongoing .

for example , in 2001 congress asked gao to evaluate the extent administrative or judicial challenges impeded fs' implementation of fuel management projects .

the report found that approximately 24% of the fuel reduction decisions signed in fy2001 and fy2002 were appealed .

a similar gao analysis found that 20% of the fuel management projects identified for implementation in fy2006 through fy2008 were challenged through appeals or objections .

in addition , there have been several academic studies examining fs nepa implementation .

collectively , these studies suggest that projects that are more complex — in terms of scale and scope — are more likely to be challenged , but other project characteristics ( eg , timber harvests ) and factors related to staffing , documentation , and implementation of the public involvement requirements also affect the likelihood of project challenges .

hfra , passed in 2003 , included provisions intended to expedite implementation of hazardous fuels reduction projects .

despite these provisions , the extent of nfs areas in need of treatment has continued to increase , and fs continues to look for ways to increase the pace of project implementation .

to some , this implies that the hfra approach to streamline agency decisionmaking has not been successful .

to others , this implies that the hfra approach needs to be more broadly applied , as it was in legislation enacted during the 115 th congress .

the following two tables provide side - by - side comparisons that briefly describe the forest - related provisions enacted by each law ( the fy2018 omnibus and 2018 farm bill ) to prior law , generally in the order in which they were included in the legislation , with a few exceptions for purposes of clarity .

provisions in each law that do not directly affect forest management are not included .

