t he senior community service employment program ( scsep ) authorizes the department of labor ( dol ) to make grants to support part - time community service employment opportunities for eligible individuals who are age 55 or over and have limited employment prospects .

participation in the program is temporary , with the goal of transitioning participants to unsubsidized employment .

in fy2019 , appropriations for the scsep program were $400 million and supported approximately 41,000 positions .

scsep appropriations accounted for approximately 20% of total older americans act funding in fy2019 .

scsep is authorized by title v of the older americans act of 1965 , as amended ( oaa ; 42 u.s.c .

3056 et seq. ) .

since enactment of the oaa , congress has reauthorized and amended the act numerous times .

most recently , the older americans act reauthorization act of 2016 ( p.l .

114-144 ) authorized appropriations for oaa programs for fy2017 through fy2019 , and made other changes to the act .

prior to the 2016 oaa reauthorization , the oaa amendments of 2006 ( p.l .

109-365 ) reauthorized all programs under the act through fy2011 .

although the authorizations of appropriations under the oaa expired at the end of fy2011 , congress continued to appropriate funding for oaa - authorized activities through fy2016 .

grants under the program are administered by the employment and training administration ( eta ) at the department of labor ( dol ) .

 ( references to the secretary in this report refer to the secretary of labor , unless otherwise specified. ) .

scsep is the only oaa program administered by dol .

other oaa programs are administered by the administration for community living ( acl ) at the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

scsep is supported by discretionary appropriations under the dol - hhs appropriations bill .

scsep programs operate on dol's program year ( py ) , which operates nine months behind the fiscal year .

activities in a given program year are supported by funding from the corresponding fiscal year .

for example , py2017 ran from july 1 , 2017 , through june 30 , 2018 , and was supported by fy2017 appropriations .

programs administered under title v of the oaa may also be referred to as the community service employment for older americans ( cseoa ) programs .

dol uses the cseoa and scsep terminology interchangeably .

from its total appropriation , the oaa establishes three reservations: ( 1 ) up to 1.5% for dol - selected pilots , demonstration , and evaluation projects ; ( 2 ) a fixed percentage of 0.75% for the territories of guam , american samoa , the u.s. virgin islands , and the northern mariana islands ; and ( 3 ) a portion determined by the secretary for activities that support eligible individuals who are american indian and pacific islander / asian american .

the remaining funds are allocated to formula grants .

title v supports formula grants to both national organizations ( "national grantees" ) and state agencies ( "state grantees" ) .

national grantees are typically nonprofit organizations that operate in more than one state .

state grantees are state government agencies .

state grantee agencies are typically housed in a state's workforce unit or aging unit .

in py2018 , approximately 78% of funds for formula grants ( $298 million ) were distributed among national grantees .

there are about 15-20 national grantee organizations , including aarp and the national council on aging .

about 22% of py2018 funds for grants ( $84 million ) were allocated to state agencies .

both national grantees and state grantees subgrant funds to partner organizations that work with host agencies that provide the actual employment ( see figure 1 ) .

as a condition of receiving scsep funds , each state's governor must develop and submit a state plan to dol .

the plan can be an independent document or part of a combined plan with the state's activities under the workforce innovation and opportunity act ( wioa ) , the primary federal workforce development legislation authorizing workforce services for the broader population .

whether the scsep plan is independent or part of a combined plan , it must provide information on individuals in the state who will be eligible for the program as well as the localities most in need of services .

the plan must be developed in consultation with the state wioa agency , national grantees operating in the state , and other stakeholders .

the state plan must describe how the activities under scsep will be coordinated with activities under wioa and how the state will minimize duplication between title v and wioa .

grantees that receive funds directly from dol typically allocate funds to subgrantees and / or host agencies that provide the actual work site placements and part - time community service employment .

federal law establishes six core indicators for cseoa grantees .

three of the six cseoa indicators focus on unsubsidized employment and earnings after participation in the program .

the performance indicators are 1. hours ( in the aggregate ) of community service employment ; 2. the percentage of project participants who are in unsubsidized employment during the second quarter after exit from the project ; 3. the percentage of project participants who are in unsubsidized employment during the fourth quarter after exit from the project ; 4. the median earnings of project participants who are in unsubsidized employment during the second quarter after exit from the project ; 5. indicators of effectiveness in serving employers , host agencies , and project participants ; and 6. the number of eligible individuals served , including the number of participating individuals with demonstrated barriers to employment .

indicators 2-4 are largely based on the performance accountability indicators for the general workforce programs under wioa .

indicators 1 , 5 , and 6 do not have direct analogues in the wioa performance accountability system .

the current performance accountability measures were established by the older americans act reauthorization act of 2016 ( p.l .

114-144 ) .

grantees started reporting performance under these metrics beginning in py2018 , starting july 1 , 2018 .

grantees negotiate expected performance levels with dol .

negotiating performance levels at the grantee level allows the expected performance levels to reflect the types of participants a particular grantee serves or the environment in which it operates ( eg , the grantee serves a disproportionate number of high - need participants or operates in an area with a high rate of unemployment. ) .

performance accountability is assessed at the level of the grantee ( i.e. , the entity that receives funding directly from dol ) .

grantees are responsible for oversight of subgrantees and host agencies .

regulations establish that performance is measured as a percentage of the negotiated level of performance .

for example , if a grantee negotiates a performance rate of 50% of participants in unsubsidized employment in the second quarter after exit and 48% of the program participants subsequently meet that standard , the grantee has reached 96% of its agreed - upon level of performance .

performance in the range of 80% to 100% constitutes meeting the core level of performance .

if a national or state grantee fails to meets its negotiated level of performance , the grantee must receive technical assistance from dol and submit a corrective action plan .

if a national grantee fails to meet expected levels of performance for four consecutive years , the grantee may not compete in the subsequent grant competition .

if a state grantee fails to meet the expected levels of performance for three consecutive program years , the state must conduct a competition to award its formula funds to a new grantee .

dol makes available several reports with scsep participation data .

data are reported by program year .

reports currently made available by dol include the following: aggregate and individual performance reports .

these reports include the performance of each national grantee and state agency relative to the negotiated levels of performance .

nationwide quarterly progress .

these reports include total participation as well as data on demographics and participants' demonstrated barriers to employment .

service to minority individuals .

these reports include information on the participation and outcomes of minorities for each grantee .

the reports are required under section 515 of the oaa .

