l aw enforcement officials have described money laundering — the process of making illegally obtained proceeds appear legitimate — as the "lifeblood" of organized crime .

according to one estimate , criminals launder roughly $1 trillion to $2 trillion annually worldwide , a sum that represents between 2% and 5% of global gross domestic product .

without the ability to conceal and spend these large sums of "dirty" money , criminal organizations "could operate only at a small fraction of current levels , and with far less flexibility. .

over the past decade , money launderers have turned to a new technology to conceal the origins of illegally obtained proceeds: virtual currency .

virtual currencies like bitcoin , ether , and ripple are digital representations of value that , like ordinary currency , function as media of exchange , units of account , and stores of value .

however , unlike ordinary currency , virtual currencies are not legal tender , meaning they cannot be used to pay taxes and creditors need not accept them as payments for debt .

according to their proponents , virtual currencies ( 1 ) have the potential to offer cheaper and faster transactions than traditional bank - centric payment networks , ( 2 ) provide inflation - resistant alternatives to traditional fiat currencies , and ( 3 ) often involve promising new technologies ( such as blockchain technology ) that will spur innovation across a variety of fields .

however , other commentators have argued that the anonymity offered by certain decentralized virtual currencies — that is , virtual currencies that are not issued or maintained by a central organization — makes them an attractive vehicle for money laundering .

these observers have contended that criminals often use such virtual currencies not only to buy and sell illicit goods and services , but also to launder illegally obtained fiat currencies .

while it is difficult to definitively assess the volume of money laundered through virtual currencies , the virtual currency security firm ciphertrace has estimated that criminals laundered roughly $2.5 billion of bitcoin on major exchanges between january 9 , 2009 , and september 20 , 2018 .

an official from the treasury department's financial crimes enforcement network ( fincen ) has similarly indicated that virtual currencies have been "exploited to support billions of dollars of .

 .

 .

suspicious activity. .

while such figures represent only a fraction of both global money laundering and virtual currency transaction volume , government officials have identified virtual currencies as a growth industry for money launderers that presents regulators and law enforcement with unique challenges .

this report provides a general overview of the application of federal anti - money laundering ( aml ) law to virtual currencies .

first , the report outlines the basic architecture of federal aml law .

second , the report discusses administrative guidance concerning the application of federal aml law to virtual currencies .

third , the report reviews a number of prominent criminal prosecutions and administrative enforcement actions involving federal aml law and virtual currencies .

finally , the report discusses a number of legislative proposals to reform certain elements of the federal aml regime surrounding virtual currencies and further investigate the use of virtual currencies in criminal activities .

the federal aml regime consists of two general categories of laws and regulations .

first , federal law requires a range of "financial institutions" to abide by a variety of aml compliance program , reporting , and recordkeeping requirements .

second , federal law criminalizes money laundering and various forms of related conduct .

because neither congress nor fincen has formally amended the bsa regulatory regime in response to the advent of virtual currencies , prosecutors and regulators have been required to analyze whether virtual currency transactions and business models fall within some of the preexisting legal categories discussed above .

in 2013 , fincen attempted to clarify certain aspects of this analysis by issuing administrative guidance addressing the circumstances in which participants in virtual currency transactions qualify as msbs .

in its 2013 guidance , fincen took the position that "users" of virtual currencies do not qualify as msbs subject to federal registration requirements , while "administrators" and "exchangers" of virtual currencies may qualify as msbs .

specifically , the guidance explained that users of virtual currencies — that is , persons who obtain virtual currencies to purchase goods or services — are not msbs because they are not involved in money transmission .

by contrast , fincen indicated that virtual currency administrators ( persons "engaged as a business" in putting a virtual currency into circulation and who have the authority to withdraw such currency from circulation ) and exchangers ( persons "engaged as a business in the exchange of virtual currency for real currency , funds , or other virtual currency" ) may be "money transmitters" and , by extension , msbs .

specifically , fincen explained that virtual currency administrators and exchangers qualify as msbs ( unless they fall within a specific exemption ) when they ( 1 )  "accept[] or transmit[] a convertible virtual currency," or ( 2 ) "buy[] or sell[] convertible virtual currency for any reason. .

accordingly , under fincen's guidance , virtual currency issuers and exchangers will generally qualify as msbs unless they fall within a specific statutory or regulatory exemption .

over the past decade , federal prosecutors and regulators have pursued a number of cases involving the application of federal aml law to virtual currencies .

in a number of criminal cases , federal prosecutors have brought money - laundering and certain related charges against the operators of online marketplaces and virtual currency payment systems used to disguise the proceeds of illicit activities .

fincen has also brought civil enforcement actions against virtual currency exchangers for failure to comply with the bsa's aml program , reporting , and recordkeeping requirements .

as these prosecutions and enforcement actions demonstrate , virtual currencies have a number of features that make them attractive to criminals .

specifically , commentators have noted that money launderers have been attracted by the anonymity , lack of clear regulations , and settlement finality that accompanies virtual currency transactions .

the ease of transferring virtual currencies across international borders further complicates aml efforts , as aml regulations "are not widely applied internationally to virtual currency despite increasing evidence of misuse. .

the treasury department's 2018 money laundering risk assessment accordingly identified virtual currencies as a vulnerability in u.s. aml efforts .

several bills introduced in the 116th congress aim to address to these challenges .

these bills would , among other things , commission agency analyses of the use of virtual currencies for illicit activities and clarify that fincen's statutory powers and duties include international coordination on issues related to virtual currencies .

commentators have also identified legal uncertainty as an additional challenge facing prosecutors , regulators , and participants in virtual currency transactions .

specifically , these observers have noted that applying the bsa's regulatory regime to virtual currencies requires analyzing novel business models using legal categories developed primarily for traditional financial institutions .

while the weight of legal authority supports the application of some of these categories to certain virtual currency business models , at least one anomalous decision indicates that some judges demand more explicit indicia of congressional intent to apply existing law in this relatively new field .

moreover , a number of commentators have argued that providing greater legal certainty to legitimate virtual currency activities is necessary to preserve the united states' position as a "global leader" in encouraging technological innovation .

this interest in legal clarity — in addition to a desire to shield certain virtual currency innovators from "expensive and onerous" aml requirements — has generated a legislative proposal to exempt certain blockchain developers from various money transmitter requirements .

in january 2019 , the house passed three bills that would commission studies concerning the use of virtual currencies for illicit purposes .

h.r .

56 , the financial technology protection act , would establish an independent financial technology task force to combat terrorism and illicit financing ( task force ) led by the treasury secretary .

the bill would direct the task force to ( 1 ) "conduct independent research on terrorist and illicit use of new financial technologies , including digital currencies," and ( 2 )  "develop legislative and regulatory proposals to improve counter - terrorist and counter - illicit financing efforts. .

h.r .

56 would further require the task force to annually report its findings to congress .

the bill would also establish two programs to incentivize members of the public to assist the federal government's efforts to combat the illicit use of virtual currencies .

first , the bill would direct the treasury secretary to establish a reward of up to $450,000 for persons who "provide[] information leading to the conviction of an individual involved with terrorist use of digital currencies. .

second , the bill would direct the treasury secretary to create a grant program "for the development of tools and programs to detect terrorist and illicit use of digital currencies. .

after passing the house in january 2019 , h.r .

56 was referred to the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs .

a second bill , h.r .

428 , the homeland security assessment of terrorists' use of virtual currencies act , would similarly commission an analysis of the use of virtual currencies by terrorists .

specifically , h.r .

428 would direct the under secretary of homeland security for intelligence and analysis to conduct a "threat assessment" analyzing "the actual and potential threat posed by individuals using virtual currency to carry out activities in furtherance of an act of terrorism , including the provision of material support or resources to a foreign terrorist organization. .

after passing the house in january 2019 , h.r .

428 was referred to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

finally , h.r .

502 , the fight illicit networks and detect trafficking act ( the find trafficking act ) , would direct the government accountability office ( gao ) to conduct a study "on how virtual currencies and online marketplaces are used to facilitate sex and drug trafficking. .

the bill would require gao to provide congress with a report summarizing the results of the study , together with any recommendations for legislative or regulatory action that would assist the federal government in combatting the use of virtual currencies to facilitate sex and drug trafficking .

after passing the house in january 2019 , h.r .

56 was referred to the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs .

in march 2019 , the house passed h.r .

1414 , the fincen improvement act of 2019 .

the bill would , among other things , clarify that fincen's statutory power to coordinate with foreign financial intelligence units on antiterrorism and aml initiatives "includ[es] matters involving emerging technologies or value that substitutes for currency. .

after passing the house in march 2019 , h.r .

1414 was referred to the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs .

in january 2019 , h.r .

528 , the blockchain regulatory certainty act , was introduced in the house of representatives .

the bill would create a safe harbor from federal and state money transmitter licensing and registration requirements for certain blockchain developers .

specifically , the bill would provide that non controlling "blockchain developers" and providers of a "blockchain service" shall not be treated as "money transmitters," msbs , "or any other state or federal legal designation[s] requiring licensing or registration as a condition to acting as a blockchain developer or provider of a blockchain service. .

a blockchain developer or provider of a blockchain service would qualify as a noncontrolling developer or provider as long as it does not have control over users' digital currency in the regular course of business .

some commentators have argued that such a safe harbor is necessary to provide legal certainty to actors in the virtual currency space , including persons who contribute code to virtual currency platforms or develop blockchain - related software but do not take custody of others' virtual currency .

however , another commentator has noted that it is "debat[able]" whether federal registration requirements apply to such persons .

h.r .

528 was referred to the house committee on financial services and the house committee on the judiciary in january 2019 .

