enacted in 1937 , the federal aid in wildlife restoration act , now known as the pittman - robertson wildli fe restoration act ( hereinafter referred to as pittman - robertson ) , provides funding for states and territories to support projects that promote the conservation and restoration of wild birds and mammals and their habitats and programs that provide hunter education and safety training and opportunities .

the u.s .

fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , an agency within the department of the interior , administers pittman - robertson as part of its wildlife and sport fish restoration program .

revenues generated through excise taxes on pistols and revolvers , other firearms , ammunition , bows , and other archery equipment provide the funding for pittman - robertson .

after collection , receipts from these excise taxes are deposited into the federal aid to wildlife restoration fund in the treasury , and monies from the fund are made available for fws for pittman - robertson activities in the fiscal year following their collection without any further action by congress .

for three programs within pittman - robertson , fws apportions the funds directly among the states and territories .

all 50 states as well as puerto rico , guam , american samoa , the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands , and the u.s. virgin islands ( collectively referred to as territories in this report ) are eligible to receive funding through pittman - robertson .

since its creation , pittman - robertson has provided over $18.8 billion ( in 2018 dollars ; $12.2 billion in nominal dollars ) to states and territories .

this report provides an overview of the pittman - robertson state and territory programs that support wildlife restoration and hunter education and safety activities , including a breakdown of the various apportionment formulas and an analysis of related issues that may be of interest to congress .

this report focuses on the formula - based programs within pittman - robertson that provide funding for states and territories .

the pittman - robertson wildlife restoration act apportions and allocates funding for five distinct purposes: 1. program administration ( section 4 ( a ) ) ; 2 .

wildlife restoration ( section 4 ( b ) ) ; 3 .

basic hunter education and safety ( section 4 ( c ) ) ; 4 .

enhanced hunter education and safety grants ( section 10 ) ; and 5 .

multistate conservation grants ( section 11 ) .

funds for three of these programs — wildlife restoration , basic hunter education and safety , and enhanced hunter education and safety grants — are disbursed directly to states based on two apportionment formulas ( both hunter education and safety programs use the same formula ) .

the formulas take into account a state's acreage , number of hunting licenses sold , and population ( figure 1 and table a - 1 ) .

territories are apportioned a set percentage of the funds for each program .

washington , dc , does not receive funding under these programs .

states and territories can use their apportionments to support the federal share of wildlife and hunter and safety projects that receive pittman - robertson funding .

additionally , pittman - robertson provides for fws to allocate nonformula based funding for multistate conservation grants and program administration .

members of congress have routinely introduced legislation to amend pittman - robertson .

in particular , congress has considered issues related to eligible uses of state and territorial apportionments , the funding structure and funding sources for the program , and the apportionment formulas .

in recent congresses , some members have introduced several bills that would amend the way states and territories are able to spend their apportionments .

some bills have proposed amending pittman - robertson to allow additional uses , such as hunter recruitment and retention ; others have proposed modifying the federal share and eligible uses of funds for existing or related activities , such as for public target ranges .

some members introduced multiple bills for both purposes in recent congresses , including in the 115 th and 116 th congresses .

several bills in the 115 th congress would have allowed and in the 116 th congress would allow states to use funds provided through pittman - robertson to promote hunting and recreational shooting , recruitment and retention of hunters and shooters , and public relations .

according to the 2016 national survey of fishing , hunting , and wildlife - associated recreation , the number of hunters in the united states declined by 16% ( 2.2 million individuals ) compared to the similar survey in 2011 ( from 13.7 million in 2011 to 11.5 million in 2016 ) .

these bills would allow states to use funds currently provided for the wildlife restoration , basic hunter education and safety , and enhanced hunter education and safety grants programs for hunter and recreational shooter recruitment and retention .

in addition , they would create a funding mechanism for the secretary of the interior to use for recruitment and retention purposes at the national level .

currently , pittman - robertson prohibits the use of wildlife restoration program apportionments for public relations related to wildlife management activities .

these proposals would remove this prohibition .

proponents of this type of legislation have argued that these bills would provide states with flexibility to use pittman - robertson apportionments to support recruitment efforts that would promote participation in hunting and shooting sports .

they contend there is a need to attract and retain hunters and recreational shooters , which , in turn , could increase excise tax revenues that support pittman - robertson .

stakeholders also point out that wildlife restoration would remain the primary purpose of the act even if amended .

other stakeholders have raised the concern that these bills would diminish wildlife restoration activities by allowing states to use funds currently apportioned for wildlife restoration purposes for recruitment and retention .

other legislation has been introduced , including in the 115 th and 116 th congresses , that would change the terms under which states may use pittman - robertson allocations for projects related to the construction and expansion of public target ranges .

currently , pittman - robertson allows states to use funds apportioned under the basic hunter education and safety program ( section 4 ( c ) ) for the "construction , operation , and maintenance of public target ranges. .

funds apportioned under the enhanced hunter education and safety grants program ( section 10 ) may be used for "enhancement of construction or development of firearm shooting ranges and archery ranges , and the updating of safety features of firearm shooting ranges and archery ranges. .

however , both programs have a 75% cap for the federal share of projects supported by pittman - robertson funding .

all of the proposals in the 115 th and 116 th congress to amend the eligibility of activities related to shooting ranges would allow states and territories to use their basic hunter education and safety program apportionments for land acquisition , expansion , and construction related to a target range , rather than solely for construction , operation , and maintenance of a range ; allow states and territories to use up to 10% of funds apportioned to them through the wildlife restoration program to supplement apportionments for the enhanced hunter education and safety grants program to be used for land acquisition , expansion , and construction related to a target range ; allow states and territories to use their apportionments to pay for up to 90% of the total cost of a project related to a shooting range , instead of the current 75% federal cost - share cap ; and extend the obligation and expenditure window of enhanced hunter education and safety grants program apportionments used for shooting ranges to up to five fiscal years from the current window ( the fiscal year for which they were apportioned ) .

according to their authors , these bills would address a stated decline in the availability of public target ranges and would provide increased opportunity for target practice at public shooting ranges .

some proponents have further argued that this type of legislation would allow the use of more funds to provide the public with opportunities to "embrace hunting and shooting sports," which could lead to economic benefits .

some proponents also contend that this legislation would make it easier for states to use federal funding , because it would lower the state matching requirement from at least 25% to 10% for target range - related projects and extend the funding window for certain funds .

some stakeholders have raised concerns that this legislation would allow states to use funding for target range - purposes that otherwise would be available for wildlife restoration activities under section 4 ( b ) .

under current law , the federal aid to wildlife restoration fund receives revenues generated through an excise tax on firearms , ammunition , and archery equipment .

because pittman - robertson funding is entirely reliant on revenues from these taxes , it is subject to spending patterns on these items and can fluctuate with the markets for these goods .

in addition , although firearm and archery equipment owners , hunters , and recreational shooters generate the funds used by pittman - robertson , many stakeholders contend that the act's wildlife restoration benefits accrue to the american public at large ( this is often referred to as user - pay , public - benefit ) .

both the potential for market - based fluctuation of the excise tax structure and the public benefit nature of pittman - robertson have led some stakeholders to propose amending the act to include a funding source that they argue is more stable and not solely reliant on hunters and recreational shooters .

congress has structured revenue sources for pittman - robertson so that those who recreate with firearms or bows contribute to funding that is used to maintain and preserve wildlife and hunter safety programs .

upon enactment of the federal aid in wildlife restoration act , in 1937 , congress only included revenues generated from excise taxes on firearms ( not including pistols and revolvers ) and shells and cartridges .

in debating this act , some members stated that taxes imposed on sporting arms and ammunition should be used to benefit wildlife restoration .

in 1970 , congress enacted legislation to deposit revenues from an excise tax on pistols and revolvers into the federal aid to wildlife restoration fund rather than into the general fund of the treasury , into which they were being deposited .

the purpose of this legislation was to increase revenues available to support wildlife restoration and programs for hunter safety .

congress further amended the revenue sources in 1972 , providing that an excise tax on bows and arrows , also created in the same law , also be deposited into the federal aid to wildlife restoration fund .

this inclusion provided that archers also contribute to the benefits provided by the act .

the concept of providing more stable and diversified funds for pittman - robertson is not new , and both stakeholders and congress have addressed this issue on several occasions .

for example , some stakeholders have suggested that given the public benefit nature of pittman - robertson , an excise tax should be imposed on other categories of goods and services related to outdoor recreation ( eg , backpacks , bicycles , climbing gear , and sport utility vehicles , among other items ) .

this proposal — sometimes referred to as a backpack tax — has spurred an ongoing debate for several decades .

proponents have contended that it would be fairer for all users , not just hunters and shooters , to support wildlife conservation and restoration and that broadening the tax base could raise more revenue for restoration .

conversely , opponents have suggested that the proposal would place an untenable burden on the outdoor industry , leading to fewer sales and making items prohibitively expensive for some stakeholders , and that it could deter individuals from enjoying the outdoors .

congress has not enacted legislation to broaden the excise tax base supporting pittman - robertson beyond firearms , ammunition , and archery equipment .

however , in fy2001 , congress amended pittman - robertson to include an additional subaccount within the federal aid to wildlife restoration fund , the wildlife restoration and conservation account , to provide supplemental funding for wildlife restoration and conservation .

in the same law that created the subaccount , congress appropriated $50 million to the subaccount "for the development , revision , and implementation of wildlife conservation and restoration plans and programs. .

congress appropriated funding to this subaccount only in fy2001 .

in recent congresses , including the 115 th congress , some members have introduced legislation that would have amended pittman - robertson to repurpose the subaccount .

these bills would have transferred up to $1.3 billion per year into the subaccount from revenues deposited into the treasury under the outer continental shelf lands act and the mineral leasing act .

these funds would have been available for states and territories for a variety of conservation and restoration activities .

in the 116 th congress , congress may continue to consider alternate funding sources for pittman - robertson through existing or new mechanisms .

proponents have argued that additional funds from alternate sources would bolster restoration and conservation activities and provide a secure source of funding for pittman - robertson .

some stakeholders also have stated that a bill authorizing such alternate funding sources could provide additional resources for federal agencies or tribal partners to implement the conservation of threatened and endangered species , among other concerns .

however , congress may consider if providing funding for conservation and restoration under pittman - robertson could affect other potential uses of federal funds .

in addition to eligible uses and funding sources , congress may consider amending pittman - robertson's apportionment structure .

currently , states and territories are treated differently under the program ; states are apportioned funds based on area , population , and number of hunting licenses ( see " state and territory apportionment " above ) , whereas territories are allocated funding based on a set percentage or percentage caps .

for the wildlife restoration program , states receive a minimum of 0.5% of the program's total apportionment , puerto rico receives not more than 0.5% , and each of the remaining four eligible territories receives not more than 0.17% .

for both the basic and enhanced hunter education and safety programs , states receive at least 1% of the total apportionments and territories receive 0.17% of the apportionments .

under current law , washington , dc , does not receive funding through any of these programs .

however , in fy2001 , washington , dc , received funding through the wildlife conservation and restoration account .

congress may consider issues related to apportionment formulas , including topics related to parity between states , territories , and others .

it also may consider amending the apportionment structures , including minimum and maximum allocations , in general .

the current structure is the result of multiple congressional actions since the original enactment in 1937 .

through these actions , congress has added and modified apportionment formula and eligibility .

some stakeholders have expressed concern over the discrepancy between the minimum apportionment to states and the set percentage provided to territories ; they contend there should be greater parity between states and territories .

other stakeholders have suggested that tribes also should be eligible to receive allocations under pittman - robertson programs .

appendix a .

state characteristics appendix b .

annual pittman - robertson wildlife restoration act apportionments by state and territory , fy2015-fy201 .

