with its adoption as part of the civil rights act of 1964 , title vi invested the federal government with a uniquely powerful role in addressing race and national origin discrimination .

like other statutory provisions in the civil rights act , title vi seeks to end race discrimination among institutions and programs whose doors were otherwise open to the public — especially public schools .

but unlike the civil rights act's better known and more heavily litigated provisions , title vi is concerned specifically with the use of "public funds," designed to ensure that federal dollars not be "spent in any fashion which encourages , entrenches , subsidizes , or results in racial discrimination. .

and to fulfill that broad mandate , title vi takes a distinctive approach to policing discrimination by making the promise of nondiscrimination a condition of the federal government's financial support .

title vi consequently prohibits all federally funded programs , activities , and institutions from discriminating based on race , color , or national origin .

although that prohibition accompanies nearly all grants and contracts awarded by the federal government , much of title vi's doctrine has been shaped by its use in the public schools .

that doctrinal story has accordingly centered on one agency in particular: the office for civil rights ( ocr ) in the u.s. department of education ( ed ) .

as this report explains , title vi continues to play a central part in ocr's mission of protecting civil rights on campuses at all educational levels , and in institutions both public and private .

this report begins by briefly tracing title vi to its historical and conceptual roots in the federal spending power , and explains how the early understanding of that power shaped the various legislative proposals that ultimately became title vi .

the report then examines the central doctrinal question behind the statute: what exactly title vi outlawed by prohibiting "discrimination" among federally funded programs , and what agencies are therefore allowed to do in order to enforce that prohibition .

the report then turns to ed's ocr , briefly reviewing how that agency goes about the day - to - day work of enforcing title vi in schools , and concludes by surveying two recent developments related to title vi , along with some considerations should congress wish to revisit this landmark civil rights law .

because this report focuses specifically on how ocr has come to understand and enforce title vi , it does not directly discuss litigation under the statute , whether filed by a private party or by the u.s. department of justice following a referral from ocr , though many of the substantive legal standards overlap .

title vi revolves around a single sentence - long prohibition , found in section 601 of the law , providing that "[n]o person in the united states" may be "subjected to discrimination" by a "program or activity" that receives federal financial assistance based on his or her "race , color , or national origin. .

plainly that prohibition outlaws racial "discrimination" in all federally funded programs .

it does not define , however , the sorts of practices title vi thereby excludes .

and with the legislative history on this point inconclusive at best , the task of providing a workable definition has been left to the agencies charged with enforcing title vi and , ultimately , to the courts .

as explained below , however , with its 2001 decision in alexander v. sandoval , the supreme court appears to have put the basic interpretive question to rest: section 601 directly prohibits only intentional discrimination .

in sandoval the court appeared to resolve the basic ambiguity in title vi: the statute's central nondiscrimination mandate — section 601 — outlaws only intentional discrimination .

but saying that much , the sandoval majority also acknowledged , did not speak to whether policies with a disparate impact might still be barred by regulations issued under the rulemaking grant found in section 602 of title vi .

section 602 , as noted , directs agencies to promulgate regulations "to effectuate" the antidiscrimination prohibition of section 601 "consistent with achievement of the objectives of the statute. .

and pursuant to that directive , all cabinet - level federal funding agencies , along with many smaller agencies , have since issued rules and guidance under title vi outlawing disparate impact discrimination .

as this section explains , however , sandoval seems to have placed narrower limits on what funding agencies may redress through regulations under section 602 , arguably constraining them to redress in their rulemakings the same forms of intentional discrimination outlawed by section 601 .

although title vi applies to funds distributed by every federal agency , much of the doctrine under the statute has been shaped by its use in the public schools .

that doctrinal story has accordingly centered on one agency in particular: the office for civil rights ( ocr ) , originally housed in hew but today located in the u.s. department of education ( ed ) .

as the agency primarily responsible for enforcing title vi in the public schools , as well as nearly all colleges and universities , ocr handles every year a large volume and variety of claims alleging race and national origin discrimination .

some of the most common types of those claims are discussed below , beginning first with a brief overview of how ed , as a matter of policy , processes the complaints it receives under title vi .

title vi has gone largely unchanged in the 50 years since it became law .

as this report has explained , the debates over the statute have therefore centered on how the courts have read its two central provisions — sections 601 and 602 — and how federal agencies have gone about enforcing them .

but congress has the ultimate say over how title vi works — rooted not only in its legislative power but in its authority to oversee the statute's use by federal agencies .

as this section explains , recently two issues over the statute have drawn particular congressional interest: the viability of disparate impact regulations under section 602 , and the inclusion of new protected classes in section 601 .

as explained earlier , with its 2001 decision in alexander v. sandoval , the court seemed to cast doubt on the future of all disparate impact liability under title vi as currently written , even when liability was premised on regulations issued under section 602 .

in the last several months , following the release of a widely remarked report on school safety , the trump administration signaled that it may be rethinking altogether title vi regulations that reach beyond intentional discrimination to address policies with a racially disparate impact .

given the continuing debate about the relation of title vi's central provisions , congress could opt to put down its own marker , by definitively clarifying title vi's scope in either of two ways .

on the one hand , congress could make clear that section 601 indeed prohibits only intentional discrimination , and that any rules under section 602 may not find a recipient liable for discrimination absent proof of discriminatory intent .

congress , on the other hand , could expressly endorse disparate impact under title vi by , for example , grafting that standard onto section 601 , as it has done in title vii of the 1964 civil rights act .

that addition would unambiguously allow funding agencies to investigate policies and practices under title vi based on their discriminatory effects , regardless of the underlying intent .

in addition to clarifying the types of discrimination title vi outlaws , congress could also choose to revise the classes of individuals who come within its protection .

one recent proposal , for example , would amend section 601 to include "sex ( including sexual orientation and gender identity ) " along with race , color , and national origin among its protected classes .

although that or a similar amendment would clearly expand title vi's coverage , its effects will likely hinge on how the courts choose to interpret section 601 in light of such additions .

though a complete analysis lies beyond the scope of this report , at least two readings seem arguable .

on the one hand , the courts could continue to read section 601 to "enact[] constitutional principles," in which case they would presumably review claims based on sex discrimination under a heightened standard of review , while in the case of gender identity , possibly only for basic rationality .

on the other hand , to the extent that an amendment introduces a statutory protection for a class of individuals not currently recognized by the court as a constitutionally "suspect classification," that addition , especially if buttressed by supporting legislative history , could suggest that congress had decided to amend the reach of title vi altogether , to "independently proscribe conduct that the constitution does not. .

in the 50 years since becoming law title vi has played a central role in addressing racial discrimination in the nation's schools .

title vi provides that protection in a unique way: by making the promise of nondiscrimination a condition for any program or institution that receives federal financial support .

for much of its history , the debates over title vi have fastened on two basic ambiguities in the statute: the kind of "discrimination" title vi was meant to outlaw and the types of rules a funding agency could issue to effectuate that prohibition .

the supreme court appears to have definitively resolved the first of those ambiguities: because title vi simply "enacts constitutional principles," as currently written , it prohibits only intentional discrimination .

and on that basis the court has suggested , but not definitively ruled on , how it might resolve the second ambiguity as well: to effectuate title vi's purpose , an agency may outlaw only policies resulting from a provable discriminatory intent , not simply having a racially discriminatory effect .

whether the court will turn that suggestion into a holding remains to be seen .

until then , however , federal agencies like ocr will likely continue to enforce title vi consistent with constitutional standards that the court has since read into the statute .

in ocr's case , that enforcement work is already considerable , involving thousands of complaints every year culminating in significant resolutions across a wide range of schools and institutions of higher education .

and in the background remains ed's ultimate authority under title vi — to withdraw its financial support from any program or institution that refuses to comply with the statute's command that all individuals be treated equally , regardless of their race .

