the merit systems protection board ( mspb or board ) is a n independent , executive branch agency that works to protect current , former , and prospective federal employees against inappropriate employment - related actions , in accordance with " merit system principles ," statutorily defined standards governing the performance and management of the federal workforce .

the mspb also aims to promote an effective federal workforce free of prohibited personnel practices .

the board mainly carries out its mission through adjudication of federal employee appeals of adverse actions .

when the board determines that a federal employee has been subject to an improper adverse action , it may order relief , including reins tatement , backpay , and attorney' s fees .

the board may also order federal agencies to comply with board orders , conduct special studies of the civil service and other executive branch merit systems , and review office of personnel management ( opm ) rules and regulations to determine , for example , whether a federal agency has invalidly implemented the opm requirements .

this report focuses on the board's adjudicatory authority .

federal law specifies that the board consists of three members appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the senate .

however , as of march 2019 , the board lacks any sitting members .

although other mspb employees , including administrative judges who issue initial decisions in cases , will continue their work , some members of congress and others have raised concerns about the extent to which these vacancies limit the agency's ability to perform its other functions .

this report discusses the establishment of the mspb and its structure , as well as the role of the office of special counsel , an independent , prosecutorial agency that operates concurrently with the board .

the report then addresses the board's authority to adjudicate matters within its jurisdiction and the scope of this jurisdiction , as well as the availability of judicial review for the board's decisions .

finally , the report examines the effect of the lack of a quorum of board members .

the origins of the mspb may be traced back more than a century , as part of efforts to curtail the practice of political patronage in the federal government .

under the "spoils system" that existed in the first century of the republic , "federal employees came and went , depending upon party service and changing administrations , rather than meritorious performance. .

in response to the "strong discontent with the corruption and inefficiency of the patronage system of public employment," congress passed the civil service act of 1883 , also known as the pendleton act , which generally created a merit - based system for hiring federal employees .

more specifically , the act established a civil service commission ( csc ) authorized to aid the president in preparing suitable civil service rules for open , competitive examinations of applicants for federal employment .

over the next few decades , congress enacted additional measures addressing issues such as merit hiring , due process rights , and appeals of agency adverse personnel actions , and the csc played an increasingly larger role in implementing these requirements .

even so , some members of congress and others expressed concerns with the regulatory structure of the civil service system .

one central criticism of this structure involved the csc and its simultaneous handling of managerial and adjudicatory matters .

a 1978 senate committee report described the issue: at the present time the civil service commission has a variety of functions .

 .

 .

the csc must now simultaneously serve as a management agent for a president elected through a partisan political process as well as the protection of the merit system from partisan abuse .

the commission serves , too , as the provider of services to agency management in implementing personnel programs , while maintaining sufficient neutrality to adjudicate disputes between agency managers and their employees .

as a result , the commission's performance of its conflicting functions has suffered .

expected to be all things to all parties — presidential counsellor , merit "watchdog," employee protector , and agency advisory — the commission has become progressively less credible in all of its roles .

in response to these and other issues , congress passed the civil service reform act ( csra ) , the most comprehensive reform of the civil service system since the pendleton act and the current legal framework governing the federal civilian workforce .

as part of this reform , and in conjunction with an earlier reorganization plan developed by president carter , the csra split the functions of the commission between two separate new agencies , opm and the mspb .

in general , the csra charged opm with conducting personnel management functions formerly performed by the csc , such as providing training and productivity programs , examining for civil service positions , classifying positions , and administering pay and benefits .

the mspb retained the csc's hearing , adjudication , and appeals functions , as well as authority to enforce agency compliance with its decisions .

the csra further authorized the mspb to develop its adjudicatory processes and procedures , and gave the board power to , among other functions , issue subpoenas , call witnesses to testify at hearings , and enforce compliance with its final decisions .

as noted above , the board consists of three members — a chairman , a vice chairman , and a third member — all appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the senate .

not more than two members may be adherents of the same political party .

in order to serve on the board , members must have demonstrated ability , background , training , or experience that makes them "especially qualified" to carry out the mspb's functions .

the term of office of each board member is seven years , and terms are nonrenewable .

while a sitting member may not be reappointed after a seven - year term , a member may continue to serve on the board for up to one additional year if no successor has been appointed .

board members also have for - cause removal protection and may be removed by the president only "for inefficiency , neglect of duty , or malfeasance in office. .

while the three board members make decisions in all cases by majority vote , the chairman of the board is the chief executive and administrative officer , responsible for handling issues related to the board's organization and personnel policies .

the vice chairman is tasked with performing the chairman's functions during absence , disability , or vacancy .

during the absence or disability of both the chairman and vice chairman or vacancies in both offices , the remaining board member performs the chairman's functions .

neither the csra nor the board's regulations expressly address a scenario in which the board is entirely vacant .

the office of special counsel ( osc ) in an independent federal agency that protects employees , former employees , and applicants for employment from prohibited personnel practices by receiving and investigating complaints of those practices .

the osc is headed by the special counsel , who is appointed by the president , by and with the advice and consent of the senate , for a term of five years .

after receiving and investigating allegations of prohibited personal practices , the special counsel may petition the mspb for corrective action if an agency does not correct the practice , and may seek disciplinary action against any employee who has committed such a practice .

the special counsel may also petition the board to order a stay of any personnel action that he believes was taken or is to be taken as a result of a prohibited personnel practice .

the special counsel position originally resided in the mspb .

in 1989 , congress established the osc as an independent agency to be headed by the special counsel .

the mspb hears and adjudicates matters within its jurisdiction , as provided by the csra and by any other statute , rule , or regulation .

the board maintains both original and appellate jurisdiction over cases .

the board has original jurisdiction over actions brought by the special counsel for corrective and disciplinary action , specified removals of persons in the senior executive service ( ses ) , and certain adverse personnel actions taken against administrative law judges ( aljs ) .

in cases involving its original jurisdiction , the board adjudicates the case initially rather than reviews an agency decision .

the mspb has appellate jurisdiction to review any action that is appealable to the board under any statute , rule , or regulation by an employee or applicant for employment .

for example , an agency's decision to remove or suspend an employee for more than 14 days may be appealed to the board .

cases may be heard by board members directly , or referred to aljs or board employees called "administrative judges. .

aljs typically adjudicate and issue initial decisions in cases involving corrective and disciplinary action .

administrative judges adjudicate cases and issue initial decisions under the board's appellate jurisdiction .

once decided , an initial decision may be appealed to the full board .

while both aljs and administrative judges are attorneys who are licensed to practice law , administrative judges do not enjoy the tenure and job protections of aljs .

an alj , for example , may only be removed for cause .

under 5 u.s.c .

§ 7703 , federal employees or applicants for employment who are adversely affected by a final order or decision of the mspb may obtain judicial review .

this section also specifies the judicial forum for these decisions .

in general , a petition for judicial review may be filed in the federal circuit within 60 days after the date the petitioner received notice of a board final decision .

the federal circuit must examine these cases under a standard of review that is deferential to the mspb's determination .

more specifically , the federal circuit is required to review the record in these cases and hold unlawful and set aside only any agency action , findings , or conclusions found to be: ( 1 ) arbitrary , capricious , an abuse of discretion , or otherwise not in accordance with law ; ( 2 ) obtained without procedures required by statute , rule , or regulation having been followed ; or ( 3 ) unsupported by substantial evidence .

under this standard of review , the supreme court has recognized that the federal circuit's ability to review the merits of mspb decisions is "extremely narrow. .

as the court has further explained , in examining these mspb decisions , "it is not for the federal circuit to substitute its own judgment for that of the board. .

accordingly , the federal circuit typically upholds board decisions .

according to a 2019 mspb report , over the past few years , the federal circuit has affirmed board decisions in 93 to 96 percent of the cases it reviewed .

courts have also acknowledged that the csra , as amended , provides the federal circuit with exclusive jurisdiction over appeals of mspb final decisions .

however , one central exception to this exclusivity , found under 5 u.s.c .

§ 7702 , is for so - called "mixed cases" involving allegations of federal antidiscrimination laws in connection with an improper adverse personnel action .

following the mspb's decision in a mixed case , affected employees may seek judicial review in federal district court , rather than the federal circuit .

district court review may be preferable for the petitioning federal employee , as district courts generally review these discrimination - related claims under a de novo standard ( i.e. , affording no deference to the determination of the mspb ) .

while this special jurisdictional rule for mixed cases may appear straightforward , courts have grappled with its application in a variety of circumstances .

two recent supreme court decisions , kloeckner v. solis and perry v. merit systems protection board , illustrate some of the issues that courts have confronted with respect to the judicial review of mspb decisions involving mixed cases .

the court in kloeckner considered the proper judicial forum when the board dismisses a mixed case on procedural grounds .

although the federal circuit generally held that the appropriate forum for review was the district court if the mspb dismissed a mixed case on the merits , other courts reached varying conclusions with respect to cases dismissed by the mspb for procedural reasons .

in kloeckner , a former labor department employee filed a discrimination claim with the agency , and the employee was subsequently terminated from her position .

the employee filed her case with the mspb , but the board dismissed her claim as untimely .

in a unanimous opinion written by justice kagan , the supreme court examined the statutory language in 5 u.s.c .

§ 7702 and held that when the mspb decides a mixed case , the proper forum for review is the district court , irrespective of whether the mspb dismissed the case on the merits or procedural grounds .

the court in perry also explored the judicial review of mixed case appeals , particularly in situations where the mspb dismissed a case for lack of board jurisdiction .

traditionally , lower courts had commonly held that the federal circuit , and not a district court , was the appropriate court to hear these types of cases .

in perry , a u.s. census bureau employee received notice that he would be removed from his position for poor attendance .

after the employee and the agency reached a settlement involving suspension from service and early retirement , the employee appealed to the mspb .

the mspb found that the employee's separation from service was voluntary , and , therefore , not an issue that the board had jurisdiction to examine .

the employee appealed the case to the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit ( d.c .

circuit ) , but the court transferred the case to the federal circuit .

in a 6-2 decision penned by justice ginsburg , the supreme court reversed the judgment of the d.c .

circuit .

similar to kloeckner , the court's opinion hinged on its interpretation of the statutory language in 5 u.s.c .

§ 7702 , under which district court review of a mixed case applies only when an employee " ( a ) has been affected by an action which the employee .

 .

 .

may appeal to the [mspb] and " ( b ) alleges .

 .

 .

discrimination. .

while the federal government had argued for purposes of this section that a case constitutes a mixed case only if the employee "may appeal to the board," the court rejected this argument .

instead , the court declared that under this language , what matters is not what the mspb determined about its ability to hear an appeal , but rather "the nature of an employee's claim that he had been "'affected by an action [appealable] to the [mspb]'" ( in this case , suspension and removal ) .

the court also relied on its decision in kloe c kner and found that when it comes to mixed cases , there was nothing in the statutory language that demonstrated congress's intent to treat jurisdictional dismissals differently from other types of mspb dismissals .

accordingly , the kloe c kner and perry decisions both arguably demonstrate that despite mspb's grounds for dismissing a mixed case , if an employee ( or a former employee ) "complains of serious adverse action prompted .

 .

 .

by the employing agency's violation of federal antidiscrimination laws," the appropriate forum for judicial review is the district court .

in recent years , congress has passed legislation that , for some types of cases , expressly extends judicial review of mspb decisions beyond the federal circuit .

the department of veterans affairs accountability and whistleblower protection act of 2017 addressed mspb appeal rights for veterans affairs department employees who have been suspended , demoted , or removed from federal service for performance or misconduct .

among other things , the act specifies that employees may appeal a decision of the mspb to the federal circuit or any court of appeals of competent jurisdiction .

additionally , in 2018 , congress passed the all circuit review act , which extends judicial review of mspb decisions in certain whistleblower and other retaliation cases not only to the federal circuit , but also to federal circuit court of appeals .

this act is a permanent extension of the whistleblower protection enhancement act , as amended , which provided for this expanded jurisdiction for a period that terminated on november 26 , 2017 .

according to the office of special counsel , the new act will , among other things , promote more "robust implementation of whistleblower protection laws. .

the special counsel further maintained that given the number of district and appellate courts that will now be hearing these cases , "[d]iffering interpretations may result in 'circuit splits,' which make it more likely that the u.s. supreme court will take up questions that arise regarding how these important laws are applied .

this expanded judicial accountability is precisely the outcome congress intended and will strengthen whistleblower protections. .

the mspb currently has no sitting members .

board member mark a. robbins , who served most recently as the mspb's acting chairman , ended his term on february 28 , 2019 .

the board has lacked a quorum since january 8 , 2017 , when former board chairman susan tsui grundmann resigned .

prior to that time , there were only two members on the board .

mspb regulations provide generally that its members will make decisions in all cases by majority vote .

these regulations do allow for some decision making when a majority vote is not possible because of a vacancy or recusal , but such decisionmaking is available only when there are at least two members in office .

without a quorum , the board is unable to issue final decisions in cases where an initial decision has been appealed .

as of december 31 , 2018 , there were approximately 1,800 cases pending before the board .

the absence of a quorum also restricts the board's ability to publish reports on merit system studies or promulgate new regulations in response to any legislative changes involving the mspb .

in 2018 , president trump nominated three individuals to serve as chairman , vice chairman , and board member .

a confirmation hearing for these nominees was subsequently held , but the nominees were not confirmed by the senate before the adjournment of the 115th congress .

on january 16 , 2019 , the president resubmitted the nominations for consideration by the 116th congress .

on february , 13 , 2019 , the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs approved two of the nominees , but the president's nominee for vice chairman withdrew from consideration prior to the committee's vote .

the committee's chairman has indicated that he will not advance the two nominees to the full senate until the president nominates , and the committee supports , a third member .

