streamgages measure water level and related streamflow at streams , rivers , lakes , and reservoirs across the country .

streamgages provide foundational information for diverse applications that affect a variety of constituents .

congress has supported a national streamgage program for 130 years .

these streamgages operate in every state , the district of columbia , and the territories of puerto rico and guam ; therefore , national streamgage operations garner interest from many members of congress .

data fro m streamgages informs real - time decisionmaking and long - term planning on issues such as hazard preparations and response , infrastructure design , water use allocations , ecosystem management , and recreation .

direct users of streamgage data include a variety of agencies from all levels of government , utility companies , consulting firms , scientific institutions , and recreationists .

streamgages are operated across the globe with national programs in north america , europe , australia , and brazil , among others .

in the united states , the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) , the department of the interior's ( doi's ) lead scientific agency , manages the usgs streamgaging network ( figure 1 ) .

the network encompasses 10,300 streamgages that record water height or streamflow for at least a portion of the year .

approximately 8,200 of these streamgages measure streamflow year - round and are part of the national streamflow network .

this subnetwork includes 3,640 federal priority streamgages ( fpss ) , which congress and the usgs designated as national priorities ( see section on " federal priority streamgages " ) .

some entities , such as state governments , operate their own streamgages separate from the usgs streamgaging network .

congressional appropriations and agreements with approximately 1,400 nonfederal partners funded the usgs streamgaging network at $189.5 million in fy2018 .

some streamgages are funded solely through congressional appropriations for the usgs and other federal agencies , such as the u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) , bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) , and department of defense ( dod ) .

much of the usgs streamgaging network is funded cooperatively .

interested parties sign funding agreements with the usgs to share the cost of streamgages and data collection .

the usgs cooperative matching funds program ( cmf ) provides up to a 50% match with tribal , regional , state , and local partners ( see section on " cooperative matching funds program " ) .

other federal agencies , nonfederal governments , and nongovernmental entities may provide reimbursable funding for streamgages in the usgs streamgaging network without contributed funds from the usgs .

evolving federal policies and user needs from diverse stakeholders have shaped the size , organization , and function of the usgs streamgage program .

this report provides an overview of federal streamgages by describing the function of a streamgage , the data available from streamgage measurements , and the uses of streamgage information .

the report also outlines the structure and funding of the usgs streamgaging network and discusses potential issues for congress , such as funding priorities and the future structure of the nation's streamgage network .

a streamgage's primary purpose is to collect data on water levels and streamflow ( the amount of water flowing through a river or stream over time ) .

streamgages estimate streamflow based on ( 1 ) continuous measurements of stage height ( the height of the water surface ) and ( 2 ) periodic measurements of streamflow , or discharge , in the channel and floodplains .

usgs measurements are used to create rating curves , in order to convert continuously measured stage heights into estimates of streamflow .

selected streamgages may provide additional measurements , such as measurements of water quality ( see box on "supergages" ) .

streamgages house instruments to measure , store , and transmit stream stage height ( figure 2 ) .

stage height is usually transmitted every hour , or more frequently at 5 to 15 minute intervals for emergency or priority streamgages .

most streamgages transmit data by satellite to usgs computers ; the data then are provided online to the public .

numerous streamgages also have cameras that capture and transmit photos of streamflow conditions .

periodic streamflow measurements require usgs personnel to measure discharge at various sections across the stream .

streamflow measurements are made every six to eight weeks to capture a range of stage heights and streamflows , especially at high and low stage heights .

repeated measurements allow scientists to capture changes to the channel from vegetation growth , sedimentation , or erosion , which can affect the relationship between stage height and streamflow .

the usgs national water information system ( nwis ) receives and converts all stream height data from usgs streamgages into streamflow estimates .

an example of streamgage data from nwis is shown in figure 3 for a site capturing peak streamflow during a hurricane event .

the free and publicly accessible data are frequently accessed online or by request to users .

for example , the agency responded to over 670 million requests for streamflow and water level information in 2018 .

the nwis website is the main repository for current and historical streamflow data , in addition to other water information .

tools such as waterwatch summarize the current conditions of the nation's streams and watersheds through maps , graphs , and tables by comparing real - time streamflow conditions to historic streamflow from streamgages with records of 30 years or more .

the usgs streamgaging network provides streamflow information to assist during natural and man - made disasters , such as flooding and drought , and to inform economic and statutory water management decisions , such as the allocation of water supplies for irrigation .

individual streamgages in the network also can serve multiple uses .

for example , a streamgage intentionally established for the purpose of reservoir management may provide data to inform water quality standards , habitat assessments , and recreational activities .

additionally , the value of a single streamgage is enhanced by the operation of the entire network , particularly for research , modeling , and forecasting .

streamgages were first established in the united states to inform water use and infrastructure planning — applications that benefit from continuous , long - term hydrologic records ( see box on "evolution of streamgage uses" ) .

long and continuous periods of data are used to construct baselines for water conditions and to identify deviations in the amount and timing of streamflow caused by changes in land use , water use , and climate .

some stakeholders contend that the value of streamflow records increases over time , with at least 20 years of continuous coverage needed for many applications .

technological advances allowing access to streamflow information in real time have expanded the uses of streamgages .

real - time forecasting and operational decisionmaking are used in many applications of streamflow data .

web and phone applications also have facilitated increased public use of water information .

the usgs streamgaging network is part of the groundwater and streamflow information program under the usgs water resources mission area .

the president's budget request for fy2020 proposes a restructuring of the mission area to create a water observing systems program that would combine the usgs streamgaging network and other water observation programs .

the primary operators of streamgages are the regional and state usgs water science centers , which maintain hydrologic data collection and conduct water research in the region .

approximately 8,200 of the 10,300 usgs streamgages measure year - round streamflow ( national streamflow network ; see figure 4 ) , with the rest only measuring stage height or measuring streamflow on a seasonal basis .

usgs streamgages are also differentiated based on cooperative funding ( cmf ) and federal interest ( fpss ) .

in fy2018 , congressional appropriations and nonfederal partners provided $189.5 million for the usgs streamgaging network ( figure 6 ) .

the usgs share included $24.7 million for fpss and $29.8 million for cmf .

other federal agencies provided $40.7 million ( table 1 ) .

nonfederal partners , mostly affiliated with the cmf program , provided $94.3 million .

the appropriations bill for the interior , environment , and related agencies funds the usgs share of the usgs streamgaging network .

funding for streamgages is included in the groundwater and streamflow information program under the usgs water resources mission area .

the line item includes funding for the streamgage network and groundwater monitoring activities , as well as other activities .

congress provided $74.2 million in fy2018 and $82.7 million in fy2019 for the groundwater and streamflow information program .

while maintaining level funding for fps and cmf streamgages in fy2019 , congress directed increased funding of $8.5 million for the deployment and operation of nextgen water observing equipment .

the president's budget request for fy2020 proposes creating a new water observing systems program combining the groundwater and streamflow information program and elements of the national water quality program focused on observations of surface water and groundwater .

the president's fy2020 budget requests $105.1 million for the proposed program , a decrease of $7.5 million compared to $112.5 million of fy2018 funding for a similar structure .

the budget request would maintain funding for active fps locations and provide no funding for the nextgen system .

for cmf , the request proposes a decrease of $500,000 for tribal water , which would result in a loss of $250,000 for cmf streamgages , and a decrease of $717,000 for urban waters federal partnership , which would reduce water quality monitoring at select streamgages .

other federal agencies contribute to whole or partial funding of streamgages for agency purposes ( table 1 ) .

since fy2012 , funding from other federal agencies has doubled from $19.9 million to $40.7 million in nominal dollars .

this increase may be due to meeting inflation and other streamgage cost increases ; to new needs for monitoring data with existing cooperators ( eg , usace in the savannah and jacksonville harbor expansion projects ) ; and to the introduction of additional funding partners ( eg , the epa ) that are supporting new streamgages .

nonfederal partners funded approximately half the costs of the usgs streamgaging network from fy2012 to fy2018 .

cooperative partners include tribal , regional , state , and local agencies related to natural resources , water management , environmental quality , transportation , and regional and city planning .

irrigation districts , riverkeeper partnerships , and utility agencies and companies also fund the program .

contributions by nongovernmental partners to streamgages are very limited ( 1% in fy2018 ) and are not eligible for cost - sharing through the usgs cmf program .

congress may consider funding levels and policy priorities for the usgs streamgaging network .

congressional appropriations may affect the size of the network and the design of streamgages .

congress may provide direction regarding the policy priorities when considering the mandates of the secure water act of 2009 and initiating the nextgen system .

congress determines the amount of federal funding for the usgs streamgaging network and may direct its allocation to fps , cmf , and other initiatives .

the usgs and numerous stakeholders have raised funding considerations including user needs , priorities of partners , federal coverage , infrastructure repair , disaster response , inflation , and technological advances .

congress may consider whether to maintain , decrease , or expand the network , and whether to invest in streamgage restoration and modernization .

the usgs uses appropriated funding to develop and maintain the usgs streamgaging network .

while some stakeholders advocate for maintaining or expanding the network , others may argue that congress should consider reducing the network in order to prioritize other activities .

congress may provide funding to maintain existing streamgages .

the administration continues to request funding for the groundwater and streamflow information program , which funds the usgs streamgaging network .

the fy2020 budget request states that "one of the highest goals of the usgs is to maintain long - term stability of a 'federal needs backbone network' for long - term tracking and forecasting / modeling of streamflow conditions. .

some stakeholders may advocate to maintain the current network as it provides hydrologic information for diverse applications ( see section on " streamgage uses " ) .

the fy2020 budget requests fps funding at fy2019 enacted levels .

if inflation increases costs , level funding may not fully maintain the current operations of fpss .

in addition , 71% of the network , including some fpss , are funded by other federal and nonfederal partners , which makes those streamgages potentially vulnerable for discontinuation .

according to the government accountability office , maintaining streamgages through partners can be a challenge due to both the changing priorities and financial limitations of the partners .

congress may consider reducing the network , either for fpss , cooperative streamgages , or both .

the usgs has discontinued some streamgages because of other funding priorities or because cooperators decided to no longer fund them and alternative funding was not available for the operating costs .

closures may affect individual streamgages or a collection of streamgages .

the administration requested reductions for the groundwater and streamflow information program in fy2018 , fy2019 , and fy2020 compared to previous congressional appropriations .

for fy2018 , the administration requested a decrease of $742,000 for the groundwater and streamflow information program , which the budget justification said would diminish the usgs's ability to execute its core activities including strengthening the national streamgaging and groundwater monitoring networks .

for fy2019 , the proposed reduction included a decrease of $160,000 for u.s. - canada transboundary streamgages .

the fy2019 and fy2020 requests proposed a decrease for tribal water cmf , which would result in a loss of cmf funding for select streamgages .

congress did not make these cuts in fy2018 and fy2019 , and is considering appropriations for fy2020 .

reducing the usgs streamgaging network could alleviate federal spending on streamgages and allow other entities to operate streamgages tailored to their needs .

on the other hand , discontinuing currently operational streamgages may result loss of data acquisition , discontinuation of long - term datasets , and decreased coverage in some basins .

some stakeholders have proposed that entities with specific needs build and operate their own streamgages separate from the usgs network .

some states , such as california and oregon , already operate their own streamgaging networks .

this approach may contain some challenges ( eg , the data may be of higher or lower quality , the data be restricted for public use , or the host may use different standards ) .

however , if individual streamgages were operated at the same level of quality as usgs streamgages , the usgs could incorporate such data into the nwis network .

some also argue that disparate data sets could be available on a shared platform with usgs streamgages ; such a platform could include information on methods of collection , quality , and accuracy .

congress may increase funding to expand the network , which could include establishing the remaining locations for fps , providing more funds for cooperative streamgages , or pursuing new initiatives like the nextgen system .

congress mandated completion of a national network of no less than 4,700 streamgages in the secure water act of 2009 .

at the close of fy2018 , 3,640 of the 4,760 fpss designated by the usgs were operational , with 52% of their funding coming from the usgs .

the usgs estimates that $125 million in additional funding each year would be needed to complete the network ; however , an average of only about $25 million ( in 2018 dollars ) was appropriated annually for fpss between fy2014 and fy2019 .

while some stakeholders have advocated for congress to provide full appropriations for fpss to meet the mandate based on network needs , congress may consider other funding priorities ( eg , the nextgen system ) .

congress may also consider if other federal agencies and nonfederal cooperative partners could provide more funding for fpss .

these entities may not be interested in financing some of the designated streamgages in the fps network , particularly those in isolated river basins with little anthropogenic activity .

some stakeholders advocate for more federal funding to expand the cooperative part of the network , which addresses more localized needs .

some may argue against more federal funding for cooperative streamgages as it lacks a direct statutory mandate ( unlike fpss ) .

others have proposed increasing nontraditional funding sources for streamgages .

they suggest that businesses , homeowner associations , non - for - profit organizations , academic institutions , and other nontraditional entities could provide funding for streamgaging ; therefore , increasing the amount of nonfederal investment .

contributions by nongovernmental partners to streamgages are currently relatively limited ( 1% in fy2018 ) and are not eligible for federal matching funds .

congress could potentially encourage wider participation by nontraditional partners through such means as authorizing cooperative matching opportunities for public - private partnerships .

traditional stakeholders may oppose making matching funds available to entities not currently eligible , which could result in more competition for limited funds .

congress increased the groundwater and streamflow information program appropriations by $1.5 million in fy2018 and $8.5 million in fy2019 .

these increases were directed to streamgages for the nextgen system ( see section on " nextgen system " ) .

congress may consider expanding the network through the nextgen system based on results from the pilot project .

increases solely directed to the nextgen system may intensify funding constraints for fpss and cmf streamgages .

streamgages are vulnerable to hazards if not properly hardened .

the secure water act directed the usgs to ensure all fpss were flood hardened by fy2019 .

according to the usgs , structural restoration is usually funded because of emergencies ; for example , disaster supplemental appropriations may provide funds for hardening streamgages , or funds are diverted from operational budgets to repair affected streamgages .

the 2017 hurricane season resulted in damage to more than 100 streamgages .

in response , congress provided $4.6 million in the bipartisan budget act of 2018 to repair , replace , and restore these streamgages and recover their data , and for hydrologists to reconstruct stream channel measurements .

when the usgs does not receive disaster supplemental funding from congress , the agency is not reimbursed for funding it redirects in order to provide around - the - clock monitoring during the events and equipment repair during and after the events .

some stakeholders have advocated for congress to provide funds specifically for strengthening and restoring infrastructure , especially to withstand natural disasters .

these stakeholders estimate that $238 million is needed to update half of the streamgages in the network to enable them to withstand major flood events and to meet new data transmitting requirements .

under budget constraints , increases in congressional appropriations are often prioritized to maintain or expand the network instead of restoration .

congress might consider investments in new technologies for the usgs streamgaging network .

while regarded as reliable , many of the current streamgage operations are based on labor - intensive and more expensive techniques .

some stakeholders suggest that investing in modern technological and computational capabilities could provide enhanced streamflow information with reduced costs .

others raise that these approaches may not provide the quality and consistency of data expected of usgs streamgages and may reduce funds available for existing operations .

the secure water act of 2009 directed the usgs to equip all fpss with modernized telemetry systems by fy2019 .

according to stakeholders , the current u.s. streamgage telemetry and information infrastructure may be vulnerable to failure , and the existing data collection platforms and computer networks might eventually be inefficient for real - time and detailed data .

in september 2018 , an error in telemetry equipment resulted in an outage of 11% of the network .

the usgs stated that redundancy in telemetry using cellular signals or camera streaming could have alleviated the problem , which affected the network for weeks .

the images act of 2018 ( h.r .

4905 ) introduced in the 115 th congress would have directed fema to work with usgs to modernize hardware and increase the speed of data transmittal , but the legislation did not specify funding amounts .

some stakeholders have suggested a figure of $112 million as the amount needed to upgrade the enterprise data management systems , information technology infrastructure , and real - time data delivery capabilities .

past increases of appropriations for streamgages have prioritized continued operation and network expansion over technological improvements .

to mitigate costs for such upgrades , federal science agencies are considering cloud computing that could also benefit cloud providers if other users develop applications on the cloud network using the data already hosted there .

the fy2020 budget request for the usgs outlines enhancement and modernization of nwis with a centralized platform meeting the federal cloud first computing strategy .

some argue that congress should fund alternative data infrastructure to ensure capacity and reliability of increased data while reducing the cost , though others may argue these strategies are not ready for full implementation .

the usgs suggests that modern models and computational methods to estimate streamflow in ungaged or sparsely gaged basins may provide an alternative approach to conventional streamgaging .

these methods require more observational data , particularly for reference river basins , than that provided by the current streamgage network .

in an effort to assess this approach , the usgs initiated a nextgen system pilot project in the delaware river basin with $1.5 million in fy2018 ( figure 8 ) , and the consolidated appropriations act , 2019 ( p.l .

116-6 ) provided $8.5 million for the nextgen system .

reports accompanying fy2019 interior appropriations bills by the house and senate in the 115 th congress addressed the nextgen system .

the senate committee report encouraged the usgs to have a cost - effective strategy for the nextgen system ( s.rept .

115-276 ) , and the house committee report directed the usgs to provide the committee with a report on the nextgen system , explaining the limitations of the current water monitoring system , the enhancements and modernization needed , and costs to implement the system over a 10-year period and operate and maintain the system ( h.rept .

115-765 ) .

the usgs says the funding will allow further the nextgen system implementation in the delaware river basin ; continued progress in modernizing usgs data infrastructure ; and the selection of the next basin .

advances by the nextgen system to estimate streamflow at ungagged locations based on modeling of highly measured reference basins could also result in reduced need for streamgages , lower costs , and expansion of coverage of streamflow data .

others may suggest that modeling streamflow may not provide adequate data as physical measurements , and initiating the nextgen system may result in decreased funding available for traditional operations .

congress may also consider directing the usgs to pursue innovative observation technologies: satellite - based or airborne platforms , ultrasound sensors for river stage - height measurement , radar technology for stream velocity , and autonomous vehicles for light detection and ranging ( lidar ) and other types of remote sensing .

the usgs is currently evaluating combining cameras and radars with advanced imagery analysis and installing these combined technologies on drone platforms to collect streamflow in difficult or inaccessible areas .

data coverage could also potentially increase with high - density sensing and sensor networks that use miniaturization , artificial intelligence , and economy of scale .

statistical advances to estimate streamflow at locations without streamgages could also result in reduced need for streamgages .

some suggest that such technologies may eventually satisfy streamflow information needs at lower cost , while others caution that advanced technologies may not provide as robust and reliable data as traditional methods .

congress may consider outlining the future direction for the usgs streamgaging network through oversight or legislation .

at the close of fy2018 , 3,640 of the 4,760 fps locations designated by the usgs were operational , with 52% of their funding coming from the usgs .

as the usgs faces a deadline by the secure water act of 2009 to operate no less than 4,700 fpss by fy2019 , congress directed the usgs through appropriations legislation to invest in the nextgen system .

congress may consider pursuing both the fps mandate and the nextgen system , amending the secure water act of 2009 to facilitate completion of fpss , or replacing the fps mandate with the next gen system .

congress may consider pursuing both fps coverage and the nextgen system .

this approach could allow the usgs to meet the secure water act mandate while fully exploring new methods to obtain streamflow information .

financial constraints may limit this approach and pursuing both initiatives simultaneously may result in duplication of resources and coverage .

congress may consider revising the secure water act of 2009 to facilitate completion of fpss ( i.e. , extending the deadline for fpss , reassessing the program goals , and changing the number of fpss ) .

extending the mandate may provide more time to complete the fps network .

some suggest that the national interests have evolved and the national goals and fps locations should be reassessed .

for example , monitoring streamflow for ecological purposes was not considered in the original design but has become an increased priority .

the secure water act of 2009 directed the usgs to incorporate principles of adaptive management by conducting period reviews of the fpss to assess whether the law's objectives were being adequately addressed .

an analysis of the network could reveal whether some currently funded fps sites are no longer in the national interest and funding could be reallocated to complete other sites .

changes in the national goals may also result in the discontinuation of long - term streamgages or the need for new streamgages , and coverage may increase or decrease in various river basins .

congress may consider replacing fpss with the nextgen system by authorizing the nextgen system as a pilot program or broader program .

for example , the weather research and forecasting innovation act of 2017 ( p.l .

115-25 ) required noaa to conduct a pilot program for commercial weather data .

the act stipulated program criteria , authorization of appropriations , reporting requirements , and future directs for noaa based on the success of the pilot program .

congress could provide similar mandates in legislation including which basins are chosen for nextgen system improvements and whether the basins are determined by an external study , the administration , or congress .

while some acknowledge new streamgaging approaches are forthcoming , others may suggest that modeling streamflow may not provide as adequate data compared to traditional streamgages and altering the network design may result in loss of coverage at specific sites or across basins .

