f irearms have a unique significance in american society .

millions own or use firearms for numerous lawful purposes , such as hunting and protecting themselves in the home .

still , firearms annually cause tens of thousands of injuries and deaths , including in high - profile mass shootings .

the widespread lawful and unlawful uses of firearms have prompted vigorous debate over wheth er further firearm regulation would be effective or appropriate .

and framing the policy debate are legal issues stemming from the existing federal framework of firearms laws and the constitutional constraints that may cabin congress's ability to legislate in this area .

firearms regulation at the federal level has grown more expansive over time , setting rules for the lawful manufacture , sale , and possession of firearms at the national level .

these federal firearms laws mostly serve as a baseline that states can ( and sometimes do ) supplement , and congress regularly considers legislation to address perceived gaps in these laws .

proposals to modify the current federal framework for regulating firearms may be informed by numerous constitutional considerations , including the scope of the second amendment right to keep and bear arms and the need to ground legislation in one of congress's enumerated powers .

this report provides an overview of the development of federal firearms laws and the major components of the current statutory regimes governing firearms .

it then describes the constitutional considerations that may impact congress's ability to enact firearms laws .

finally , this report describes selected topical areas where the 115 th and 116 th congresses have considered legislation to amend the existing federal framework regulating firearms , highlighting some of the constitutional issues that may arise in those areas .

federal laws regulating firearms date back roughly a century , and over time lawmakers have established more stringent requirements for the transfer , possession , and transportation of firearms .

though not a regulation of firearms per se , an excise tax was levied on imported firearms and ammunition beginning in 1919 .

in 1927 , a federal law was enacted prohibiting the use of the u.s .

postal service to ship concealable firearms .

then , "[s]purred by the bloody 'tommy gun' era" of the 1920s and early 1930s , congress passed the national firearms act of 1934 ( nfa ) , which established a stringent taxation and registration scheme for specified weapons associated with the prohibition - fueled gang violence of the time .

a few years later , congress enacted the federal firearms act of 1938 ( ffa ) , which created a licensing scheme for the manufacture , importation , and sale of firearms and established limited categories of persons who could not possess firearms .

the ffa eventually was superseded , however , by the more comprehensive gun control act of 1968 ( gca ) .

in addition to expanding the ffa's licensing scheme and categories of prohibited persons — which largely had been restricted to certain criminals — the gca augmented the criminal penalties available for violations and established procedures for obtaining relief from firearm disabilities .

since the gca's passage , intervening legislation has amended the regulatory regime significantly .

for instance , the firearm owners' protection act of 1986 ( fopa ) carved out exceptions to the felony firearm prohibition for certain crimes , repealed certain regulations pertaining to ammunition , expressly prohibited the creation of a national gun registry , added additional categories of persons who are barred from possessing firearms , prohibited the private possession of machineguns manufactured on or after the date of fopa's enactment , and further expanded the available criminal penalties for violations , among other things .

additionally , the brady handgun violence protection act of 1993 ( brady act ) mandated that the attorney general create a background check system — the national instant criminal background check system ( nics ) — which queries various government records that could indicate that a prospective transferee is ineligible to receive a firearm .

the brady act further required that a background check be run for many , but not all , proposed firearms transfers before they can be completed .

and the gun - free school zones act added a provision to the gca that , subject to certain exceptions , bans firearms in statutorily defined school zones .

in 1994 , congress also imposed a 10-year moratorium on the manufacture , transfer , or possession of "semiautomatic assault weapons," as defined in the act , and large capacity ammunition feeding devices , but the ban was permitted to expire in 2004 .

finally , some piecemeal legislation in recent years has sought to protect lawful firearm owners , manufacturers , or dealers in certain ways .

for example , the protection of lawful commerce in arms act , enacted in 2005 , grants civil immunity to firearm manufacturers , dealers , and importers when weapons made or sold by them are misused by others .

firearms regulation in the united states is an area of shared authority among federal , state , and local governments .

individual states have enacted a variety of laws relating to the possession , registration , and carrying of firearms , among other things .

however , federal law establishes a baseline regulatory framework that state and local laws may not contradict .

thus , the current collection of federal firearms laws may be thought of as a regulatory floor that sets out , at the federal level , the minimum requirements for lawful manufacture , sale , and possession of firearms .

the two principal federal firearms laws currently in force are the nfa and the gca , as amended .

the department of justice's bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives ( atf ) is the principal agency charged with administering these laws .

numerous constitutional considerations may inform congressional proposals to modify the current framework for regulating firearms sales and possession .

although congress has broad constitutional authority to regulate firearms , any firearm measure must be rooted in one of congress's enumerated powers .

in enacting firearms laws , congress has typically invoked its tax , commerce , and spending powers .

still , when exercising those enumerated powers , congress must be mindful of other constitutional restraints , such as those flowing from the second amendment , the fifth amendment's due process clause , and principles of federalism .

this section provides an overview of the primary powers congress has invoked to enact firearms measures and then addresses the constitutional constraints that independently could limit congress's ability to regulate firearms .

federal firearms regulation has been a subject of continuous interest for congress .

a range of proposals have been in this and past congresses .

some seek to ease federal firearms restrictions or facilitate state reciprocity in the treatment of persons authorized to carry firearms by another state ; others seek greater restrictions on the federal laws concerning the possession , transfer , or sale of firearms or the expansion of background checks for firearm purchases .

these various approaches , in turn , prompt various constitutional questions , including congress's constitutional authority to legislate on such matters and whether the proposed measures comport with the second amendment and other constitutional constraints .

this section discusses several congressional proposals related to 3d - printed firearms , background checks , mental illness , particular firearms and accessories ( eg , semiautomatic assault weapons , bump stocks , silencers ) , and "red flag" laws and identifies related constitutional questions .

under the undetectable firearms act of 1988 ( ufa ) , it is unlawful for any person to manufacture , import , sell , ship , deliver , possess , transfer , or receive a firearm ( 1 ) that , after removal of grips , stocks , and magazines , is not detectable by walk - through metal detectors ; or ( 2 ) any major component of which does not generate an accurate image when scanned by the types of x - ray machines commonly used at airports .

these prohibitions grew out of a concern that the increasing use of lightweight , noncorrosive plastics as a substitute for metal in firearm - component manufacturing would lead to the proliferation of firearms not detectable at security checkpoints .

despite the prohibitions in the ufa , the advent of 3d - printing technology and its application to firearms has prompted concern about a new wave of undetectable , plastic guns that technically comply with the statute and could fall into the wrong hands .

a high - profile example of a design for such a gun is the "liberator" pistol , plans for which were first disseminated in 2013 by defense distributed — a nonprofit "private defense firm" and ffl .

according to media reports , the design for the liberator allows for the 3d - printing of a functioning pistol that is almost entirely plastic , with the only metal components being a small firing pin and a removable piece of steel that is included specifically to make the design compliant with the ufa .

in other words , the irrelevance of the steel block to the firearm's functionality potentially could allow bad actors to produce operable and concealable plastic firearms that would not be caught by metal detectors .

with respect to defense distributed specifically , years of litigation over the company's online dissemination of computer files for 3d - printed nonmetallic firearms has mostly stymied the company's efforts to share its files on the internet .

most recently , a federal district court in washington entered an order that effectively bars defense distributed from making its disputed files available online for the duration of the ongoing lawsuit in that jurisdiction .

nevertheless , the company's continuing efforts to spread its designs for nonmetallic firearms have raised novel constitutional questions without easy answers , including ( 1 ) whether first amendment free speech protections extend to computer code ( which could bring defense distributed's activities within the amendment's scope ) , and ( 2 ) whether the second amendment protects the right to make arms as a necessary precursor to keeping and bearing them .

faced with the long - simmering dispute over dissemination of 3d - printed gun files and the possibly incomplete protections of the ufa , the 115 th and 116 th congresses have considered legislation addressing the online spread of 3d - printed gun files and the possession of 3d - printed guns themselves .

for instance , the 3d - printed gun safety act of 2018 would have made it unlawful to "intentionally publish" on the internet "digital instructions ... that can automatically program" a 3d printer or similar device to produce or complete a firearm .

perhaps with first amendment concerns in mind , the bill's "findings" section stated that congress's intention was not "to regulate the rights of computer programmers" but was instead "to curb the pernicious effects of untraceable — and potentially undetectable — firearms. .

other legislation would appear to have banned firearm assembly kits or firearm components that might be produced with a 3d printer either by amending the definition of firearm in the gca or by bringing such items within the purview of the consumer product safety act .

the untraceable firearms act of 2018 additionally would have expanded serial number requirements , extended the ufa to firearms lacking detectable major components , and clarified that manufacturing firearms under the gca includes 3d printing , among other things .

finally , a bill introduced in the 115 th congress would have amended the gca to prohibit the manufacture of firearms or components by means of a 3d printer and the transfer or possession of any such items .

the 116 th congress began with a push in the house to expand firearm background checks .

two house bills were passed in february 2019: ( 1 ) h.r .

8 , the bipartisan background checks act of 2019 , and ( 2 ) h.r .

1112 , the enhanced background checks act of 2019 .

if enacted , h.r .

8 would expand background checks to capture many private transfers between non - ffls , subject to enumerated exceptions .

 ( a similar bill has been introduced in the senate. ) .

one question the bill raises is whether it may be lawfully enacted under one of congress's article i powers .

the bill's accompanying constitutional authority statement does not specify which article i power congress is invoking to enact the measure , but the bill may be an attempt to exercise congress's commerce power .

although the bill does not use the word commerce , other gca provisions lack an explicit textual hook to the commerce clause .

courts reviewing other federal firearms law without a textual hook have upheld those measures after distinguishing them from the firearm possession law struck down in lopez .

accordingly , the constitutionality of h.r .

8 , as a lawful enactment under the commerce clause , may depend on the ability to distinguish it from the flaws the supreme court identified in lopez .

h.r .

1112 would amend the so - called "default proceed" process that allows an ffl to transfer a firearm when the nics check has not been completed within three business days .

the bill provides a mechanism for a transfer to occur if the ffl does not receive instructions from the nics system on whether to proceed with or deny a proposed transaction within 10 business days .

if the transferee wishes to proceed with the sale in such cases , he or she must file a petition ( electronically or via first - class mail ) to the attorney general certifying that the transferee does not believe he or she is prohibited from acquiring the firearm .

if a response is not provided within 10 business days , the ffl would be allowed to proceed with the transfer .

the committee report accompanying the bill appears to construe these 10-day periods as occurring in succession rather than concurrently ( i.e. , the delay period might last up to 20 business days ) .

because the bill potentially could delay a sale to a law - abiding citizen up to 20 business days , there may be questions about whether those persons have received adequate procedural due process in the short - term deprivation of a constitutionally protected interest .

because the temporary deprivation ( i.e. , the inability to purchase a firearm for self - defense ) would occur before a firearm may be transferred to the prospective purchaser , a reviewing court would be tasked with determining whether post - deprivation proceedings — meaning proceedings that take place after a person has been deprived of a constitutionally protected interest — are constitutionally permissible .

typically , due process requires that a person be given an opportunity to be heard before the deprivation of a protected interest may occur ; in that case there are pre - deprivation hearings .

but the supreme court has recognized in circumstances in which the government "must act quickly , or where it would be impractical to provide pre - deprivation process , post - deprivation process satisfies the requirements of the due process clause. .

some members of congress have proposed measures that would require states to recognize concealed carry privileges afforded by other states .

both s. 69 , the constitutional carry reciprocity act of 2019 , and h.r .

38 , the concealed carry reciprocity act of 2019 , if enacted , would allow persons who are eligible to carry a concealed handgun in one state to lawfully carry a handgun in other states that have a concealed - carry regime for their residents without regard to differences in the states' eligibility requirements for concealed carry .

both bills purport to preempt state laws to varying degrees .

whether these preemption provisions are considered to be valid likely will depend on whether the bills , as a whole , are interpreted to "confer[] on private entities ... a federal right to engage in certain conduct," i.e. , carrying a concealed handgun , "subject only to certain ( federal ) constraints. .

h.r .

38 also contains a civil - suit provision that would authorize a private right of action against any person , state , or local government entity that interferes with a concealed - carry right that the bill establishes .

because the bill seeks to abrogate the states' eleventh amendment immunity from suit in federal court , several questions need to be answered , the first being what exception to eleventh amendment immunity the bill is invoking .

given that the bill cites the second amendment as the constitutional source of authority , it is possible that the bill seeks to invoke congress's enforcement power under section five of the fourteenth amendment .

section five of the fourteenth amendment enables congress to abrogate a state's eleventh amendment immunity through legislation designed to enforce the fourteenth amendment's protections .

and the second amendment is made enforceable on the states via the fourteenth amendment .

if congress , indeed , intends to invoke its section five power , a second question raised is whether legislation designed to remedy or deter state violations of the second amendment would be a permissible exercise of congress's section five enforcement power .

and assuming that congress could lawfully exercise its section five power to enforce violations of second amendment rights , a third question would be whether the second amendment protects the right to carry a concealed handgun — an issue that has divided the federal appellate courts .

as described previously , a person who has been "adjudicated as a mental defective" or "committed to a mental institution" is barred by federal law from transporting , possessing , or receiving firearms or ammunition .

both regulatory and judicial interpretations of these terms have focused on the need for a formal decision by an authoritative body like a court or board after an adjudicative hearing , as broader interpretations could raise constitutional due process and second amendment concerns .

nevertheless , the prohibition — even construed narrowly — has been criticized in some quarters as unconstitutional given its effectively permanent nature or as stigmatizing mental illness and unfairly painting as dangerous individuals who are more likely to be victims than perpetrators of violent crime .

at the same time , some observers have , in response to past mass shootings , called for even stricter limits on possession of firearms by the mentally ill. for its part , the 115 th congress considered bills that would have both broadened and narrowed the existing firearm prohibition .

some legislation would have , among other things , adopted the narrow understanding that an adjudication or commitment for purposes of the firearm prohibition must stem from an order or finding of an "adjudicative body" after a hearing and that the order or finding may impose only a temporary disability .

other legislation would have added temporary firearm prohibitions for persons assessed by mental health professionals to pose a risk of danger to others .

apart from constitutional and interpretive issues , commentators have highlighted the challenges of collecting comprehensive mental health records for use in nics background checks , contending that the 2007 virginia tech shooting could have been avoided if the gunman's prior state mental health adjudication had been reported .

one challenge specific to collecting mental health records is that many such records are held by state or local agencies that may believe patient information must remain confidential pursuant to the health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) .

to combat this perception , the department of health and human services issued a rule in 2016 that expressly allows specified state entities to report limited information otherwise covered by hipaa to nics or to another entity that reports to nics .

as noted above , congress has also sought to improve mental health record reporting at the state level through niaa , which ( among other things ) funds state efforts to develop systems for accurate and complete reporting .

nics reporting of mental health records at the federal level has raised somewhat different issues .

although federal agencies are generally required to report mental health adjudication records for background check purposes , niaa makes clear that federal departments and agencies may not furnish such records if the relevant adjudication has been set aside or the person has been found to be "rehabilitated," among other things .

additionally , the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , which appears to supply the vast majority of federal mental health records to nics , has for years provided records of beneficiaries who are appointed fiduciaries to manage their financial affairs based on a va determination that the beneficiaries are "mentally incompetent" ; concern that this practice may unfairly deprive veterans of their right to possess firearms , however , led to the introduction of legislation in the 115 th congress that would have ensured that veterans for whom fiduciaries are appointed are not considered "adjudicated as a mental defective" unless a judicial authority has issued an order or finding "that such person is a danger to himself or herself or others. .

a final rule published by the social security administration ( ssa ) in december 2016 , which specified similar conditions for ssa reporting of disability program beneficiaries who were appointed a representative payee , was also vacated by congress through a congressional review act resolution early in 2017 .

numerous proposals have been made over the years to limit or expand the ability to possess certain kinds of firearms and accessories .

for example , bills have targeted limiting the possession of semiautomatic "assault weapons," large - capacity ammunition feeding devices , and bump stocks .

conversely , other bills have proposed decreasing regulations on firearm silencers .

there has been continued interest in tightening the regulation of semiautomatic "assault weapons" since the 1994 ban expired in 2004 .

some proposals seek to reinstate and expand upon the former assault weapon ban .

congress has also considered bringing certain semiautomatic firearms under the more - stringent nfa's regulatory scheme .

further , some members of congress have proposed to make it unlawful for an ffl to sell or transfer to any person under 21 years old certain semiautomatic rifles ; currently , anyone age 18 or older may purchase such rifles from an ffl .

banning the possession of these kinds of firearms entirely or by a subset of the population may raise second amendment questions , such as the extent to which the second amendment protects the right of all persons to bear specific arms other than handguns in the home for self - defense .

to date every federal appellate court that has reviewed a state or local semiautomatic assault weapon ban has rejected second amendment challenges to those laws .

nor has a federal appellate court sustained a challenge to the current federal law that prohibits the sale of handguns to persons under 21 years old .

there have also been proposals to ban "bump stock" devices , which can be attached to a semiautomatic firearm and allow it to effectively mimic the firing capability of a fully automatic weapon .

after it was discovered that the assailant behind the las vegas , nevada , mass shooting in october 2017 used one of these firearm accessories , atf initiated the process of regulating them .

atf published a final rule the next year , on december 26 , 2018 , banning the transfer and possession of all bump stock devices , effective march 26 , 2019 .

litigation seeking to enjoin the rule before its effective date followed .

the plaintiffs challenged the rulemaking process and the rule itself .

codifying the ban through legislation would avoid the challenges to the rulemaking process but could potentially be subject to constitutional challenge under the takings clause , which forbids "private property [to] be taken for public use , without just compensation. .

in this vein , takings lawsuits for compensation under the tucker act or little tucker act potentially could be brought by persons who owned bump stock devices before the effective date of any statutory ban .

still , these constitutional concerns could be alleviated by creating a grandfather clause for bump stocks that were lawfully owned before the effective date of any bump stock ban .

additionally , there have been congressional efforts to deregulate firearm silencers , which are currently regulated under the nfa and gca .

in the shush acts , as introduced in the house and senate , some members have proposed measures that , if enacted , would eliminate the federal regulation of firearm silencers entirely .

these bills also seek to preempt state and local laws that impose a tax on the making , transferring , possessing , or transporting of a firearm silencer as well as those that require marking , recordkeeping , or registering the same .

less expansive proposals purport only to remove silencers from nfa regulation .

thus , if the bills were enacted , silencers would not be subject to the nfa's tax and registration requirements but would still be subject to all gca firearm regulations .

still , this proposal contains the same preemption provisions as the more comprehensive shush acts .

all three bills may raise questions about whether the preemption provisions are constitutionally valid , as congress can only preempt state and local measures when those measures conflict with a federal regulation covering the same activity .

as relevant here , though , congress , as part of a deregulation measure , may expressly prohibit states from further regulating the same activity "[t]o ensure that the states would not undo federal deregulation with regulation of their own. .

somewhat related to mental health firearm restrictions are proposals for so - called "red flag" laws , which generally permit courts to issue temporary orders barring particular persons from possessing guns based on some showing of imminent danger or a risk of misuse .

following the february 2018 school shooting in parkland , florida , a number of states proposed or passed red - flag laws , and legislation has been introduced in the 116 th congress on the subject .

disagreement over various proposals has largely turned on the stringency of the showing that must be made to obtain an order , the persons who may seek an order , whether an initial order may be obtained without the presence of the gun owner , and the length of the resultant firearm disability .

red - flag legislation may raise questions as to whether such measures run afoul of the second amendment and deprive gun owners ( or prospective gun owners ) of constitutionally protected interests without due process of law .

however , proponents of such laws assert that they are an effective and needed means of averting gun violence before it happens and that hearing and review procedures are constitutionally adequate .

were a court to consider a constitutional challenge to a red - flag measure under the second amendment or due process clause , the outcome potentially could depend on ( 1 ) the court's conception of the scope of the right to keep and bear arms in light of heller and ( 2 ) the weight ascribed by the court to the three mathews v. eldridge factors based on the particular procedures of the measure at issue .

