in january 2019 , the house agreed to h.res .

6 , a resolution "adopting the rules of the house of representatives for the one hundred sixteenth congress. .

this report summarizes amendments to house rules affecting committee procedure in the 116 th congress ( 2019-2020 ) as provided for in h.res .

6 .

the report also describes separate orders contained in the resolution that relate to committee procedure , including the establishment of the select committee on the climate crisis and the select committee on the modernization of congress .

separate orders have the same force and effect as house rules and are commonly included in the house rules package resolution .

in the 116 th congress , rules changes that affect all house committees concern committee membership and organization , hearings and markups , and committee oversight and investigations .

changes that affect specific committees include modifications to the names , jurisdiction , or procedure of certain house committees .

h.res .

6 e stablished a select committee on the climate crisis .

the select committee's "sole authority" is to "investigate , study , make findings , and develop recommendations on policies , strategies , and innovations" to reduce pollution and "other activities that contribute to the climate crisis. .

the select committee does not have the legislative authority to report bills or resolutions or the legal authorit y to issue subpoena s or take depositions .

however , it c an submit subpoena and deposition recommendations to relevant standing committees , hold public hearings in support of its investigative functions , and otherwise function under the r ules governing standing committees .

the select committee shall be composed of 15 members , delegates , or the resident commissioner .

the speaker is to appoint the members , with six members selected at the recommendation of the minority leader .

the speaker is to designate a chair and , upon the minority leader's recommendation , a vice chair .

the membership must possess certain attributes: at least two members are to be serving their first terms in congress , at least two are to be members of the committee on rules , and at least two are to be members of the committee on house administration .

h.res .

6 requires the select committee to submit policy recommendations to the relevant standing committees by march 31 , 2020 , and report to the house its investigations , detailed findings , and policy recommendations by december 31 , 2020 .

the policy recommendations and report are to be made publicly available in "widely accessible formats" not later than 30 days following the march 31 and december 31 , 2020 , dates of completion .

title ii of h.res .

6 establishes a select committee on the modernization of congress to recommend improvements to the work and operation of congress .

the select committee's "sole authority" is to "investigate , study , make findings , hold public hearings , and develop recommendations on modernizing congress. .

such recommendations could include new rules to "promote a more modern and efficient congress ; " new scheduling procedures ; policies to "develop the next generation of leaders ; " policies to recruit , retain , and provide for a diverse staff ; policies to make congressional administration more efficient ; policies on technology and innovation ; and new procedures regarding the house commission on congressional mailing standards ( commonly known as the "franking commission" ) .

the select committee's membership is to include two members , delegates , or the resident commissioner appointed by the speaker .

at least two members must be serving in their first term , at least two members must be members of the committee on rules , and at least two members must be members on the committee of house administration .

the select committee is bipartisan in composition .

half of the members are appointed on the recommendation of the minority leader .

the speaker designates the chair and , on the recommendation of the minority leader , the vice chair .

the select committee does not have legislative jurisdiction or authority to take legislative action on bills or resolutions , and it does not have subpoena or deposition authority .

however , it may submit legislative , subpoena , and deposition recommendations to the relevant standing committees .

and , like standing committees , the committee was required to have a member day hearing at the start of 116 th congress .

h.res .

6 requires the select committee to provide an interim status report every 90 days .

this interim report must include transcripts of committee proceedings , itemized expenditures , and a proposed plan of activity for the next 90 days .

with the "votes of not fewer than 2 / 3 of its members," the select committee is also authorized to submit additional reports from "time to time" that provide the results of investigations , detailed findings , and policy recommendations .

the select committee is to submit its final report , with the "votes of not fewer than 2 / 3 of its members," at the end of the first session of the 116 th congress .

this report is to include detailed findings and policy recommendations .

the select committee is also to submit policy recommendations to the relevant standing committees .

all committee reports are to be made available to the general public within 30 calendar days of their submittal to congress or a committee .

the select committee is to terminate on february 1 , 2020 .

upon its termination , the select committee's records are to be transferred to relevant standing committees , as determined by the speaker .

