because of technological advances in digitization and data processing , electronic forms of payment have become increasingly available , convenient , and cost efficient .

established technologies , such as credit and debit cards , have long been a popular payment option .

in addition , new payment methods ( eg , paypal's venmo app and square's point - of - sale hardware , among others ) use underlying traditional banking and payments systems to make electronic payments less expensive and more available to individuals and small businesses .

newer digital currencies , such as cryptocurrencies , offer alternative ( though not yet widely adopted ) options that have a high degree of independence from traditional systems .

although cash remains an important method of payment in the united states ( see figure 1 ) , anecdotal reporting suggests that various electronic payment systems have become so effective and inexpensive relative to cash payments that some u.s. businesses — even those at which sales generally have a low dollar value — are increasingly choosing not to accept cash .

in some developed countries , such as sweden , cash payments are becoming relatively scarce .

in addition , a number of central banks worldwide are examining the possibility of issuing government - backed digital currencies that exist only electronically .

these trends suggest that due to buyer or seller preference or government policy , the role of cash in the payment system may continue to decline , perhaps significantly , in coming years .

some observers have examined the consequences of an evolution away from cash .

proponents of reducing the use of physical currency ( or even eliminating it all together and becoming a cashless society ) argue that it will generate important benefits , including potentially improved efficiency of the payment system , a reduction of crime , and less constrained monetary policy .

proponents of maintaining cash as a payment option argue that significant reductions in cash usage and acceptance would further marginalize people with limited access to the financial system , increase the financial system's vulnerability to cyberattack , and reduce personal privacy .

given developments and debate in this area , congress may consider policy issues related to the declining use of cash relative to electronic forms of payment .

this report is divided into two parts .

the first part analyzes cash and noncash payment systems , and the second analyzes potential outcomes if cash were to be significantly displaced as a commonly accepted form of payment .

part i describes the characteristics of cash and the various electronic payment systems that could potentially supplant cash .

the noncash payment systems include traditional electronic payment systems ( such as credit cards or payment apps ) and alternative electronic payment systems , focusing on private systems using distributed ledger technology ( such as cryptocurrencies ) and central bank digital currencies ( which are only under consideration by central banks at this time ) .

part i also examines the advantages and costs specific to each payment system and the potential obstacles to the adoption of alternative electronic payment systems .

part ii of this report analyzes the potential implications of a reduced role of cash payments in the economy , including potential benefits , costs , and risks .

the report also includes an appendix that presents two international case studies of economies in which noncash payment systems rapidly expanded .

this section provides analysis of cash , traditional noncash payment systems , and potential alternative payment systems .

it describes the characteristics , presents usage data , and analyzes the advantages and costs of each system .

it also includes a discussion on the potential decline in cash usage and a short inset on the legality of businesses' refusing to accept cash .

as discussed above , although cash remains a frequently used payment system , other payment systems continue to develop that offer their own advantages and costs .

various trends suggest that due to market preference or government policy , the role of cash in the payment system has begun to decline and may continue to decline , perhaps significantly , in coming years .

if the relative benefits and costs of cash and the various other payment methods evolve in such a way that cash is significantly displaced as a commonly accepted form of payment , that evolution could have a number of effects , both positive and negative , on the economy and society .

this section of the report describes a number of potential benefits of a reduced role for cash in the u.s. economy and the various risks and costs that may occur .

many of the factors discussed below may not occur wholly as a benefit , risk , or cost ; rather , a potential benefit may bring with it a risk , and vice versa .

cash has a number of advantageous features that has made it a simple and robust payment system throughout most of human history .

it is difficult to imagine conditions under which cash would be replaced entirely , and disappear from the economy , at least in the near future .

nevertheless , its hegemony as a payment system appears to have come to an end , as electronic payment systems have gained popularity , and the ubiquity of cash acceptance for in - person purchases also seems precarious .

if noncash payment systems significantly displace cash and cash usage and acceptance significantly declines , there would be a number of effects ( both positive and negative ) on the economy and society .

now or in the near future , policymakers may face decisions about whether to impede or hasten the decline of cash and consider the implications of doing so .

two countries provide interesting case studies of market forces drastically changing the way a society makes payments .

sweden in recent years , the use of cash in sweden has quickly and substantially declined , dropping from 40% to 13% of transactions between 2010 and 2018 .

in many cases , businesses no longer accept cash , and one survey indicated that two - thirds of small businesses planned to stop accepting cash .

anecdotal reporting indicates that about 5% of bank branches accept cash deposits or offer cash withdrawals .

furthermore , sweden's central bank is examining the possibility of creating registered accounts for the purpose of issuing currency electronically .

reportedly , many swedes are generally in favor of the trend ( the displacement of cash is due largely to consumer preference ) , though some have voiced concerns about financial access issues that the change causes for certain groups , such as the elderly .

observers have put forward a number of explanations for the sweden's growing preference for electronic payment methods such as cards and mobile app enabled payments .

one argument asserts that sweden is an especially technology savvy country .

as such , swedes are comfortable using electronic payment systems , and swedish companies have developed fast and easy payment technologies , such as izettle and swish .

some observers also have suggested that swedes are especially trusting of institutions and thus have fewer privacy concerns .

some have noted that the timing of the start of the decline in cash use among swedes coincided with the start of a transition to new swedish banknotes and coins .

they suggest that this spurred people and businesses to make a switch not to the new bills and coins but instead to electronic payment methods .

kenya in 2007 , a company named safaricom — kenya's largest mobile phone network operator — introduced a "mobile money" service called m - pesa ( "m" stands for "mobile" and "pesa" is the swahili word for money ) .

users of the service download a phone application and deposit cash with m - pesa employees called "agents. .

they can then transfer money into any other m - pesa account using their phone .

originally intended as a service for kenyans who had moved to a city to earn money to send back home to rural areas , the service became tremendously popular as a general use payment system .

by 2016 , there were approximately 31.6 million mobile money accounts in kenya , which had a total population of 47.6 million in 2017 .

many observers identify the combination of lack of access to traditional banking services and the proliferation of mobile phones in kenya as a driving factor for the expansion of m - pesa and subsequent mobile money services .

these observers argue that in kenya , as with many developing and largely rural nations , both consumers and banks view financial and bank services as a business need of the rich .

in 2006 , before the introduction of m - pesa , just 19% of kenyans had bank accounts and there was 1.5 bank branches for every 100,000 people .

however , 54% of kenyans had their own mobile phone or access to one .

another explanation for the rise of mobile money is that safaricom successfully identified a large , profitable , and previously untapped market in kenya .

available mobile technology and its proliferation among the population meant low - cost money transfers could be profitably offered to lower - income consumers .

certain observers assert that the success of m - pesa has caused kenyan financial institutions to reevaluate their business models , shifting their focus to offering services to lower - income groups than they previously targeted , and cite the increase in bank accounts and the decline of the average account balances as evidence of this change .

as a result , the portion of the kenyan population with access to some type of formal financial services has grown from 27% in 2006 to 75% in 2017 .

although mobile money appears to have filled a market need , the degree to which it has displaced cash should not be overstated .

an official at safaricom estimated in february 2018 that as many as 8 out of 10 transactions are still cash transactions , as kenyans still reportedly prefer cash for small , in - person purchases because of convenience and using m - pesa generally involves fees .

in addition , workers are still generally paid in cash .

