on december 20 , 2018 , president trump signed into law a new five - year omnibus farm bill , the agricultural improvement act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-334 ; the 2018 farm bill ) .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) will implement the provisions , most of which take effect in calendar year 2019 .

the 2018 farm bill includes 12 titles covering different program areas .

the first title , title i — commodities , authorizes several major revenue support and disaster assistance programs ( see shaded box below ) .

this report briefly describes the major revenue support programs in title i of the 2018 farm bill .

in addition , it reviews changes to key administrative provisions such as program eligibility and signup , payment acres and yields , payment limits , and cost projections .

appendixes at the end of this report ( table a - 1 to table a - 5 ) provide side - by - side comparisons of the provisions for five of the subtitles of title i with prior law ( as indicated in the shadow box above — subtitle c , sugar , and subtitle d , dairy , are discussed elsewhere ) .

aside from dairy and sugar , which have their own specific programs , most grain and oilseed crops produced in the united states are eligible for two tiers of revenue support under title i of the 2018 farm bill .

specialty crops such as fruits , vegetables , and tree nuts are not covered .

the first tier of support is provided by the marketing assistance loan ( mal ) program , which offers a minimum price guarantee for production of "loan" commodities in the form of a short - term loan at statutorily set prices ( table 1 ) .

the mal program may be supplemented by a higher , second tier of revenue support comprised of two other programs: ( 1 ) the price loss coverage ( plc ) program , which provides price protection via statutory fixed "reference" prices for eligible crops , or ( 2 ) the agricultural risk coverage ( arc ) program , which provides revenue protection via historical moving average revenue guarantees based on the five most recent years of crop prices and yields .

plc and arc are available for producers that own or rent historical "base" acres of "covered" commodities .

the sugar and dairy sectors are supported by separate federal farm programs that are tailored more specifically to the physical differences associated with each of their products — refined sugar and liquid fresh milk — and their respective markets .

disaster assistance is available for producers of most tree crops and livestock .

the noninsured crop assistance program is available for all agricultural commodities that are not covered by a federal crop insurance policy .

all of these title i programs existed under the previous 2014 farm bill .

the 2018 farm bill extends their authority through crop year 2023 but with some modifications to most of them .

occasionally , agricultural producers may receive federal support under programs authorized outside of the farm bill .

the secretary of agriculture has broad latitude under the authority of the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) charter act to make direct payments in support of u.s. agriculture .

two such programs implemented in recent years under ccc authority are the cotton ginning cost share program and the market facilitation program .

separately , under the federal crop insurance program , title i program commodities — along with more than 100 other crops including fruits and vegetables — are also eligible for subsidized crop insurance , which provides within - year yield ( or revenue ) protection .

the federal crop insurance program is permanently authorized outside of the omnibus farm bill by the federal crop insurance act ( 7 u.s.c .

§1501 et seq .

 ) .

the 2018 farm bill includes title xi — crop insurance , which makes minor adjustments to program implementation but does not alter the underlying authority of the federal crop insurance program .

neither the federal crop insurance program nor programs authorized under the ccc charter act are discussed in this report .

the farm revenue support program provisions from title i of the 2014 farm bill are largely preserved under the 2018 farm bill but with some modifications , as identified below .

the sugar ( subtitle c ) and dairy ( subtitle d ) programs are essential parts of title i of the 2018 farm bill .

however , their programs differ markedly from the mal , plc , and arc programs .

neither dairy nor sugar program benefits are subject to any per - person payment limit .

in addition , the commodities themselves differ from the other title i commodities ( primarily grain and oilseed crops ) in the nature of their output — fluid milk and refined sugar , how these commodities are processed and stored , and the markets that they are sold into .

as a result , the dairy and sugar programs are briefly discussed below but are described in more detail in other reports .

four disaster assistance programs that focus primarily on livestock and tree crops were permanently authorized in the 2014 farm bill .

these disaster assistance programs provide federal assistance to help farmers and ranchers recover financially from natural disasters , including drought and floods .

participation is free .

the livestock indemnity program ( lip ) compensates producers at a rate of 75% of market value for livestock mortality or livestock sold at a loss .

eligible loss conditions may include ( 1 ) extreme or abnormal damaging weather that is not expected to occur during the loss period for which it occurred , ( 2 ) disease that is caused or transmitted by a vector and is not susceptible to control by vaccination , and ( 3 ) an attack by animals reintroduced into the wild by the federal government or protected by federal law .

the livestock forage disaster program ( lfp ) provides payments to eligible livestock producers who have suffered grazing losses on drought - affected pastureland ( including cropland planted specifically for grazing ) or on rangeland managed by a federal agency due to a qualifying fire .

the tree assistance program ( tap ) provides payments to eligible orchardists and nursery growers to replant or rehabilitate trees , bushes , and vines damaged by natural disasters , disease , and insect infestation .

eligible losses must exceed 15% after adjustment for normal mortality .

payments cover 65% of the cost of replanting trees or nursery stock and 50% of the cost of rehabilitation ( eg , pruning and removal ) .

the emergency assistance for livestock , honey bees , and farm - raised fish program ( elap ) provides payments to producers of livestock , honey bees , and farm - raised fish as compensation for losses due to disease , adverse weather , feed or water shortages , or other conditions ( such as wildfires ) that are not covered under lip or lfp .

the 2018 farm bill amended the permanent agricultural disaster assistance programs by expanding the definition of eligible producer to include indian tribes or tribal organizations .

it also expanded payments under lip for livestock losses caused by disease and for losses of unweaned livestock that occur before vaccination .

it increased replanting and rehabilitation payment rates for orchardists who are beginning farmers or veterans under tap .

finally , it removed payment limits on elap .

of the four disaster assistance programs , only the lfp is now subject to the $125,000 per - person payment limit .

cbo projects usda spending for title i farm commodity and disaster programs under the 2018 farm bill at $31.3 billion for the five - year 2019-2023 period .

this translates to $6.3 billion annually , including projected annual outlays of $4.1 billion for plc and $1.2 billion for arc ( table 2 ) .

this contrasts with estimated annual outlays on title i programs under the 2014 farm bill of $7.2 billion , including $1.8 billion for plc and $3.3 billion for arc .

under the 2014 farm bill , most acres of corn , soybeans , and wheat — the three largest crops produced annually in the united states — were enrolled in arc ( 93% , 97% , and 56% , respectively ) .

this preference for enrollment in arc contributed to larger annual payment outlays under arc ( $3.3 billion per year on average ) than plc ( $1.8 billion per year ) under the 2014 farm bill .

cbo's spending projections assume that a large proportion of producers will switch from participating in arc to plc under the 2018 farm bill ( figure 7 ) .

the assumed shift in participation between the two programs is driven by projections of farm prices for major program crops to track near or below plc reference prices throughout the 10-year projection period , thus implying greater potential for plc payments .

the substantial projected shift in participation from arc to plc is projected to result in significantly larger annual outlays under the plc program ( $4.1 billion per year ) than under the arc program ( $1.2 billion per year ) under the five - year life of the 2018 farm bill , crop years 2019-2023 ( table 2 and figure 8 ) .

annual program outlays can be highly variable .

this is because spending on the farm revenue support programs — mal , plc , and arc — is market - driven , and disaster assistance payments are associated with unpredictable acts of nature .

given the counter - cyclical design of the plc and arc programs , if commodity prices turn out to be higher than projected , then outlays will be lower than projected levels ( and vice versa ) .

this appendix provides a side - by - side comparison of provisions from title i ( the commodity title ) of the 2018 farm bill with prior law — that is , provisions from title i of the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) as amended by subsequent law including the bipartisan budget agreement ( bba ) of 2018 ( p.l .

115-123 ) .

the bba made substantial changes to both the dairy program and the treatment of cotton under the plc and arc programs .

each subtitle ( a - g ) is individually examined in a separate table with the exception of subtitle c ( sugar ) and subtitle d ( dairy ) , which are examined in more detail by other crs products .

this appendix includes the following tables by subtitle .

table a - 1 .

subtitle a — commodity policytable a - 2 .

subtitle b — marketing loanstable a - 3 .

subtitle e — supplemental agricultural disaster assistancetable a - 4 .

subtitle f — noninsured crop assistancetable a - 5 .

subtitle g — administration for information on the dairy and sugar programs and their explicit legislative text , see: crs report r45525 , the 2018 farm bill ( p.l .

115-334 ) : summary and side - by - side comparison , coordinated by mark a. mcminimy ; crs in focus if10750 , farm bill primer: dairy safety net , by joel l. greene ; crs in focus if10833 , dairy provisions in the bipartisan budget act ( p.l .

115-123 ) , by joel l. greene ; crs in focus if10223 , fundamental elements of the u.s. sugar program , by mark a. mcminimy ; and crs report r43998 , u.s. sugar program fundamentals , by mark a. mcminimy .

