the majority of latin american and caribbean countries are functional democracies , but institutional weaknesses and widespread public corruption in many of these countries have undermined effective governance and sparked protest and demands for greater transparency .

from a u.s. perspective , widespread corruption in latin america is a potential threat to regional security , has a symbiotic relationship with violent crime , and can be a stimulus for migration .

this report examines how anti - corruption strategies in u.s. policy and legislation initially evolved from a desire to level the playing field for corporations working in the developing world .

at first , u.s. corporations were regulated so they could not bribe or extort to win contracts , and then the focus expanded to helping build more effective institutions and the rule of law in developing countries to ensure more fair , predictable , and transparent systems .

the report examines how corruption contributes to wasting public monies , distorting electoral outcomes , and reinforcing criminal structures .

although the fight against corruption is a global effort , this report focuses more closely on u.s. interests in fighting corruption in the region , and how u.s. policy and assistance programs have developed to address that goal .

contemporary anti - corruption efforts in brazil , mexico , and central america are examined as case studies .

the report closes with considerations for congress in conducting its oversight role over u.s. funded anti - corruption efforts in the region and pursuing the policy objective of broadening the rule of law and encouraging good government .

in the wake of numerous scandals , particularly regarding the multi - country scandal involving the odebrecht corporation , corruption has become a searing , top - level concern in many latin american nations , with implications for u.s. policy .

in past decades , public rejection of corruption has risen and then crested and fallen back , sometimes to a tacit toleration of bribery and other corruption as the way of politics .

some critics maintain that corruption is so entrenched that it is now endemic in the region and forms the primary path to political power .

the number of grand - scale scandals exposed in recent years in the region , such as payoff schemes involving high court justices and top - level officials , has led some voters to conclude that all parties and politicians are corrupt , resulting in presidents and vice presidents being pushed from office and traditional political parties being viewed as corrupt and illegitimate .

some analysts maintain that chronic corruption diminishes support for democracy and stokes cynicism about the integrity of politics .

however , 2018 saw prominent anti - corruption candidates and campaigns win elections across the region , with populist and anti - establishment fervor marking campaigns in mexico , brazil , and several other countries .

in these contests , leading candidates abandoned traditional parties sullied by corruption allegations .

for instance , in mexico , the decades - long dominance of the institutional revolutionary party ( pri ) — displaced in 2000 , but resurgent in 2012 — was again swept out in mexico's july 2018 national elections by the national regeneration party , or morena , founded four years earlier .

throughout the region , winning candidates of the left and the right — as in mexico and brazil — embraced anti - establishment platforms that appealed to voter disillusionment with corrupt elites .

in its global perceptions survey , transparency international ( ti ) has found that a majority of latin americans tend to believe pervasive public corruption exists and is expanding its reach .

the sense of widespread corruption may be sparking a civil society rejection of the status quo and a deeper commitment to combat corrupt behavior and demand accountability ( see textbox ) .

grand corruption involving top political leaders has touched every nearly every partof latin america , generating a wave of anti - corruption activism .

in the past , such demonstrations have proven ephemeral , quickly fading as the systemic nature of the problem has left citizens resigned to the status quo .

these anti - corruption campaigns may prove more enduring , however , as civil society organizations are attempting to build on their preliminary successes by pushing for institutional reforms to enhance transparency and accountability throughout the public sector .

regarding the relationship of perceptions of corruption as an accurate indicator of actual acts of corruption or prevalence of those acts , ti has in the past married the two .

in the 20 latin american nations polled in the corruption perceptions index ( cpi ) for 2016 , ti said that respondents identified politicians , political parties , and police as the most corrupt sectors of their societies .

the most frequently cited offenses were graft , influence peddling , extortion , bribe solicitation , money laundering , and political finance violations ( for 2016 and 2017 cpi results for latin america and the caribbean , see figure 1 ) .

one of the 2016 surveys used to establish ti's country rankings asked whether respondents had paid a bribe for a public service over the past 12 months .

nearly one - third confirmed they had paid a bribe to receive a basic public service , such as health care or education .

another index , called the world justice project's rule of law index ( wjp rule of law index ) , reports that corruption levels vary significantly across the region , although corruption appears to be both widespread and endemic .

the rule of law index identifies several indicators for a regional ranking related to governance .

at the region's apex and exhibiting the strongest rule of law sit chile , costa rica , and , at the top , uruguay .

the region's least successful on the 2019 rule of law index are nicaragua , honduras , bolivia , and , at the bottom , venezuela .

however , on the indicator of "absence of corruption" alone , the region's worst with regard to the metrics of bribery , improper influence by public or private interests , and misappropriation of public funds , were: peru , venezuela , mexico , and at the bottom , bolivia .

the world justice project asserts that full , functioning democracies evolve slowly and anti - corruption programs able to influence and transform the status quo may take years to show results .

corruption patterns vary considerably from country to country .

transparency international and other regional surveys , such as the latinobarómeter , have found the divergence between countries is more pronounced in latin america and the caribbean than in other regions .

some commentators argue that lower - level corruption is simpler to identify and root out .

more widespread and higher levels of corruption are more difficult to contain and have powerful forces protecting them .

for instance , compromised justice systems , apparent in recent scandals in mexico , colombia , and peru , result in impunity for powerful defendants and inhibit the number of successfully completed prosecutions .

this may result in diminished belief in democratic legitimacy and the rule of law .

the confidence or expectation of fairness is replaced with mistrust when bribes are routinely demanded by the police ; there is ample evidence of political kickback schemes ; and evidence such as recordings shows the suborning of court officials and judges .

in the western hemisphere , populist leaders including nicaragua's daniel ortega and venezuela's nicolás maduro have resorted to tactics that undermine democratic institutions like the free press and an independent judiciary , which , when functioning , can help prevent corruption .

in peru , president pedro pablo kuczynski stepped down in march 2018 to avoid impeachment for allegedly taking odebrecht bribes right before he was to host a summit of the americas focused on eradicating corruption .

in mexico and brazil in 2018 , and in el salvador early in 2019 , presidential candidates campaigned successfully against traditional political parties deemed corrupt .

in 2018 , mexico's long - dominant institutional revolutionary party ( pri ) , was dogged by corruption allegations and performed poorly in congressional and presidential elections .

political parties are crucial to a competitive democracy , but when they are no longer accountable they lose their primary function of placing a check on the consolidation and abuse of power .

disillusioned and cynical voters who have regularly experienced breaches by their governments , leaders or political parties , can lose trust that is not easily restored .

the effort needed to rebuild a country's democratic institutions , such as a functioning justice system , takes patience and political will that is hard to sustain over time .

anti - corruption efforts can face towering political opposition and significant undercurrents that undercut prosecution and future transparency .

the economic costs related to systemic corruption are well researched .

in 2018 , the costs to mexico of corruption were estimated to be as high as 5% of the country's gdp and in peru and colombia as much as 10% .

many analysts contend corruption also exacerbates inequality ( a persistent feature of several latin american and caribbean societies ) which increases instability .

many observers have noted the unusual level of activism on anti - corruption reaching nearly every corner of the region in recent years and wondered whether it will endure and produce lasting reform .

they question whether this current resistance to an existing culture of impunity can be prevented from falling into anti - democratic reaction , or , once again , slipping into resignation .

in the realm of foreign assistance and especially investment , u.s. competitors , including china and to a lesser extent russia , are using investment in the region , such as infrastructure or energy development projects , not to strengthen recipient governments , but to further their own economic interests .

these projects can be beset by hidden costs and have unknown beneficiaries , while they lack public oversight .

greater transparency on bidding and public finance will help give the general public greater capacity to assess them .

u.s. programs to strengthen the rule of law and increase governmental transparency may directly benefit recipient nations in latin america and the caribbean by extending the institutional foundation for sustained economic development .

the 2017 u.s. national security strategy maintains that corruption of weak governments , especially those cowed by criminals and terrorists , poses a serious national security challenge .

it asserts that reducing violence should be a priority in countries that are u.s. trade and security partners because extreme violence is economically and socially disruptive and creates instability .

the range of corrupt practices is broad and solutions to control public corruption are quite diverse as the case studies in this report indicate .

police and justice systems are open to corruption when morale and integrity are low and external pressures high , which may allow abusive prosecutorial practices to prevail , such as the use of torture or efforts to destroy or fabricate evidence .

weak rule of law subverts justice systems , and diminishes political systems and participatory democracy .

for several years , u.s. foreign assistance has been provided to fight corruption and enhance the rule of law in latin america ( including judicial training ) , to improve law - enforcement techniques to conduct investigations , make arrests and properly handle evidence , and enhance oversight of civil society for better accountability .

u.s. assistance has supported whistleblower protections and other measures to allow private citizens to be more effective watchdogs of public officials , disrupt abuses , and prevent corruption from taking hold again .

identifying u.s. partners as tainted by corruption can increase tensions in bilateral relations .

as a result , u.s. assistance programs are often identified as efforts to increase the efficiency or integrity of "good government," increase "transparency," and inculcate the rule of law , rather than to combat egregious violations or known violators .

furthermore , anti - establishment and populist governing styles of leaders in latin america may define their policy ends as anti - corruption , but this may mask other political goals that are more anti - institutional rather than committed to strengthening the nation's institutions .

one example of the u.s. approach is the new proposed trade agreement signed by the united states , canada , and mexico in late 2018 .

u.s. trade talks with mexico and canada to replace the north trade agreement ( nafta ) resulted in the united states - mexico - canada agreement , ( usmca ) , which includes a chapter on anti - corruption .

the main purpose of the chapter is to "prevent and combat bribery and corruption in international trade and investment. .

the accomplishment of dedicating a full chapter to reinforce the trilateral commitment to combat corruption is significant , but success would be achieved as the provisions are translated into action .

this is especially true in mexico , where significant gaps remain in implementing anti - corruption regulation .

some scholars have identified the various anti - corruption requirements in the chapter as some of the most comprehensive in any trade treaty , though largely drawn from the proposed trans - pacific partnership agreement from which the trump administration withdrew in 2017 .

the uscma chapter includes measures to combat corruption , which are legislative , administrative , and promotional .

relevant assistance provided by the u.s. government to combat corruption includes assistance and efforts by u.s. state department , the united states agency for international development ( usaid ) , the department of justice , the department of the treasury , and the millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) , outlined below .

the following examples highlight the various ways in which the u.s. government has supported recent anti - corruption efforts in latin america .

the selected cases — brazil , mexico , guatemala , and honduras — examine the extent to which u.s. support has contributed to driving anti - corruption efforts in widely divergent legal and historical contexts .

the united states in these illustrative cases has sought to work closely with established authorities and civil society actors to combat impunity , increase transparency , and dislodge corruption .

in brazil , the u.s. justice department cooperated with brazilian prosecutors on a complex international bribery and corruption case .

in mexico , the united states has supported rule of law reforms to increase judicial independence , reduce impunity , and protect journalists in the context of a strong central government .

in central america , with its historically weak governments , the multilateral institutions and outside experts worked alongside the justice systems in guatemala and honduras to expose corruption and criminal control .

a march 2019 congressional hearing titled , "understanding odebrecht: lessons for combating corruption in the americas," shows the current interest of congress in anti - corruption and rule of law programs to reinforce the latin american response to public corruption , which has ousted former and sitting latin american presidents .

u.s. assistance to increase justice - system proficiency has yielded some significant progress , according to some analysts .

these programs may be provided through ngos , or in exchanges and training organized by the u.s. justice department or usaid .

judicial system support and investigative assistance can also be provided by international bodies .

attitudinal coaching or education can help build a culture of integrity and respect for law enforcement .

those attitudes are supported by awarding the judiciary and law enforcement with salaries adequate to resist bribery ; thus building respect for presumption of innocence , rejection of torture , and a commitment to equality before the law .

technical assistance may also be needed to open government to citizen scrutiny .

digital public accounting systems can be employed to increase transparency for government auditors , journalists , and the interested public to help identify how public funds are spent and pinpoint corruption if it occurs .

the improvement of government practices through training is the strategy behind threshold grants from the mcc , as in paraguay in 2009 and 2010 .

the threshold assistance to enact anti - corruption improvements is to enable the country to become eligible for a large mcc compact award .

the following presents some issues congress may consider in determining the priorities for u.s. policies and assistance related to anti - corruption .

some members of congress remain concerned with weak rule of law in latin america and corrupt practices in the public sector .

congress may wish to consider heightening its support for anti - corruption programs and supporting conditional assistance to bolster good governance and rule of law as a congressional policy priority .

in its legislative and oversight roles , the u.s. congress has appropriated foreign assistance with conditions on reaching or maintaining anti - corruption standards if future funding is to be released .

this "carrot for good government" strategy is embodied in the millennium challenge corporation's approach to reward those countries that reach anti - corruption standards and other qualifying criteria with large aid compacts .

since fy2016 , u.s. assistance to the governments of el salvador , guatemala , and honduras has been conditioned on 16 legislative concerns , ranging from those governments' efforts to improve border security to their protection of human rights .

sanctions , on the other hand , can be a tool to punish corrupt officials .

however , if the desired change in behavior extends beyond the targeted individual ( s ) and their behavior , the desired end result may be less easy to achieve .

such sanctions are an example of coercive diplomacy to modify behavior of a nation's leadership ; and the effectiveness of a sanction is only achieved if the desired behavior ( i.e. , removal of the corrupt officials ) can be accomplished .

some analysts contend that sanctions to effect regime change may set the price of compliance too high ( i.e. , loss of office ) , so the desired behavior will not occur , and top leaders may refuse to leave office .

civil society activism seen across the region in recent years , due to a spate of corruption exposés and high - level scandals , may provide an opportunity to forge a new commitment to higher integrity standards that reject corruption .

when the financial times editor for latin america recently retired after a decade in his post , he observed that over the decade he had seen extraordinary changes for the better , "especially certain habits and expectations about justice and transparency , corruption and impunity. .

some analysts portray the new activism as a region - wide "anti - corruption movement," while others maintain it is a critical moment in the region's democratic progression , when an awareness of public officials behaving corruptly may progress beyond temporary fixes .

eliminating and arresting malign leaders is seen as an interim step that needs to be followed with the difficult — and , at times , laborious — task of crafting legislation that adapts or reforms institutions , in such areas as more transparent public procurement or campaign finance .

this would be be followed by building and applying the societal pressure to ensure implementation of those reforms .

setting expectations for u.s. relations with new leaders recently elected presidents in the region's most populous countries , mexico and brazil , who campaigned on promises to reduce corruption might be encouraged to fulfill their anti - corruption campaign pledges .

for instance , mexico's new prosecutor general , appointed by the mexican congress in early 2019 , is envisioned as autonomous from the mexican executive branch , and could seek to establish a reputation for resolving some key cases to reverse the widespread view of the prior attorney general's office , which was widely seen as lacking independence , disregarding victims , and producing high levels of impunity .

the u.s. government could encourage mexico's government to operationalize its national anti - corruption system , which was developed in cooperation with mexican civil society with usaid support .

anti - corruption programs can build on country - based initiatives , and seek to put into practice existing credible laws that deserve full implementation .

programs to help foster a more vibrant civil society , capable of building the political will to help achieve higher accountability standards may also inspire courageous leaders who are willing to take on corruption .

congressional expressions of support for anti - corruption efforts in the region can be important for such efforts .

also , support for oecd and oas anti - corruption conventions and mechanisms , and the importance of improving their implementation , can be another valuable measure because of the broad legitimacy such multilateral organizations and international standards may enjoy .

evaluating the success of anti - corruption programs is challenging due to the near impossibility of establishing causality in the development of democratic governance .

the "sustainability" of anti - corruption efforts may depend on political and economic variables external to the provision of assistance .

many analysts note that there is no single anti - corruption solution , but that approaches should be tailored to country - specific circumstances .

the timeframe for change is also difficult to define and measure , and evaluating long - term sustainability may also be complex .

a key constraint on firms being barred from public works contracts because of corruption is the threat of bankruptcy .

bankruptcy of a major firm , such as the odebrecht corporation , can lead to large numbers of unpaid employees and subcontractors thrown out of work .

it can have destabilizing economic consequences , and result in loss of the crucial public infrastructure which the contractor was to provide .

the cynicism about democratic governance derived from long exposure to widespread corruption , when all parties may come to be viewed as corrupt and most political leaders are seen as "on the take," can also create instability .

in 2019 , some latin american governments are beginning to discuss how to recover from the serious consequences of the odebrecht scandal , and move into a post - odebrecht situation that is more stable .

in recent years , reductions in u.s. foreign assistance budgets have generally reduced anti - corruption funding and more broadly programs by usaid and others under the "governance" rubric .

the trump administration has sought to reduce discretionary federal spending .

congress may consider that in confronting the challenges of trade and security presented by russia and china in latin america , as well as competition from european and asian businesses , the reduction of corruption and the enhancement of the rule of law most benefits u.s. investors and businesses operating in the region .

the cost for foreign assistance programs for good governance may also be more affordable than security assistance requiring costly equipment or other technology - based components .

sustainable program funding is another concern .

one feature of successful u.s. foreign assistance efforts is that they have been consistently funded .

perhaps this constancy of effort is best demonstrated by plan colombia , often cited as a success in the western hemisphere and even globally , and which endured for nearly two decades .

u.s. assistance to plan colombia helped a beleaguered country reach a peace agreement , reduce acts of terrorism , and homicides ( to a 40-year low in 2017 ) , and achieve a return to growth and broader stability .

although not an anti - corruption program , the plan colombia example suggests that bipartisan congressional support for a foreign assistance goal , through diverse u.s. administrations ( and party majorities in congress ) may be a hallmark of an enduring foreign policy success .

policies that champion human rights and prioritize governance and rule of law do not appear to be a central trump administration priority .

the administration's budgets have consistently sought to reduce foreign assistance overall and weigh improvement of democratic practices and good governance goals against other u.s. core interests .

instead of focusing on governance issues , the trump administration has prioritized security - related assistance , including for counternarcotics efforts .

in contrast to prior administrations , it appears less eager to pressure governments on rule of law and transparency goals unless corruption is linked to other security interests , such as migration from central america .

at the same time , some analysts maintain that u.s. influence is decreasing in the western hemisphere due to the declining regard for u.s leadership ( registered in opinion polling ) over the past couple years , although positive views of bilateral relations between a single nation and the united states are often rated more favorably .

in addition , some observers warn that attacks on the motives and accuracy of the news media by senior u.s. leaders can reduce acceptance of u.s. assistance programs designed to protect freedom of the press and investigative journalism .

in essence it undermines the position of free - press advocate that the u.s. government once held .

the trump administration has rarely applauded civil society activism in latin america and caribbean countries in response to high - level scandals and public corruption .

some of the regional and multilateral institutions , such as the inter - american development bank and the imf , have taken up advocacy of anti - corruption programming because it is no longer perceived as a top u.s. government concern .

appendix a .

select reports and recommendations several foreign policy think tanks and the multilateral development banks have published analyses over the past three years examining broad corruption scandals in latin american and caribbean countries and the outpouring of civil society response .

some of these studies contend that donor assistance aimed at anti - corruption in recent times did not go far enough , or produce a measurable and enduring change in practices .

for example , in november 2018 , the inter - american development bank ( idb ) published a report by an expert advisory group on anti - corruption , transparency and integrity in the countries of latin america and the caribbean .

the idb authors proposed a more aggressive and integrated approach to combating corruption .

the report describes earlier interventions encouraged by the idb as well as the united states and several multilateral donors as "uneven and partial," and focused more on enacting reforms and making pronouncements , rather than on implementation and enforcement .

it maintains that only an integrated and across - the - board framework for fighting corruption can actually transform the culture and practice of public corruption that pervades too much of the region .

calling for a transformative approach , the ibd authors maintain that it is essential that both supply and demand sides of corruption be understood and addressed .

they call for public and private sector participation at the national , regional , and international level to replace weak or dysfunctional institutions and practices .

the americas program at the center for strategic and international studies ( csis ) , recommends key targets for reform in the region , which are: ( 1 ) political party and campaign financing ; ( 2 ) public financial sector management ; ( 3 ) government contracting and procurement , especially for critical infrastructure ; ( 4 ) civil service reform and effective vetting of public officials ; and ( 5 ) internal strengthening and oversight of public security and justice institutions .

csis advocates peer exchanges to tap the knowledge and skills of veterans of reining in public corruption from countries such as uruguay , chile , and colombia .

their transferable experiences can assist struggling nations in the northern triangle countries of central america and elsewhere .

the emergence and persistence of civil society activism to fight corruption may be attributed to several conditions .

one is the region's expanded middle class , which grew to nearly 35% in 2015 from about 21% of latin america's population in 2001 .

the middle class is a bulwark against corruption according to the theory that the costs and inefficiencies of corruption take on greater salience when basic needs have been fulfilled .

an analysis of the 2016 / 2017 americas barometer study found that those individuals most apt to rank corruption as their nation's top problem were better educated , male , and more affluent .

however , when the link between corruption and economic problems and insecurity is made clear , citizens of any background may become energized to combat it .

some analysts identify illicit campaign finance as the root of corruption .

guatemala's current president jimmy morales , a former tv evangelical and comedian , campaigned in 2015 on a pledge he was neither a thief nor corrupt .

morales financed his presidential campaign secretively , and was investigated by the u.n. supported anti - corruption body cicig for undeclared campaign donations .

the odebrecht construction company reported it paid bribes across the region to public office holders for financing their political campaigns in exchange for large infrastructure contracts .

in addition , the amount of off - the - record political donations in many countries greatly outpace the reported donations .

in argentina president mauricio marci's successful 2016 presidential race , macri reportedly expended about 11 times more than he publicly declared , while his opponent reportedly spent some 20 times as much as he declared .

bilateral u.s. assistance programs to bolster rule of law , encourage good governance , and eliminate bribery , extortion , and graft , have been common in latin america .

several analysts assert that further progress in combating corruption and improving governance in the region may require a cultural shift , building on the numerous citizen - led anti - corruption social movements unleashed in 2015 .

these movements , some of which were nurtured by years of foreign assistance , may begin to look beyond prosecutions related to specific scandals and seek structural and institutional reforms .

some practitioners who promote an inter - related set of program elements , what has been described as an "ecosystem" of integrity - enhancing efforts , also contend that the features of successful anti - corruption programs have features common to good development programming more broadly .

these could include efforts to: abolish or seek to revise rules and regulations that obscure the workings of government .

many government rules and processes can obscure budgets and reduce transparency , thus discouraging citizen oversight .

one example that built more transparency and encouraged citizen participation is a technological solution in mexico .

lab justicia , an online collaborative tool funded by usaid , provides comprehensive information on the status of criminal justice in each state of mexico .

it draws data from open source government records and research by national and international ngos .

recruit ngos and corporations as c ritical partners in fighting corruption .

businesses and their associations and nongovernmental groups can be important targets for assistance to build demand for honest government .

these entities can encourage and benefit from information sharing via social media , strong independent journalism , and broader citizen electoral participation .

the business community and the private sector may play a critical role to press for the expansion of information , education and support to sharpen government transparency as commercial relations in a free market economy can only thrive with predictable economic rules .

adapt success ful models to local conditions .

successful multilateral and regional efforts can become exemplars for other countries if the models are adapted to local conditions and dynamics .

the cicig was cited by presidential candidates in el salvador in the early 2019 elections as an effort they would like to replicate .

during the mexican elections in 2018 , candidates also considered the cicig framework for possible replication in mexico , and in may 2019 ecuador announced it had launched an anti - graft commission with five outside the country experts .

the cicig model also exemplifies that due to the complexity of grand corruption cases that international cooperation and support may be critical to success to supplement local resources in their battle with powerful corrupt networks .

build anti - corruption momentum with strong independent j ournalism , social media , and whistleblower p rotectio ns .

investigative and independent journalists have always played a crucial role to uncover public and private corruption and criminality , inform the citizenry of the true costs of corruption , and mobilize the public to fight corruption .

in mexico , journalists have helped to mobilize rejection of criminal domination and the violence that crime groups perpetrate .

they also have raised awareness of criminal impunity for both criminal leaders and government officials on the take .

journalists are needed to amplify the efforts of whistleblowers ; and to build political will and support for anti - corruption investigations , prosecutions , and legislation .

appendix b .

implementation of the inter - american convention against corruption ( mesicic ) in 2002 , to support member states in implementing the iacac , the oas created the mechanism for follow - up on the implementation of the inter - american convention against corruption ( mesicic ) .

the mesicic serves primarily to measure how member states adhere to the convention and helps members achieve better implementation .

the mesicic provides activities that include: technical cooperation , sharing of best practices , and tools for the harmonization of anticorruption legislation throughout the americas .

including the united states , 33 oas member states are party to the mesicic .

 ( barbados is not a mesicic signatory. ) .

the mesicic's two main bodies are: the conference of state parties and the committee of experts .

the conference of state parties exercises political and operational authority over the mechanism , and is comprised of representatives from all states which are party to the mechanism .

the committee of experts manages and supervises the technical review process that steers the iacac's implementation .

it is composed of experts appointed by each state party .

the oas general secretariat , which serves as the technical secretariat through the department of legal cooperation of the secretariat for legal affairs , supports the committee of experts .

during the country - specific evaluation process , the mesicic drafts and adopts reports to recommend ways to better implement regulatory and institutional measures .

the reports aim to align the commitments of each state signatory with the goals of the iacac .

they also provide indicators for the states to identify challenges and ways to overcome shortcomings .

civil society and ngos participate in the iacac review process by submitting information to the committee of experts for consideration .

these groups may present specific proposals , methodologies , and questions for gathering information .

the committee of experts adopts a hemispheric report at the end of each technical review .

the report summarizes the progress of implementing countries in meeting the recommendations formulated by the committee in previous technical rounds , and makes recommendations of a collective nature .

the committee has adopted hemispheric reports in 2006 , 2008 , 2011 , and 2015 .

some analysts note that the battle against corruption in the public sector appears to be more resilient than in the past .

however , the elusive nature of corruption makes it difficult to draw a causal relationship between rejection of corruption in the americas and the iacac and mesicic .

these critics maintain that the instruments need updating to make the iacac relevant for combating new corruption modalities , and to make the mesicic more independent , transparent , empowered to penalize noncompliance , and technically competent .

appendix c. latin america corruption timeline from march 2014 through december 201 .

