t he constitution grants congress enormous power and freedom to engage in what we now refer to as budgeting .

first , the constitution grants congress the power of the purse but does not prescribe or require any specific budgetary legislation or budgetary outcomes .

further , the constitution allows the house and senate to determine the rules of their internal proceedings but does not prescribe or establish any budgetary rules or restrictions .

congress has thus developed certain types of budgetary legislation as well as rules and practices that govern the content and consideration of that budgetary legislation .

this collection of budgetary legislation , rules , and practices is referred to as the congressional budget process .

some have criticized the current congressional budget process and the budget outcomes that it has produced and have suggested that congress adopt a more long - term budget focus .

there is no consensus on what is meant by long term .

for example , advocates of biennial budgeting ( i.e. , two - year budget resolutions , two - year appropriations legislation ) sometimes characterize a two - year cycle as long - term budgeting .

some view the current 10-year budget window ( described below ) as being a form of long - term budgeting , while others consider long - term budgeting to span a lengthier period , such as 30 years or 50 years .

there is also no general consensus on what is required by long - term budgeting .

would it simply require congress to stay informed of the long - term projections for spending , revenue , deficits , and debt ? .

would it require congress to affirmatively vote annually on policies that are projected to continue year to year ? .

would it require congress to adopt a long - term budget plan or long - term fiscal targets ( eg , debt - to - gdp ratio limits ) ? .

and if targets were agreed upon , would it require automatic triggers to enforce fiscal targets ( eg , automatic spending cuts or automatic tax increases ) ? .

members of congress , the administration , and outside groups have expressed concern over projected levels of deficits and debt .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) recently stated that federal deficits and debt held by the public , which are higher than average , are projected to increase sharply over the next 30 years .

cbo states that deficits would rise from 4.2% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) in 2019 to 8.7% in 2049 .

according to cbo , federal debt held by the public is currently 78% of gdp , significantly higher than the 50-year average of 42% .

under current law , budget deficits would cause the debt to be 92% of gdp by 2029 and 144% of gdp by 2049 , which "would be the highest in the nation's history by far. .

if policymakers want debt in 2049 to equal its current share of gdp ( 78% ) , the deficit would need to be reduced by $400 billion every year until then , cbo has projected .

some have argued that the current congressional budget process has created , or at least exacerbated , the projected long - term deficit and debt challenges .

one recurring criticism is that the process does not encourage or require the consideration of long - term budgetary outcomes .

some argue that the lack of a formal requirement for congress to consider long - term budget outcomes discourages long - term planning and encourages policy outcomes that are desirable in the short term at the expense of the long - term budget situation .

further , they argue that the current process does not even deter or prohibit congress from enacting legislation that worsens the long - term deficit and debt projections .

they argue that congress needs to adopt a long - term budget focus .

this report provides information on existing resources and congressional rules related to a long - term budget focus .

there are potential challenges or obstacles associated with the adoption of a long - term budget focus within the current congressional budget process .

many think of the budget as being decided annually , but most policies that dictate how much will be spent and collected are fixed .

mandatory spending makes up 70% of total spending , is generally set by laws enacted years or decades ago , and remains in effect without the need for annual congressional approval .

 ( mandatory spending includes medicare , social security , medicaid , and interest on the debt. ) .

likewise , the collection of revenue as prescribed by the tax code continues without the need for legislative action .

these mandatory spending and revenue policies change only if congress and the president enact legislation making such changes .

under current law , these fixed spending and revenue policies are projected to result in increasing deficits and debt .

many argue that addressing rising deficit and debt in the long term would require policy changes .

another challenge associated with long - term budgeting is that any projected levels of spending and revenue are inherently uncertain .

the further out spending and revenue are projected , the more uncertain they become .

for example , within cbo's long - term budget projections ( referenced above ) , the agency notes that such projections are "very uncertain. .

cbo concludes that while debt as a percentage of gdp in 2049 would likely be much greater than it is today if current laws remain unchanged , many factors ( eg , labor force participation , productivity in the economy , interest rates on federal debt , and health care costs per person ) may alter actual outcomes .

other challenges associated with long - term budgeting include the difficulty of budgeting for unforeseen events ( such as military engagements , natural disasters , and downturns in the economy ) ; underlying projection assumptions ; and the problem of setting fiscal policy or establishing long - term goals that a future congress may not support .

information and data are publicly available to assist congress in understanding the projected long - term budget situation .

projections are available that show spending , revenue , deficits , and debt in the long term , and in some instances , data evaluating the long - term outlook of specific programs are available .

selected examples of that information are described below .

the constitution grants congress the power of the purse .

in carrying out such duties , congress has developed budget - related rules and legislation as well as committees to carry out this responsibility .

some of these tools might be used in long - term budgeting .

congressional committees serve congress by specializing in particular policy areas .

they do this by gathering information , making policy recommendations , and performing oversight .

in the course of this work , committees study and make recommendations related to the long - term implications of the specific programs within their jurisdiction .

for example , the senate finance committee and the house ways and means committee may hold hearings on the long - term outlook for social security .

in addition , the house and senate each have a budget committee , established by the budget act .

they enjoy jurisdiction over the budget resolution , the budget reconciliation process ( described below ) , and the budget process generally .

as stated by the senate budget committee , "the [budget] committee , the budget resolution and reconciliation process , and enforcement authorities were created to enable congress to create , enforce , and manage the annual federal budget , including all types of federal spending and revenues. .

the budget committees may impact the budget and the budget process in many ways .

they are responsible for developing and drafting a budget plan in the form of a budget resolution .

a budget resolution agreed to by the house and senate may trigger the budget reconciliation process , which has been used to make legislative changes reducing future deficits ( described below ) .

during the development of the budget plan , the budget committees gather information on the budget from many sources .

they review the president's budget submission , and the director of omb typically testifies before each budget committee .

additionally , the committees closely review cbo's annual budget and economic outlook for the upcoming 10 years , and the director of cbo testifies before the budget committees to answer questions .

the budget committees also hold hearings and consider legislation related to the budget process and the budget as a whole .

this has included examining the long - term budget outlook and the potential for a more long - term budget process .

since the budget committees enjoy jurisdiction over the budget process generally , they would likely be involved in any efforts to alter the current process .

the budget resolution reflects an annual agreement between the house and senate on spending and revenue levels for the upcoming fiscal year and at least four additional years .

the budget resolution does not become law .

therefore , no money is spent or collected as a result of its adoption .

instead , it is an agreement between the house and senate meant to assist congress in considering an overall budget plan .

once agreed to by both chambers in the exact same form , the budget resolution creates parameters that may be enforced in two primary ways: ( 1 ) by points of order and ( 2 ) by using the budget reconciliation process .

once the budget resolution has been agreed to by both chambers , certain levels contained in it are enforceable through points of order .

this means that if legislation is being considered on the house or senate floor that would violate certain levels contained in the budget resolution , a member may raise a point of order against the consideration of that legislation .

the budget act requires that the budget resolution include the following budgetary levels for the upcoming fiscal year and at least four additional years ( often referred to as out years ) : total spending , total revenues , the surplus / deficit , new spending for each major functional category , the public debt , and ( in the senate only ) social security spending and revenue levels .

the budget act also requires that the aggregate amounts of spending recommended in the budget resolution be allocated among committees .

while points of order can be effective in enforcing the budgetary goals outlined in the budget resolution , they can be raised against legislation only when it is pending on the house or senate floor .

moreover , points of order cannot limit direct spending or revenue levels resulting from current law .

often , for the budgetary levels in the budget resolution to be achieved , congress must pass legislation to alter the levels of revenue and / or direct spending resulting from existing law .

in this situation , congress seeks to reconcile the levels of direct spending and revenue under existing law with those budgetary levels expressed in the budget resolution .

to assist in this process , the budget reconciliation process allows special consideration of legislation that would accomplish those budgetary levels expressed in the budget resolution .

if congress intends to use the reconciliation process , reconciliation directives must be included in the annual budget resolution .

these directives instruct individual committees in the house and senate to develop and report legislation that would change laws within their jurisdiction related to direct spending , revenue , or the debt limit .

such reconciliation legislation is then eligible to be considered under special expedited procedures in both the house and senate .

these procedures are especially important in the senate as they include a limit on debate time .

this means the legislation does not require the support of three - fifths of senators to bring debate to a close .

since 1980 , congress has sent the president 25 reconciliation acts , 21 of which were signed into law .

reconciliation has most often been used to enact legislation that was projected to reduce deficits .

for example , between 1981 and 1984 , four reconciliation bills were enacted that were each projected to decrease the deficit .

reconciliation legislation can be used to make policy changes that are temporary or permanent , therefore affecting the long - term budget .

for a brief description of each reconciliation bill enacted into law , see crs report r40480 , budget reconciliation measures enacted into law: 1980-2017 , by megan s. lynch .

while the reconciliation process has been used to enact legislation that was projected to increase the net deficit , a senate rule ( known as the byrd rule ) prohibits reconciliation legislation from increasing the net deficit outside the "budget window. .

 ( the budget window is the period covered by the underlying budget resolution and recently has spanned 10 years. ) .

the house and senate have many additional budget - related points of order that seek to restrict or prohibit consideration of different types of budgetary legislation , some of which have long - term implications .

these points of order are found in various places such as the budget act , house and senate standing rules , and past budget resolutions .

for example , the house and senate have pay - as - you - go ( paygo ) rules that prohibit the consideration of direct spending or revenue legislation that is projected to increase the deficit in either of two time periods: ( 1 ) the period consisting of the current fiscal year , the budget year , and the four ensuing fiscal years following the budget year and ( 2 ) the period consisting of the current fiscal year , the budget year , and the ensuing nine fiscal years following the budget year .

additionally , in the senate , a rule exists that is often referred to as the "long - term deficit point of order. .

it prohibits the consideration of legislation that would cause a net increase in deficits of more than $5 billion in any of the four consecutive 10-year periods beginning after the upcoming 10 years .

previously , the house had a similar rule that prohibited consideration of legislation that would cause a net increase in mandatory spending in excess of $5 billion during the same period .

the house rule is no longer in effect .

in addition to points of order , there are other types of budget enforcement mechanisms that seek to restrict or prohibit the enactment of budgetary legislation over the long term .

the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) established statutory limits on discretionary spending for a 10-year period ( fy2012-fy2021 ) .

 ( s imilar discretionary spending limits were in effect between fy1991 and fy2002. ) .

the bca sets separate annual limits for defense discretionary and nondefense discretionary spending .

the defense category consists of discretionary spending in budget function 050 ( national defense ) only .

the nondefense category includes discretionary spending in all other budget functions .

if discretionary appropriations are enacted that exceed a statutory limit for a fiscal year , across - the - board reductions ( i.e. , sequestration ) of nonexempt budgetary resources are triggered to eliminate the excess spending within the applicable category .

in february 2010 , the statutory pay - as - you - go act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-139 ) was enacted establishing a budget enforcement mechanism commonly referred to as "statutory paygo. .

statutory paygo is generally intended to discourage enactment of legislation that is projected to increase the on - budget deficit over five and 10 years .

to enforce statutory paygo , omb is required to record the budgetary effects of newly enacted revenue and direct spending legislation over the course of a year .

after the end of a congressional session , omb is required to issue an annual paygo report noting whether a debit has been recorded for the current budget year .

if no such debit is found , no action occurs .

if a debit is found , however , the president must issue a sequestration order , which automatically implements across - the - board cuts to non - exempt direct spending programs to compensate for the amount of the debit .

while the following budget related mechanisms are no longer in effect , they provide insight into congress's past budget process reform efforts and the desire for long - term budgeting .

in 1985 , the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act ( p.l .

99-177 ) —referred to as the gramm - rudman - hollings act—employed budget process mechanisms in an attempt to force congress and the president to balance the budget within a six - year period by specifying annual deficit limits for each fiscal year ( 1986-1991 ) .

the act required that both the president and congress adhere to the deficit limits when developing their budget plans .

the act did not specify what policy changes should be made to achieve deficit reduction , leaving congress and the president to negotiate over possible revenue increases and spending decreases .

to enforce the specified deficit limits , the act set forth a specific process for the cancellation of spending by sequestration in the event that the deficit limits were breached .

these deficit targets and related enforcement mechanism were amended by the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1987 ( p.l .

100-119 ) and then were fundamentally revised by the budget enforcement act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-508 ) , which replaced the focus on deficit targets under gramm - rudman - hollings with a two - pronged approach to budgetary enforcement: the implementation of paygo procedures to control new direct spending and revenue legislation and discretionary spending limits to control the level of discretionary spending .

for more information , see crs report r41901 , statutory budget controls in effect between 1985 and 2002 , by megan s. lynch .

the bca created a joint select committee on deficit reduction .

the committee comprised 12 members from the house and senate—three chosen by each of the chambers' party leaders .

the committee was instructed to develop legislation to reduce the budget deficit by at least $1.5 trillion over the 10-year period fy2012-fy2021 .

legislation reported by the committee would then be eligible to be considered under special expedited procedures in both the house and senate .

these procedures are especially important in the senate since they include a limit on debate time .

this means the legislation does not require the support of three - fifths of senators to bring debate to a close .

the bca stipulated that if a measure meeting specific requirements was not enacted by january 15 , 2012 , then an automatic process would be triggered to enforce the budgetary goal established for the committee .

the committee did not reach agreement on such legislation , and while the committee is no longer in effect , the automatic process triggered by the lack of enactment still remains .

this comprises annual downward adjustments of the discretionary spending limits ( described above ) and sequester of nonexempt mandatory spending programs through fy2027 .

the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-123 ) created the joint select committee on budget and appropriations process reform .

the committee comprised 16 members from the house and senate—four chosen by each of the chambers' party leaders .

the committee was tasked with formulating recommendations and legislative language to "significantly reform the budget and appropriations process. .

the committee held a markup on draft legislation that concluded on november 29 , 2018 .

the principal recommendation in the draft provided that the budget resolution would be adopted for a two - year cycle rather than the current annual cycle .

the committee ultimately did not vote to report the bill as amended , and it was never considered by the full house .

