the select committee on the modernization of congress is the most recent effort of the house of representatives to examine its internal procedures and operations through the use of a specialized committee , commission , or party conference or caucus group .

the original joint committee on the organization of congress was constituted during the 79 th congress ( 1945-1946 ) for the purpose of strengthening the role of congress and its committees in the lawmaking process .

in 1965 , congress reincarnated this joint committee to suggest additional changes in how the two chambers operate , and the committee was reconstituted during the 102 nd and 103 rd congresses ( 1991-1994 ) .

while these efforts were bicameral in nature , other examinations of congressional operations , such as that being undertaken by this panel , have been focused primarily on the house .

on january 4 , 2019 , the house established the select committee on the modernization of congress by adopting title ii of h.res .

6 , the house rules package for the 116 th congress ( 2019-2020 ) , on a 418-12 vote .

the stated purpose of the select committee is "to investigate , study , make findings , hold public hearings , and develop recommendations on modernizing congress. .

the select committee's authorization ends on february 1 , 2020 , and any activities beyond that date would require additional authorization .

twelve members have been appointed by the speaker to the select committee in accordance with h.res .

6 , six of whom were appointed on the recommendation of the minority leader .

the committee's authorizing resolution further requires the membership of the committee to include two freshman members , two members from the committee on rules , and two members from the committee on house administration .

the membership of this committee differs from that of other committees in three key ways: 1 .

party ratios on committees generally reflect the overall party balance in the chamber .

the select committee , however , is composed of an equal number of democrats and republicans ( like the house ethics committee ) .

2 .

service on the select committee does not count toward the committee membership limitations in house rule x .

3 .

members of the select committee are appointed by the speaker based in part on recommendations of the minority leader .

by comparison , placement on a standing committee generally occurs on the basis of a three - step process: first , recommendations of a party's steering committee are made ; second , each party must approve those recommendations ; third , committee assignment resolutions ratifying each party's selections are adopted on the house floor .

on january 4 , 2019 , speaker pelosi selected representative derek kilmer ( wa ) to serve as chair of the select committee on the modernization of congress .

on january 29 , 2019 , the speaker appointed the five additional democratic members: emanuel cleaver ( mo ) , suzan delbene ( wa ) , zoe lofgren ( ca ) , mark pocan ( wi ) , and mary gay scanlon ( pa ) .

on february 11 , republican leader kevin mccarthy recommended the six gop members: tom graves ( vice chair , ga ) , rob woodall ( ga ) , susan brooks ( in ) , rodney davis ( il ) , dan newhouse ( wa ) , and william timmons ( sc ) .

section two of the select committee's authorizing resolution ( title ii of h.res .

6 ) created a set of procedures specific to the select committee that will help guide the committee's work during its year - long operation .

these rules supplement house rules x and xi , which govern most committee procedure that applies to the select committee , with certain exceptions .

no legislative jurisdiction was delegated to the committee — introduced measures will not be referred to it .

the committee has the broad responsibility to study house operations with an eye toward modernizing the conduct of its business .

in particular , the committee is charged with investigating the following seven areas: 1. rules to promote a more modern and efficient congress ; 2. procedures , including the schedule and calendar ; 3. policies to develop the next generation of leaders ; 4. staff recruitment , diversity , retention , and compensation and benefits ; 5. administrative efficiencies , including purchasing , travel , outside services , and shared administrative staff ; 6. technology and innovation ; and 7. the work of the house commission on congressional mailing standards ( franking commission ) .

building on the requirements of h.res .

6 , the select committee by a unanimous vote agreed to additional rules of procedure at its first meeting , held on march 12 , 2019 .

the committee established its regular meeting day ( the first tuesday of each month ) , quorum requirements for various committee activities , and how the committee intends to conduct its questioning of invited witnesses .

it takes two members to make a quorum for a hearing , one - third for a markup ( for instance , of any report the committee might release ) , and a majority "actually present" to issue a report .

committee rules also incentivize on - time arrival at a hearing with "early - bird" rules allowing members present at the start to question witnesses before late - arrivers .

the chair ( representative kilmer ) and vice chair ( representative graves ) are provided five minutes each to make opening statements , and the chair may recognize others to make opening statements as well .

committee rules place an overall time limit of 10 minutes for opening statements .

questioning witnesses occurs under the five - minute rule , and any committee member may submit to the chair "questions for the record" ( written questions to witnesses who appeared ) within 10 business days of a hearing .

although the committee is not authorized to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses or the production of documents , it "may recommend subpoenas and depositions and submit such recommendations to the relevant standing committee. .

on march 26 , 2019 , the committee on house administration reported h.res .

245 , a resolution to fund house standing and select committees during the 116 th congress , which the house agreed to the following day .

this resolution authorized $487,500 for expenditures of the select committee during the course of its investigation .

with operations of the select committee scheduled to end on february 1 , 2020 , all but $37,500 of this amount has been reserved for use during the first session of the 116 th congress ( 2019 ) .

prior to the adoption of h.res .

245 , the select committee was provided with interim funding .

in addition , pursuant to h.res .

6 , the select committee may use the services of house staff .

consistent with its mandate , the committee's first hearing ( march 12 ) was held for the purpose of receiving testimony from members themselves regarding any suggested improvements to congressional operations .

thirty - five members testified before the committee to present their own reform ideas spanning a wide range of subjects — for instance , changes to the standing rules , family - friendly adjustments to the house schedule , additional resources to support the work of congress , and ways to delegate more policymaking responsibilities to individual members .

the committee's next three hearings ( held on march 27 , may 1 , and may 10 ) included testimony from capitol hill practitioners , former members , scholars , and others on a number of proposals the committee might consider in making its own recommendations .

additional hearings and other meetings are likely to be convened throughout calendar year 2019 , and information on current and upcoming activities of the committee can be found on its official website .

h.res .

6 states that the select committee "shall submit a final report to the house. .

the final report is to include the committee's findings and any policy recommendations it might have .

documents produced by house committees generally require a majority of the committee with a quorum present to support their publication .

in the case of the select committee , a higher threshold of two - thirds is required to publish its final report .

given that the committee is composed of six members from each party , some amount of bipartisan support will be needed to publish the final report .

if all committee members are present for this vote , support from at least 8 of the 12 would be needed to meet the two - thirds threshold .

house rules generally require committees to make their proceedings and written documents available to the public within a specified period of time .

the select committee is not excepted from this obligation .

as specified in committee rule 6 , "documents reflecting the proceedings of the committee shall be made publicly available ... not more than 24 hours after each meeting has adjourned. .

after the committee's work is concluded , any records it produced during the course of its investigation will be distributed to the relevant standing committee ( s ) as designated by the speaker , and any recommendations offered by the committee in its final report must be made public within 30 days of its submission to the house .

the below crs experts are available to answer inquiries from congressional clients concerning the topics specified .

