despite periodic difficulties over the years in the transatlantic relationship , u.s. and european policymakers alike have valued a close transatlantic partnership as serving their respective geostrategic and economic interests .

u.s. policymakers , including past presidents and many members of congress , have articulated a range of benefits to the united states of strong u.s. - european ties , including the following: u.s. leadership of nato and u.s. support for the european integration project have been crucial to maintaining peace and stability on the european continent and stymieing big - power competition that cost over 500,000 american lives in two world wars .

nato and the eu are cornerstones of the broader u.s. - led international order created in the aftermath of world war ii .

u.s. engagement in europe has helped to foster democratic and prosperous european allies and friends that frequently support u.s. foreign and economic policy preferences and bolster the credibility of u.s. global leadership , including in multilateral institutions such as the united nations and the wto .

u.s. engagement in europe helps limit russian , chinese , or other potentially malign influences in the region .

the two sides of the atlantic face a range of common international challenges — from countering terrorism and cybercrime to managing instability in the middle east — and share similar values and policy outlooks .

neither side can adequately address such diverse global concerns alone , and the united states and europe have a demonstrated track record of cooperation .

u.s. and european policymakers have developed trust and well - honed habits of political , military , and intelligence cooperation over decades .

these dynamics are unique in international relations and cannot be easily or quickly replicated elsewhere ( particularly with countries that do not share the same u.s. commitment to democracy , human rights , and the rule of law ) .

the united states and europe share a substantial and mutually beneficial economic relationship that is highly integrated and interdependent .

this economic relationship substantially contributes to economic growth and employment on both sides of the atlantic .

the eu accounts for about one - fifth of u.s. total trade in goods and services , and the united states and the eu are each other's largest source and destination for foreign direct investment ( fdi ) .

the transatlantic economy generates over $5 trillion per year in foreign affiliate sales and directly employs about 9 million workers on both sides of the atlantic ( and possibly up to 16 million people when indirect employment is included ) .

together , the united states and europe have created and maintained the current rules - based international trading system that has contributed to u.s. ( and european ) wealth and prosperity .

the combined u.s. and eu economies account for 46% of global gross domestic product ( gdp ) and over half of global fdi .

together , this provides the united states and europe with significant economic clout that has enabled the two sides of the atlantic to take the lead in setting global rules and standards .

at times , u.s. officials and analysts have expressed frustration with certain aspects of the transatlantic relationship .

previous u.s. administrations and many members of congress have criticized what they viewed as insufficient european defense spending and have questioned the costs of the u.s. military presence in europe ( especially after the cold war ) .

u.s. policymakers have long - standing concerns about some eu regulatory barriers to trade .

in addition , observers point out that the eu lacks a single voice on many foreign policy issues , which may complicate or prevent u.s. - eu cooperation .

some in the united states have argued that maintaining a close u.s. - european partnership necessitates compromise and may slow u.s. decisionmaking .

meanwhile , some european officials periodically complain about u.s. dominance of the relationship and a frequent u.s. expectation of automatic european support , especially in international or multilateral forums .

those with this view contend that although the united states has long urged europe to "do more" in addressing challenges both within and outside of europe , the united states often fails to grant european allies in nato , or the eu as an institution , an equal say in transatlantic policymaking .

in the past , some european leaders — particularly in france — have aspired to build up the eu as a global power in part to check u.s. influence .

most european governments , however , have not supported developing the eu as a counterweight to the united states .

regardless of these occasional u.s. and european irritations with each other , the transatlantic partnership has remained grounded broadly in the premise that its benefits outweigh the negatives for both sides of the atlantic .

the united states was the driving proponent of nato's creation in 1949 and has been the alliance's undisputed leader as it has evolved from a regionally focused collective defense organization of 12 members to a globally engaged security organization of 29 members .

successive u.s .

administrations have viewed u.s. leadership of nato as a cornerstone of u.s. national security strategy , bringing benefits ranging from peace and stability in europe to the political and military support of 28 allies , including many of the world's most advanced militaries .

nato proponents in the united states point out that u.s. leadership of nato has allowed the united states to station u.s. forces , including nuclear weapons , in europe at bases that enable quicker air , sea , and land access to other locations of strategic importance , including the middle east and africa .

they underscore that nato also provides an unrivaled platform for constructing and operating international military coalitions with an integrated command structure that is unprecedented in terms of size , scale , and complexity .

for almost as long as nato has been in existence , it has faced criticism .

one long - standing concern of u.s. critics , including president trump and some members of congress , is that the comparatively low levels of defense spending by some european allies and their reliance on u.s. security guarantees have fostered an imbalanced "burdensharing" arrangement by which the united states carries an outsize share of the responsibility for european security .

president trump has repeatedly expressed these sentiments in suggesting that nato is a "bad deal" for the united states .

although u.s. leaders have long called for increased allied defense spending , none are seen to have done so as stridently as president trump or to link these calls so openly to the u.s. commitment to nato and a broader questioning of the alliance's value and utility ( see text box below ) .

administration supporters , including some members of congress , argue that president trump's forceful statements have succeeded in securing defense spending increases across the alliance that were not forthcoming under his predecessors .

trump administration officials stress that u.s. policy toward nato continues to be driven by a steadfast commitment to european security and stability .

the administration's 2017 national security strategy and 2018 national defense strategy articulate that the united states remains committed to nato's foundational article 5 collective defense clause .

 ( president trump has proclaimed his support for article 5 as well. ) .

u.s. strategy documents also underscore that the administration continues to view nato as crucial to deterring russia .

the administration has requested significant increases in funding for u.s. military deployments in europe under the european deterrence initiative ( edi ) .

the united states currently leads a battalion of about 1,100 nato troops deployed to poland and deploys a u.s. army brigade combat team of about 3,300 troops on continuous rotation in nato's eastern member states .

despite stated u.s. policy , some european allies express unease about president trump's commitment to nato , especially amid reports that the president has considered withdrawing the united states from the alliance .

european allies refute past statements by president trump that nato is obsolete and take issue with the president's claims that european countries have taken advantage of the united states by not spending enough on their own defense .

since the end of the cold war , nato allies and partner countries have contributed to a range of nato - led military operations across the globe , including in the western balkans , afghanistan , the mediterranean sea , the middle east , and eastern europe .

european allies also stress that the first and only time nato invoked article 5 was in solidarity with the united states after the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks .

subsequently , canada and the european allies joined the united states to lead military operations in afghanistan , the longest and most expansive operation in nato's history .

many in europe and canada view their contributions in afghanistan as an unparalleled demonstration of solidarity with the united states and a testament to the value they can provide in achieving shared security objectives .

as of early 2019 , almost one - third of the fatalities suffered by coalition forces in afghanistan have been from nato members and partner countries other than the united states .

in 2011 , the high point of the nato mission in afghanistan , about 40,000 of the 130,000 troops deployed to the mission were from non - u.s. nato countries and partners .

nato also continues to face a number of political and military challenges .

key among these is managing a resurgent russia .

allied discussions over nato's strategic posture have exposed divergent views over the threat posed by russia ( see " key foreign policy and security challenges " for more information ) .

differences also exist among the allies over the appropriate role for nato in addressing the wide - ranging security challenges emanating from the middle east and north africa .

nato continues to grapple with significant disparities in allied military capabilities , especially between the united states and the other allies .

in most , if not all , nato military interventions , european allies and canada have depended on the united states to provide key capabilities such as air - and sea - lift , refueling , and intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( isr ) .

in addition , a number of european policymakers and outside analysts contend that president trump's negative rhetoric about nato is damaging alliance cohesion and raising questions about future u.s. leadership of the alliance ( see " u.s. policy considerations and future prospects " below ) .

since may 1950 — when president harry truman first offered u.s. support for the european coal and steel community , regarded as the initial step on the decades - long path toward building the eu — the united states has championed the european integration project .

supporters of the eu integration project contend that it largely succeeded in fulfilling core u.s. post - world war ii - goals in europe of promoting peace and prosperity and deterring the soviet union .

after the cold war , the united states strongly backed eu enlargement to the former communist countries of central and eastern europe , viewing it as essential to extending stability , democracy , and the rule of law throughout the region , preventing a strategic vacuum , and firmly entrenching these countries in euro - atlantic institutions and the u.s. - led liberal international order .

the united states and many members of congress traditionally have supported the eu membership aspirations of turkey and the western balkan states for similar reasons .

over the past 25 years , as the eu has expanded and evolved , u.s. - eu political and economic relations have deepened .

despite some acute differences ( including the 2003 war in iraq ) , the united states has looked to the eu for partnership on foreign policy and security concerns worldwide .

although eu decisionmaking is sometimes slower than many u.s. policymakers would prefer and agreement among eu member states proves elusive at times , u.s. officials generally have regarded cooperation with the eu — where possible — as serving to bolster u.s. positions and enhance the prospects of achieving u.s. objectives .

the united states and the eu have promoted peace and stability in various regions and countries ( including the balkans , afghanistan , and africa ) , jointly imposed sanctions on russia for its aggression in ukraine , enhanced law enforcement and counterterrorism cooperation , worked together to contain iran's nuclear ambitions , and sought to tackle cross - border challenges such as cybersecurity and climate change .

historically , u.s. - eu cooperation has been a driving force behind efforts to liberalize world trade and ensure the stability of international financial markets .

eu officials have been surprised by what they regard as president trump's largely negative opinion of the bloc and key member states such as germany .

president trump has supported the uk's decision to leave the eu and has expressed doubts about the eu's future viability .

president trump has called the eu a "foe" for "what they do to us in trade," although he also noted , "that doesn't mean they are bad … it means that they are competitive. .

at the same time , the eu is concerned by the administration's trade policies , especially the imposition of steel and aluminum tariffs and potential auto tariffs .

many in the eu question whether the united states will continue to be a reliable partner for the eu in setting global trade rules and standards and sustaining the multilateral trading system .

 ( see " trade and economic issues " for more information. ) .

some commentators suggest that the trump administration largely views the eu through an economic prism and is less inclined to regard the eu as an important political and security partner .

various observers speculate that unlike past administrations , the trump administration might be indifferent to the eu's collapse if it allowed the united states to negotiate bilateral trade deals with individual member states that it believes would better serve u.s. interests .

president trump ( and some members of congress ) have expressed keen interest in concluding a free trade agreement ( fta ) with the united kingdom following its expected withdrawal from the eu ( see " possible implications of brexit " ) .

many analysts suggest that president trump's critical views of the eu are shaped by a preference for working bilaterally with nation - states rather than in international or multilateral forums .

in a december 2018 speech in brussels , belgium , u.s. secretary of state mike pompeo asserted that "the european union and its predecessors have delivered a great deal of prosperity to the entire continent" and that "we [the united states] benefit enormously from your success," but he also criticized multilateralism and asked , "is the eu ensuring that the interests of countries and their citizens are placed before those of bureaucrats here in brussels ? " .

secretary pompeo's comments were widely interpreted as an implicit rebuke of the eu .

others point out that the trump administration is not the first u.s. administration to be skeptical of multilateral institutions or to be charged with preferring unilateral action .

this was a key european criticism of the george w. bush administration as well .

in addition , many in the eu are uneasy with elements of the trump administration's "america first" foreign policy .

several administration decisions have put the united states into direct conflict with the eu and experts suggest they could endanger u.s. - eu political cooperation .

these include , in particular , the trump administration's decisions to withdraw from the 2015 multilateral nuclear deal with iran and the paris agreement on climate change ( see " key foreign policy and security challenges " for more information ) .

eu officials also view the administration's recognition of jerusalem as israel's capital as undermining prospects for resolving the israeli - palestinian conflict .

at the same time , administration officials contend that certain eu policies are damaging relations with the united states .

among other issues , such officials express frustration with the eu's refusal to discuss agricultural products in planned u.s. - eu trade negotiations , and they argue that that the eu does not sufficiently understand the extent of the threat posed by iran .

some u.s. policymakers voice concern that renewed eu defense initiatives could compete with nato .

in 2017 , 25 eu members launched a new eu defense pact ( known as permanent structured cooperation , or pesco ) aimed at enhancing european military capabilities and bolstering the eu's common security and defense policy ( csdp ) .

previous u.s .

administrations have been anxious about csdp's potential implications for nato .

the eu has bristled at the trump administration's criticisms , however , given its strident calls for greater european defense spending and burdensharing in nato , as well as administration suggestions that pesco could become a "protectionist vehicle for the eu" that impedes u.s. - european defense industrial cooperation and u.s. defense sales to europe .

u.s. officials note that there have always been disagreements between the united states and the eu , and they argue that fears of a demise in relations are largely overblown .

at the same time , some u.s. policymakers and analysts suggest that the multiple challenges currently facing the eu could have negative implications for the eu's ability to be a robust , effective u.s. partner .

those with this view note that internal preoccupations ( ranging from brexit to migration to voter disenchantment with traditionally pro - eu establishment parties ) could prevent the eu from focusing on key u.s. priorities , such as russian aggression in ukraine , a more assertive china , instability in the middle east and north africa , the ongoing conflict in syria , and the continued terrorism threat .

others point out that despite the string of recent eu crises over the past few years , the eu has survived and the bloc has continued to work with the united states on numerous regional and international issues .

in a 2016 referendum , uk voters favored leaving the eu by 52% to 48% .

in march 2017 , the uk government officially notified the eu of its intention to withdraw , triggering a two - year period for the uk and the eu to conclude complex withdrawal negotiations .

since the 2016 referendum , the uk has remained divided on what type of brexit it wants .

uk prime minister theresa may's government largely pursued a "hard" brexit that would keep the uk outside the eu's single market and customs union , thus allowing the uk to negotiate its own trade deals with other countries .

since january 2019 , the uk parliament has rejected the withdrawal agreement negotiated with the eu three times ; a key sticking point has been the "backstop" to resolve the irish border question and protect the northern ireland peace process .

as the result of a six - month extension offered by eu leaders on april 10 ( at an emergency european council summit ) , the uk is scheduled to exit the eu by october 31 , 2019 , at the latest .

since deciding to leave the eu , the uk has sought to reinforce its close ties with the united states and to reaffirm its position as a leading country in nato .

the uk is likely to remain a strong u.s. partner , and brexit is unlikely to cause a dramatic makeover in most aspects of the u.s. - uk relationship .

analysts believe that close u.s. - uk cooperation will continue for the foreseeable future in areas such as counterterrorism , intelligence , economic issues , and the future of nato , as well as on numerous global and regional security challenges .

uk officials have emphasized that brexit does not entail a turn toward isolationism and that the uk intends to remain a global leader in international diplomacy , security issues , trade and finance , and development aid .

president trump has expressed repeated support for brexit .

in october 2018 , the trump administration notified congress of its intent to launch u.s. - uk trade negotiations once the uk ceases to be a member of the eu , and many members of congress appear receptive to a u.s. - uk fta in the future .

at the same time , some in congress are concerned that brexit might negatively affect the northern ireland peace process .

in london in april 2019 , house speaker nancy pelosi asserted that there would be "no chance whatsoever" for a u.s. - uk fta should brexit weaken the 1998 peace accord that ended northern ireland's 30-year sectarian conflict .

beyond the u.s. - uk bilateral relationship , brexit could have a substantial impact on certain u.s. strategic interests , especially in relation to europe more broadly and future developments in the eu .

the uk is the eu's second - largest economy and a key diplomatic and military power within the eu .

moreover , the uk is often regarded as the closest u.s. partner in the eu , a partner that commonly shares u.s. views on foreign policy , trade , and regulatory issues .

some observers suggest that the united states is losing its best advocate within the eu for policies that bolster u.s. goals and protect u.s. interests .

others contend that the united states has close bilateral ties with most eu countries , shares common political and economic preferences with many of them , and as such , the uk's departure will not significantly alter u.s. - eu relations .

some u.s. officials have conveyed concerns that the uk's withdrawal could make the eu a less capable and less reliable partner for the united states given the uk's diplomatic , military , and economic clout .

the uk has served as a key driver of certain eu initiatives , especially eu enlargement ( including to turkey ) and efforts to develop stronger eu foreign and defense policies .

in addition , as the uk is a leading voice for robust eu sanctions against russia in response to russia's annexation of ukraine's crimea and aggression in eastern ukraine , some observers suggest that the departure of the uk could shift the debate in the eu about the duration and severity of eu sanctions .

more broadly , u.s. officials have long urged the eu to move beyond what is often perceived as a predominantly inward focus on treaties and institutions , in order to concentrate more effort and resources toward addressing a wide range of shared external challenges ( such as terrorism and instability to europe's south and east ) .

some observers note that brexit has produced another prolonged bout of internal preoccupation within the eu and has consumed a considerable degree of uk and eu time and personnel resources in the process .

at the working level , eu officials are losing british personnel with significant technical expertise and negotiating prowess on issues such as sanctions or dealing with countries like russia and iran .

on the other hand , some analysts have suggested that brexit could ultimately lead to a more like - minded eu , able to pursue deeper integration without uk opposition ( the uk traditionally served as a brake on certain eu integration efforts ) .

for example , brexit could allow the eu to move ahead more easily with undertaking military integration projects under the eu common security and defense policy .

however , as discussed above , trump administration officials express a degree of concern about pesco , the eu's new defense pact , and some worry that without uk leadership , csdp and pesco could evolve in ways that may infringe upon nato's primary role in european security in the longer term .

the united states and europe face numerous common foreign policy and security challenges .

the trump administration maintains that its policy choices display strong u.s. leadership and seek to bolster both u.s. and european security .

administration officials also argue that they remain ready to work with europe on many of these common challenges .

for the past 70 years , the transatlantic relationship has been grounded in a commitment to the post - world war ii order based on alliances with like - minded democratic partners .

u.s. support for a strong partnership with europe has been premised largely on the belief that u.s. leadership of nato and close u.s. - eu ties promote u.s. security and stability and magnify u.s. global influence and financial clout .

despite periodic u.s. - european tensions over the decades and changes in the security environment since the end of the cold war , most experts judge that the transatlantic partnership continues to advance u.s. strategic and economic interests .

the trump administration's 2017 national security strategy reiterates the long - standing view that "the united states is safer when europe is prosperous and stable , and can help defend our shared interests and ideals. .

the administration argues , however , that europe is not prepared to address what it sees as growing great power competition .

president trump's calls for nato allies to spend more on defense and shoulder more of the security burden reflect this worldview , as well as his commitment to ensure that u.s allies do not "take advantage of their friendship with the united states , both in military protection and trade. .

some commentators maintain that president trump has asked legitimate questions about whether there is sufficient burdensharing within nato given current threats and europe's relatively weak military capabilities .

some analysts suggest that president trump has succeeded more than past u.s. presidents in demanding that european allies increase defense budgets .

administration supporters also credit president trump with compelling the eu to address u.s. trade concerns , and they welcomed provisions in the july 2018 u.s. - eu joint statement aimed at boosting eu purchases of soybeans and lng .

many u.s. officials and some outside experts downplay concerns about a dwindling u.s. commitment to the transatlantic partnership .

they point out that there has been continuity in many u.s. policies toward europe .

the trump administration has sought to bolster nato efforts to deter russia and supported montenegro's accession to nato ( in 2017 ) , as well as the signing of north macedonia's nato accession protocol in february 2019 following the resolution of its name dispute with greece .

as noted previously , the united states has sought to work with the eu on de - escalating tensions over trade and tariffs .

furthermore , u.s. officials contend that the united states hopes to cooperate with european allies and partners in tackling global foreign policy and security issues .

secretary of state pompeo has urged european governments to work with the united states to confront common challenges posed by russia , china , and iran ( among others ) and to reform international institutions such as united nations and the wto .

critics contend , however , that the trump administration's policies and rhetoric toward nato , the eu , and some key allies are damaging the transatlantic partnership , undermining the trust and confidence upon which it ultimately rests , and creating significant uncertainty about the u.s. commitment to european security and u.s. - eu cooperation .

european officials and analysts have been relieved that president trump has voiced support for nato and article 5 , but some suggest that by tying the u.s. commitment to nato to increases in allied defense spending , president trump is harming the credibility of the u.s. security guarantee .

this , in turn , could weaken u.s. leadership of the alliance and embolden russia .

many observers assert that president trump's seemingly transactional view of nato and the broader u.s. - european relationship is detrimental to transatlantic cohesion .

following the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks on the united states , nato invoked article 5 and european allies fought and died with u.s. forces in afghanistan .

some analysts suggest that european support for the u.s. and nato missions in afghanistan is driven more by the desire to stand as allies with the united states , and less by the view that instability in afghanistan poses a significant threat to their own security .

experts increasingly question whether the allies will follow where the united states leads in the future .

as a prime example of diminished cohesion , many point to current european reluctance to keep forces in syria to guard against an islamic state resurgence after the expected u.s. troop withdrawal .

such u.s. - european divisions are widely considered a win for russia , both in terms of undermining the transatlantic partnership and consolidating russia's influence in syria .

some european leaders worry about potential u.s. global disengagement and argue that europe must be better prepared to address both regional and international challenges on its own .

many observers view eu efforts over the past few years to conclude trade agreements with other countries and regions ( including canada , japan , and latin america ) and to enhance defense cooperation as aimed , in part , at reducing european dependence on the united states .

some analysts suggest that recent calls by french president emmanuel macron for a "european army" seek to underscore the need to boost european military capabilities in the face of growing uncertainty about the future u.s. role in the world .

german chancellor angela merkel subsequently supported macron's position on developing a european army , although she noted that it should seek to complement , not compete with , nato .

others contend that the transatlantic partnership will endure .

europe remains largely dependent on the u.s. security guarantee , and the magnitude of u.s. - eu trade and investment ties will continue to bind together the two sides of the atlantic .

those with this view also point out that the united states and europe continue to share broadly similar values and policy outlooks and have few other partners of comparable size and influence elsewhere in the world .

some observers note that european allies have sought to respond constructively to president trump's criticisms of nato .

many experts believe that despite u.s. - eu tensions on certain policy issues , the eu will seek to work with the trump administration where possible and will aim to preserve political , security , and economic relations with the united states for the long term .

the eu continues to cooperate with the united states on issues of common interest and concern , such as countering terrorism , promoting cybersecurity , and reforming the wto , and plans to negotiate a new trade agreement with the united states ( although formal negotiations have yet to begin ) .

many members of congress regard a strong , close transatlantic partnership as crucial to u.s. national security and economic interests .

in february 2019 , speaker pelosi led a congressional delegation to europe and asserted that the visit sought to reaffirm "our commitment to the transatlantic alliance , our commitment to nato and respect for the european union. .

in the 115 th congress , hearings addressed a wide range of current european issues — from brexit to eu policy toward russia to european migration issues .

in the 116 th congress , several hearings focused on nato ahead of its 70 th anniversary in april 2019 , and on the broader transatlantic relationship under the trump administration .

broad bipartisan support exists in congress for nato .

while many members of congress have criticized specific developments within nato — regarding burdensharing , for example — congress as a whole has long backed nato and u.s. leadership of the alliance .

during the trump administration , expressions of congressional support have been viewed at times as an effort to reassure allies troubled by president trump's criticisms of the alliance .

during the trump administration , both chambers of congress have passed legislation expressly reaffirming u.s. support for nato , including legislation passed by the house in january 2019 ( h.r .

676 ) seeking to limit the president's ability to withdraw from nato unilaterally .

legislation similar to h.r .

676 has been introduced in the senate ( s.j.res .

4 and s. 482 ) .

some analysts viewed the bipartisan house - senate invitation to nato secretary general jens stoltenberg to address a joint session of congress in april 2019 as an additional demonstration of nato's importance to congress .

many members of congress also have considered the eu to be vital to european peace and prosperity , and thus serving u.s. interests .

in the 115 th and 116 th congresses , some house and senate members have sought to reassure eu officials and member state governments of continued u.s. support for the eu , in part through visits to brussels and key european capitals , the reestablishment of the eu caucus in the house , and continued house participation in the transatlantic legislators' dialogue ( tld ) with the european parliament .

in early 2019 , some members of congress urged the trump administration to reinstate the status of the eu's diplomatic mission to the united states as equivalent to that of a national mission after the state department downgraded it in late 2018 to that of an international organization ( which has protocol implications ) .

congress traditionally has viewed u.s. - european trade and investment relations as being largely mutually beneficial .

h.res .

810 , introduced in april 2018 by representative william keating , would have reaffirmed the importance of u.s. - eu trade and investment ties to the economic and national security interests of the united states .

some members have expressed varying degrees of concern about the trump administration's imposition of tariffs on steel and aluminum imports from the eu and other u.s. trading partners .

this concern could prompt legislative debate over modifying the president's delegated authority under section 232 ( see , for example , s. 3013 ) .

at the same time , some members of congress share the administration's critical views on certain european foreign and economic policies .

like the administration , many members are concerned about european defense spending levels and have long objected to any eu initiatives to build european defense capabilities that could ultimately compete with nato .

some members are wary about what they view as growing chinese influence in europe , and troubled by potential european efforts to protect business interests from potential u.s. secondary sanctions on iran or russia .

considerable congressional opposition exists to projects such as the nord stream 2 natural gas pipeline , which many members believe would increase european dependence on russian gas .

some members agree with the administration that any new u.s. - eu trade talks must include agriculture .

members of congress may wish to assess the extent to which the transatlantic relationship contributes to promoting u.s. strategic and economic interests , and the implications of the administration's policies on the u.s. - european partnership in the short and long term .

deliberation may include the following potential issues: nato .

congress may wish to examine the future of the alliance further .

this could entail evaluating the current state of alliance cohesion , the extent of burdensharing within the alliance and how best to measure allied contributions , possible future threats facing nato and whether nato is equipped to manage such challenges , and nato's costs and benefits for the united states .

u.s. - eu economic relations .

based on its constitutional role over tariffs and foreign commerce , congress has a direct interest in monitoring and shaping the proposed new u.s. - eu trade agreement negotiations , and it could consider implementing legislation for a potential final trade agreement under trade promotion authority .

congress may be interested in the implications of administration trade and tariff policies and the extent to which eu retaliatory tariffs and potential u.s. auto tariffs could affect u.s. - eu trade and investment ties .

members of congress also may wish to consider the extent to which u.s. - eu cooperation on trade issues could help address issues of mutual concern , such as with respect to china's trading practices or the development of globally - relevant rules on trade .

future o f the eu .

the eu is contending with numerous internal and external challenges .

the eu also faces leadership changes , with a new european parliament elected in may 2019 and a new european commission and president of the european council due to take office in late 2019 .

congress may wish to examine whether and how such issues could affect the eu's future development and u.s. - eu cooperation .

brexit .

congress may wish to consider brexit's implications for u.s. - uk and u.s. - eu relations , as well as for nato and the northern ireland peace process .

congress may also examine possible options and prospects for a future u.s. - uk trade agreement following brexit .

russia .

prospects for further u.s. - european cooperation on russia , especially in the context of deliberations on imposing additional sanctions or employing other foreign policy tools to address concerns about russia's activities , may be of interest to congress .

european vulnerabilities to hostile russian measures and the degree to which russia could benefit from transatlantic divisions may be issues for congressional oversight .

china .

amid concerns on both sides of the atlantic about china's growing global influence , congress may wish to assess where u.s. and european policies converge and diverge with respect to china and possibilities for future u.s. - european cooperation in managing the rise of china .

