a plaintiff injured by a defendant's wrongful conduct may file a tort lawsuit to recover money from that defendant .

to name an especially familiar example of a tort , "a person who causes a crash by negligently driving a vehicle is generally liable to the victim of that crash. .

by forcing people who wrongfully injure others to pay money to their victims , the tort system serves at least two functions: ( 1 ) "deter[ring] people from injuring others" and ( 2 ) "compensat[ing] those who are injured. .

employees and officers of the federal government occasionally commit torts just like other members of the general public .

until the mid - 20th century , however , the principle of "sovereign immunity" — a legal doctrine that bars private citizens from suing a sovereign government without its consent — prohibited plaintiffs from suing the united states for the tortious actions of federal officers and employees .

thus , for a substantial portion of this nation's history , persons injured by torts committed by the federal government's agents were generally unable to obtain financial compensation through the judicial system .

congress , deeming this state of affairs unacceptable , ultimately enacted the federal tort claims act ( ftca ) in 1946 .

the ftca allows plaintiffs to file and prosecute certain types of tort lawsuits against the united states and thereby potentially recover financial compensation from the federal government .

some ftca lawsuits are relatively mundane ; for instance , a civilian may sue the united states to obtain compensation for injuries sustained as a result of minor accidents on federal property .

other ftca cases , however , involve grave allegations of government misfeasance .

for example , after naval officers allegedly sexually assaulted several women at the infamous tailhook convention in 1991 , those women invoked the ftca in an attempt to hold the united states liable for those officers' attacks .

family members of persons killed in the 1993 fire at the branch davidian compound in waco likewise sued the united states under the ftca , asserting that federal law enforcement agents committed negligent acts that resulted in the deaths of their relatives .

additionally , the u.s. court of appeals for the first circuit affirmed an award of over $100 million against the united states in an ftca case alleging that the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) committed "egregious government misconduct" resulting in the wrongful incarceration of several men who were falsely accused of participating in a grisly gangland slaying .

empowering plaintiffs to sue the united states can ensure that persons injured by federal employees receive compensation and justice .

however , waiving the government's immunity from tort litigation comes at a significant cost: the u.s. department of the treasury's bureau of the fiscal service ( bureau ) reports that the united states spends hundreds of millions of dollars annually to pay tort claims under the ftca , and the department of justice reports that it handles thousands of tort claims filed against the united states each year .

moreover , exposing the united states to tort liability arguably creates a risk that government officials may inappropriately base their decisions "not on the relevant and applicable policy objectives that should be governing the execution of their authority," but rather on a desire to reduce the government's "possible exposure to substantial civil liability. .

as explained in greater detail below , the ftca attempts to balance these competing considerations by limiting the circumstances in which a plaintiff may successfully obtain a damages award against the united states .

for example , the ftca categorically bars plaintiffs from pursuing certain types of tort lawsuits against the united states .

the ftca also restricts the types and amount of monetary damages that a plaintiff may recover against the united states .

additionally , the ftca requires plaintiffs to comply with an array of procedural requirements before filing suit .

this report provides an overview of the ftca .

it first discusses the events and policy concerns that led congress to enact the ftca , including the background principle of sovereign immunity .

the report then explains the effect , scope , and operation of the ftca's waiver of the united states' immunity from certain types of tort claims .

in doing so , the report describes categorical exceptions to the government's waiver of sovereign immunity , statutory limitations on a plaintiff's ability to recover monetary damages under the ftca , and the procedures that govern tort claims against the united states .

the report concludes by discussing various legislative proposals to amend the ftca .

a person injured by the tortious activity of a federal employee generally has two potential targets that he might name as a defendant in a tort lawsuit: ( 1 ) the federal employee who committed the tort and ( 2 ) the federal government itself .

in many cases , however , suing the employee is not a viable option .

for one , as explained in greater detail below , congress has opted to shield federal officers and employees from personal liability for torts committed within the scope of their employment .

moreover , even if congress had not decided to insulate federal employees from tort liability , suing an individual is typically an unattractive option for litigants , as individual defendants may lack the financial resources to satisfy an award of monetary damages .

for many litigants , the legal and practical unavailability of tort claims against federal employees makes suing the united states a more attractive option .

whereas a private defendant may lack the financial resources to satisfy a judgment rendered against him , the united states possesses sufficient financial resources to pay virtually any judgment that a court might enter against it .

a plaintiff suing the united states , however , may nonetheless encounter significant obstacles .

in accordance with a long - standing legal doctrine known as "sovereign immunity," a private plaintiff ordinarily may not file a lawsuit against a sovereign entity — including the federal government — unless that sovereign consents .

for a substantial portion of this nation's history , the doctrine of sovereign immunity barred citizens injured by the torts of a federal officer or employee from initiating or prosecuting a lawsuit against the united states .

until 1946 , "the only practical recourse for citizens injured by the torts of federal employees was to ask congress to enact private legislation affording them relief" through "private bills. .

some , however , criticized the public bill system .

not only did private bills impose "a substantial burden on the time and attention of congress," some members of the public became increasingly concerned "that the private bill system was unjust and wrought with political favoritism. .

thus , in 1946 , congress enacted the ftca , which effectuated "a limited waiver of [the federal government's] sovereign immunity" from certain common law tort claims .

with certain exceptions and caveats discussed throughout this report , the ftca authorizes plaintiffs to bring civil lawsuits 1. against the united states ; 2. for money damages ; 3. for injury to or loss of property , or personal injury or death ; 4. caused by a federal employee's negligent or wrongful act or omission ; 5. while acting within the scope of his office or employment ; 6. under circumstances where the united states , if a private person , would be liable to the plaintiff in accordance with the law of the place where the act or omission occurred .

thus , not only does the ftca "free congress from the burden of passing on petitions for private relief" by "transfer[ring] responsibility for deciding disputed tort claims from congress to the courts," it also creates a mechanism to compensate victims of governmental wrongdoing .

in addition to this compensatory purpose , the ftca also aims to "deter tortious conduct by federal personnel" by rendering the united states liable for the torts of its agents , thereby incentivizing the government to carefully supervise its employees .

significantly , however , the ftca does not itself create a new federal cause of action against the united states ; rather , the ftca waives the united states's sovereign immunity from certain types of claims that exist under state tort law .

thus , in most respects , "the substantive law of the state where the tort occurred determines the liability of the united states" in an ftca case .

in this way , the ftca largely "renders the government liable in tort as a private individual would be under like circumstances. .

critically , however , "although the ftca's waiver of sovereign immunity is significant and extensive , it is not complete. .

to address "concerns .

 .

 .

about the integrity and solvency of the public fisc and the impact that extensive litigation might have on the ability of government officials to focus on and perform their other duties," the ftca affords the united states "important protections and benefits .

 .

 .

not enjoyed by other tort defendants" that are explained extensively below .

moreover , to limit the fora in which a plaintiff may permissibly litigate a tort suit against the united states , congress vested the federal district courts ( as well as a small number of territorial courts ) with exclusive jurisdiction over ftca cases .

furthermore , because congress believed "that juries would have difficulty viewing the united states as a defendant without being influenced by the fact that it has a deeper pocket than any other defendant," ftca cases that proceed to trial are generally "tried by the court without a jury. .

notably , the ftca only authorizes tort lawsuits against the united states itself ; it expressly shields individual federal employees from personal liability for torts that they commit within the scope of their employment .

in other words , the ftca "makes the remedy against the united states under the ftca exclusive" of "any other civil action or proceeding for money damages" that might otherwise be available "against the employee whose act or omission gave rise to the claim. .

congress prohibited courts from holding federal employees personally liable for torts committed within the scope of their employment in order to avert what congress perceived as "an immediate crisis involving the prospect of personal liability and the threat of protracted personal tort litigation for the entire federal workforce. .

critically , the individual employee generally remains immune from tort liability for torts committed within the scope of his employment even if a provision of the ftca forecloses the plaintiff from recovering monetary damages from the united states itself .

as the following subsections of this report explain , determining whether the ftca governs a particular tort case — and , thus , whether the ftca shields the individual who committed the alleged tort from personal liability — requires the court to ask two threshold questions: ( 1 ) whether the individual who committed the tort was in fact a federal employee , and , if so , ( 2 ) whether that individual committed the tort within the scope of his office or employment .

as mentioned above , the ftca imposes significant substantive limitations on the types of tort lawsuits a plaintiff may permissibly pursue against the united states .

the congress that enacted the ftca , concerned about "unwarranted judicial intrusion[s] into areas of governmental operations and policymaking," opted to explicitly preserve the united states' sovereign immunity from more than a dozen categories of claims .

specifically , section 2680 of the ftca establishes the following exceptions preventing private litigants from pursuing the following categories of claims against the united states: "any claim based upon an act or omission of an employee of the government , exercising due care , in the execution of a statute or regulation .

 .

 .

or based upon the exercise or performance or the failure to exercise or perform a discretionary function or duty" ; "any claim arising out of the loss , miscarriage , or negligent transmission of letters or postal matter" ; certain claims arising from the actions of law enforcement officers administering customs and excise laws ; certain admiralty claims against the united states for which federal law provides an alternative remedy ; claims "arising out of an act or omission of any employee of the government in administering" certain provisions of the trading with the enemy act of 1917 ; "any claim for damages caused by the imposition or establishment of a quarantine by the united states" ; certain claims predicated upon intentional torts committed by federal employees ; "any claim for damages caused by the fiscal operations of the treasury or by the regulation of the monetary system" ; "any claim arising out of the combatant activities of the military or naval forces , or the coast guard , during time of war" ; "any claim arising in a foreign country" ; "any claim arising from the activities of the tennessee valley authority" ; "any claim arising from the activities of the panama canal company" ; or "any claim arising from the activities of a federal land bank , a federal intermediate credit bank , or a bank for cooperatives. .

some of these exceptions are more doctrinally significant than others .

the following sections of this report therefore discuss the most frequently litigated exceptions to the united states' waiver of immunity from tort claims .

apart from the exceptions to the united states' waiver of sovereign immunity discussed above , the ftca may also limit a plaintiff's ability to obtain compensation from the federal government in other ways .

although , as a general matter , the damages that a plaintiff may recover in an ftca suit are typically determined by the law of the state in which the tort occurred , the ftca imposes several restrictions on the types and amount of damages that a litigant may recover .

with few exceptions , plaintiffs may not recover punitive damages or prejudgment interest against the united states .

the ftca likewise bars most awards of attorney's fees against the government .

furthermore , with limited exceptions , an ftca plaintiff may not recover any damages that exceed the amount he initially requested when he submitted his claim to the applicable agency to satisfy the ftca's exhaustion requirement , which this report discusses below .

"[t]he underlying purpose of" requiring the plaintiff to specify the maximum amount of damages he seeks "is to put the government on notice of its maximum potential exposure to liability" and thereby "make intelligent settlement decisions. .

critically , however , a plaintiff can potentially recover damages in excess of the amount he initially requested if the plaintiff can demonstrate "intervening facts" or "newly discovered evidence not reasonably discoverable at the time of presenting the claim to the federal agency" that warrant a larger award .

in addition to the aforementioned substantive limitations on a plaintiff's ability to pursue a tort lawsuit against the united states , congress has also established an array of procedural requirements a plaintiff must satisfy in order to validly invoke the ftca .

most significantly , the ftca contains statute - of - limitations and exhaustion provisions that limit when a plaintiff may permissibly file a tort lawsuit against the united states .

for one , with certain exceptions , a plaintiff may not institute an ftca action against the united states unless ( 1 ) the plaintiff has first "presented the claim to the appropriate federal agency" whose employees are responsible for the plaintiff's alleged injury , and ( 2 ) that agency has "finally denied" the plaintiff's claim .

these administrative exhaustion requirements afford federal agencies an opportunity to settle disputes before engaging in formal litigation in the federal courts .

"[e]ncouraging settlement of tort claims within administrative agencies" in this manner arguably "reduce[s] court congestion and avoid[s] unnecessary litigation. .

because litigation can be costly and time - consuming , "the settlement of claims within administrative agencies" arguably not only "benefits ftca claimants by permitting them to forego the expense of full - blown litigation," but also "frees up limited [governmental] resources for more pressing matters. .

a claimant ordinarily has two years from the date of his injury to present a written notification of his ftca claim "to the federal agency whose activities gave rise to the claim. .

this written notification must "sufficiently describ[e] the injury to enable the agency to begin its own investigation. .

once the agency receives such notice , it may either settle the claim or deny it .

with limited exceptions , if the claimant fails to submit an administrative claim within the two - year time limit , then "his 'tort claim against the united states shall be forever barred.' .

as a general rule , a plaintiff must "exhaust his administrative remedies prior to filing suit" ; a plaintiff usually cannot file an ftca lawsuit and then cure his failure to comply with the exhaustion requirement by belatedly submitting an administrative claim .

if , after the claimant submits his claim to the relevant administrative agency , the claimant and the agency agree on a mutually acceptable settlement , no further litigation occurs .

statistics suggest that "[t]he majority of ftca .

 .

 .

claims are resolved on the administrative level and do not go to litigation. .

if the agency does not agree to settle the claim , however , the agency may deny the claim by "mailing , by certified or registered mail , .

 .

 .

notice of final denial of the claim" to the claimant .

if no administrative settlement occurs , a claimant's right to a judicial determination "is preserved and the claimant may file suit in federal court. .

the claimant typically has six months from the date the agency mails its denial to initiate an ftca lawsuit against the united states in federal court if he so chooses .

with limited exceptions , if the plaintiff does not file suit before this six - month deadline , his claim against the united states will be "forever barred. .

if a federal agency does not promptly decide whether to settle or deny claims that claimants have presented to them , the ftca establishes a mechanism for constructive exhaustion to prevent claims from being consigned to administrative limbo while the claimant awaits the agency's decision .

pursuant to section 2675 ( a ) of the ftca , "[t]he failure of an agency to make final disposition of a claim within six months after it is filed shall , at the option of the claimant any time thereafter , be deemed a final denial of the claim for purposes of" the ftca's exhaustion requirement .

thus , under these limited circumstances , section 2675 ( a ) authorizes a plaintiff to file an ftca suit against the united states even before the agency has formally denied his administrative claim .

since congress first enacted the ftca in 1946 , the federal courts have developed a robust body of judicial precedent interpreting the statute .

in recent decades , however , the supreme court has rejected several invitations by litigants to modify its long - standing doctrines governing the ftca's application .

in doing so , the court has expressed reluctance to revisit settled ftca precedents in the absence of congressional action .

thus , if congress disapproves of some or all of the legal principles that currently govern ftca cases , legislative action may be necessary to change the governing standards .

some observers have advocated a variety of modifications to the ftca .

recent legislative proposals to alter the ftca have included , among other things , carving out certain categories of claims , cases , or plaintiffs to which the ftca does not apply ; expanding or narrowing the ftca's definition of "employee" — which , as discussed above , is presently relatively broad , but does not include independent contractors ; and amending 28 u.s.c .

§ 2680 to create new exceptions to the federal government's waiver of sovereign immunity — or , alternatively , to broaden , narrow , or eliminate existing exceptions .

proposals to change the ftca's substantive standards implicate policy questions that congress may wish to consider .

on one hand , broadening the ftca's waiver of sovereign immunity could enable a larger number of victims of government wrongdoing to obtain recourse through the federal courts , but could concomitantly increase the total amount of money the united states must pay to tort claimants each year and exacerbate "concerns .

 .

 .

about .

 .

 .

the impact that extensive litigation might have on the ability of government officials to focus on and perform their other duties. .

conversely , narrowing the ftca's immunity waiver could result in a larger number of private individuals bearing the costs of government employee misfeasance , but could result in a cost savings to the united states and decrease the potential for judicial interference with federal operations .

one particular proposal to amend the ftca that has captured a relatively substantial amount of congressional attention is abrogating or narrowing the feres doctrine .

as discussed above , the feres doctrine shields the federal government from liability "for injuries to servicemen where the injuries arise out of or are in the course of activity incident to [military] service. .

opponents of feres argue that the doctrine inappropriately bars servicemembers from obtaining recourse for their injuries .

critics maintain that feres 's bar on ftca suits creates especially unjust results with respect to servicemembers who suffer injuries in military hospitals and servicemembers who are victims of sexual abuse , as those types of tortious actions are far removed from the core functions of the military .

some members of congress , judges , and legal commentators have therefore advocated eliminating or narrowing the feres doctrine to allow servicemembers to pursue certain tort claims against the united states under the ftca .

supporters of feres , by contrast , have instead urged congress to retain the feres doctrine in its current form .

these commentators contend "that the abolition of the feres doctrine would lead to intra - military lawsuits that would have a very adverse effect on military order , discipline and effectiveness. .

supporters further maintain that entertaining tort suits by servicemembers against the united states would increase the government's exposure to monetary liability .

some who support the feres doctrine argue that even though feres bars servicemembers from suing the united states under the ftca for injuries they sustain incident to military service , feres does not necessarily leave servicemembers without any remedy whatsoever ; depending on the circumstances , injured servicemembers may be entitled to certain benefits under other federal statutes .

congress has periodically held hearings to assess whether to retain , abrogate , or modify the feres doctrine .

the house armed services committee's subcommittee on military personnel conducted the most recent of those hearings on april 30 , 2019 .

if congress desires to authorize servicemembers to prosecute tort lawsuits against the united states , it has several options .

for example , congress could abolish feres in its entirety and allow servicemembers to file tort suits against the united states subject to the same exceptions and prerequisites that govern ftca lawsuits initiated by nonservicemembers .

alternatively , instead of abrogating feres entirely , congress could allow servicemembers to sue the united states for only certain injuries arising from military service , such as injuries resulting from medical malpractice .

as an alternative to authorizing full - fledged litigation against the united states in federal court , congress could also create alternative compensation mechanisms intended to provide relief to injured servicemembers whose claims would otherwise be barred by feres .

such alternative compensation procedures could , for example , resemble the alternative compensation scheme congress established for persons injured by vaccines .

to that end , congress has periodically introduced bills proposing to modify the feres doctrine .

most recently , several members of the 116th congress cosponsored the sfc .

richard stayskal military medical accountability act of 2019 ( h.r .

2422 ) , which would authorize "member[s] of the armed forces of the united states" to bring claims "against the united states under [the ftca] for damages .

 .

 .

arising out of a negligent or wrongful act or omission in the performance of medical , dental , or related health care functions" rendered at certain military medical treatment facilities under specified conditions .

in addition to proposals to modify the ftca itself , congress retains the authority to enact private legislation to compensate individual tort victims who would otherwise be barred from obtaining recourse from the united states under the ftca in its current form .

although , as explained above , congress enacted the ftca in part to eliminate the need to pass private bills in order to compensate persons injured by the federal government , congress still retains some authority to pass private bills if it so desires .

thus , rather than amend the ftca to expand the universe of circumstances in which the united states will be liable to tort claimants , some have suggested that congress should pass individual private bills to compensate particular injured persons or groups of persons who might otherwise lack recourse under the ftca .

to that end , congress has occasionally "provided compensation [to plaintiffs] in situations where the courts have found that the ftca waiver of immunity provides no relief. .

