a s the supreme court has observed , while the first amendment protects the "freedom of speech," it "does not protect violence. .

but when speech promotes violence , a tension can form between the values of liberty and security .

in an oft - quoted passage from a dissenting opinion , justice robert jackson argued that the problems this tension creates are not insurmountable but must be confronted with a dose of pragmatism: a government can temper "liberty with order," but to treat free speech as absolute threatens to "convert the constitutional bill of rights into a suicide pact. .

while justices of the court have often disagreed over when free speech rights must yield to the government's interests , when it comes to speech promoting violence , the court has rejected an all - or - nothing approach .

over the past 50 years , the court has drawn a line between speech that advocates violence in the abstract and speech that facilitates it in a specific way , with the former receiving more robust constitutional protections .

it has done so because , in the court's view , upholding the first amendment requires preserving "uninhibited , robust , and wide - open" debate on public issues , even if that means allowing individuals to express ideas that are "deeply offensive to many. .

in more recent years , some have begun to question whether and how the court's decisions in this area should apply to speech online .

the "vast democratic fora of the internet" have provided ample platforms not only for those seeking to debate issues or express controversial views , but also for individuals and entities planning violent attacks or threatening violence online .

many policymakers and commentators , including some members of congress , have expressed concerns about the proliferation of social media content promoting terrorism and violence and the influence such speech can have on other internet users .

some have called on congress to restrict or even prohibit such content , which raises the question of whether the first amendment would allow such regulation .

a number of legal scholars have explored these issues , and some have proposed recommendations to congress about how best to address these concerns in accordance with the first amendment .

although governmental efforts to combat online content promoting terrorism or violence could take a number of forms , this report focuses on the first amendment implications of imposing civil or criminal liability on individual internet users ( i.e. , the originators of the content ) rather than the social media companies or internet service providers themselves .

as such , it focuses on the underlying first amendment issues that are likely to be common to both forms of government action , but does not discuss the additional considerations attendant to regulating a social media platform , which are the subject of another crs report .

the report begins with some background on the use of the internet by terrorist groups and the reported influence of online content on certain individuals accused of committing violent attacks .

it then considers the question of who can invoke the first amendment by analyzing whether its free speech protections apply to foreign nationals when they post online content from abroad , for example , in circumstances such as u.s. prosecutions where online content is introduced as evidence of a crime .

the report then discusses the overarching first amendment principles that bear on what the government may regulate under the first amendment , including ( 1 )  the distinction between regulating conduct and speech ; ( 2 )  the presumed invalidity of content - based laws ; and ( 3 )  relevant "unprotected" categories of speech that generally can be restricted because of their content .

the report next discusses the strict scrutiny standard and the overbreadth doctrine , which impose limitations on how the government can regulate by requiring that laws restricting speech be sufficiently tailored and not so broad as to chill protected speech .

finally , the report concludes with some considerations for congress in evaluating the constitutionality of regulating online content promoting terrorism or violence .

according to the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , the internet and , in particular , the use of social media are among the key "factors [that] have contributed to the evolution of the terrorism threat landscape" since the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks .

certain organizations that track or study hate crimes also cite the internet as a tool used to intimidate and harass people because of their race , ethnicity , religion , sexual orientation , or other attributes .

at the same time , some commentators have questioned the purported link between what some refer to as "hate speech" and bias - motivated crimes or have expressed concern that focusing on the ideological motivations of speakers has led to calls to criminalize protected speech divorced from any criminal intent or action .

while the nature or extent of the relationship between online speech and criminal conduct may be disputed , the use of the internet by terrorist groups is well documented .

u.s. - designated terrorist groups such as the islamic state ( also known as isis or isil ) , al qaeda , hamas , and al shabaab , have long used social media to disseminate their ideologies and recruit new members to their causes .

the islamic state group has used twitter and youtube to disseminate videos of its fighters executing prisoners and to claim credit for attacks around the world .

al shabaab used twitter to claim credit for the 2013 attack on the westgate shopping mall in nairobi , kenya , and to distribute information about the attack while it unfolded .

news outlets are also beginning to examine how the alleged perpetrator of the march 2019 terrorist attacks on two mosques in new zealand may have used social media to announce and promote his actions .

in addition , the internet reportedly has played a key role in certain individuals' personal "journey[s] to terrorism" or violent extremism — a process often referred to as "radicalization. .

for example , the person convicted of killing nine black parishioners in a south carolina church in 2015 was said to have "self - radicalized" online , adopting a "white supremacy extremist ideology , including a belief in the need to use violence to achieve white supremacy. .

in 2015 , it was reported that "the digital legacy" of anwar al awlaki — a u.s. citizen who became closely involved with al qaeda's affiliate in yemen and was targeted and killed by a u.s. drone strike there — influenced the ideologies of certain individuals accused or convicted of terrorist activities , including the boston marathon bombers .

speech advocating violence and terrorism is prohibited by the terms of service of facebook , twitter , and certain other social media outlets .

such prohibitions are permissible under current judicial interpretations of first amendment law because these platforms are operated by private actors , and the first amendment constrains only state ( i.e. , government ) action .

although the more established sites reportedly have increased their efforts to disable accounts that are associated with terrorist groups or remove content promoting terrorism or violence , it is not clear how comprehensive or successful these efforts have been .

moreover , users banned from one platform may move to another online forum that does not have the same restrictions , sometimes finding a community of like - minded individuals who reinforce or escalate their violent rhetoric ( sometimes referred to as "echo chambers" ) .

as previously noted , this report focuses on the first amendment considerations relevant to government regulation of online content promoting terrorism or violence .

because of the global reach of many online platforms , this report begins with the threshold question of the first amendment's reach , and in particular , whether it applies to foreign nationals posting online content from outside of the united states .

while the first amendment may extend to u.s. citizens speaking abroad or foreign nationals speaking within the united states under some circumstances , the supreme court has not directly opined on whether the first amendment applies to online content that a foreign national posts while located outside of the united states .

nevertheless , the court's decisions involving the extraterritorial reach of other constitutional protections , as well as lower court decisions involving the first amendment rights of foreign nationals , suggest that foreign nationals may face barriers in claiming first amendment protections for such speech .

the supreme court's decision in united states v. verdugo - urquidez — though it involves the fourth amendment — is instructive .

in that case , the court held that the fourth amendment , which "prohibits 'unreasonable searches and seizures,'" did not extend to the search of a mexican citizen's home in mexico by u.s. authorities .

the court reasoned that in contrast to the fifth and sixth amendments , which concern trial rights and procedures , the fourth amendment applies regardless of the prospect of trial , and "a violation of the amendment is 'fully accomplished' at the time of an unreasonable governmental intrusion. .

as such , any violation would have "occurred solely in mexico. .

four of the five justices who joined the majority opinion reasoned that the fourth amendment reserves its protections to "the people," which they interpreted as a "term of art employed in select parts of the constitution. .

in the view of those justices , a textual analysis of the constitution suggested that "'the people' protected by the fourth amendment , and by the first and second amendments," meant "a class of persons who are part of a national community or who have otherwise developed sufficient connection with this country to be considered part of that community. .

because the defendant had "no voluntary attachment to the united states" at the time of the search , he could not claim the protections of the fourth amendment .

at least two sitting supreme court justices — justices clarence thomas and brett kavanaugh — have suggested that the first amendment does not apply to foreign nationals abroad , citing to verdugo - urquidez .

the discussion that more directly addressed the applicability of free speech protections to foreign nationals came from then - judge brett kavanaugh in a 2014 case involving the united states' prosecution of an al qaeda associate .

in that case , a u.s. military commission convicted a personal assistant to osama bin laden for , among other things , conspiracy to commit war crimes .

the defendant "claim[ed] that he was unconstitutionally prosecuted for his political speech , including his production of [an] al qaeda recruitment video celebrating the terrorist attack on the u.s.s .

cole . .

when the case , al bahlul v. united states , first reached the full u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit ( d.c .

circuit ) , the court ruled on a different legal question and remanded the case for consideration of the first amendment challenge .

however , judge kavanaugh authored a separate opinion , in part to address the first amendment's applicability .

he stated that "although non - u.s. citizens arguably may have some first amendment rights at [a u.s. military base in] guantanamo or in other u.s. territories for any speech they engage in there , non - u.s. citizens have no first amendment rights abroad in foreign countries. .

the supreme court has applied the constitution to aliens in the united states and in u.s. territories , but has not extended constitutional rights to aliens in foreign countries .

see boumediene v. bush , 553 u.s. 723 , 768-71 ( 2008 ) ( applying article i , section 9 to u.s .

naval base at guantanamo , which was "[i]n every practical sense .

 .

 .

not abroad" ) ; united states v. verdugo - urquidez , 494 u.s. 259 ( 1990 ) ( declining to apply fourth amendment to search and seizure of alien's property in mexico ) ; johnson v. eisentrager , 339 u.s. 763 ( 1950 ) ( declining to apply habeas corpus right to u.s. - controlled military prison in germany ) ; see also al maqaleh v. hagel , 738 f.3d 312 ( d.c. cir .

2013 ) ( declining to apply habeas corpus right to u.s. military base in afghanistan ) ; al maqaleh v. gates , 605 f.3d 84 ( d.c. cir .

2010 ) ( same ) .

therefore , [the defendant] had no first amendment rights as a non - u.s. citizen in afghanistan when he led bin laden's media operation .

two years later , the full d.c .

circuit took up the al bahlul case again following remand .

this time , the court squarely rejected the defendant's first amendment challenge , citing the concurring opinions of judge kavanaugh , judge patricia millett , and judge robert wilkins , who all concluded that the defendant could not avail himself of the first amendment's protections .

thus , as the d.c .

circuit phrased it in a prior decision , "aliens beyond the territorial jurisdiction of the united states are generally unable to claim the protections of the first amendment. .

nevertheless , "[i]n a variety of contexts th[e] court has referred to a first amendment right to 'receive information and ideas.' .

in order to preserve this right , the court has largely rejected governmental attempts to control information because of how the government views that information .

for example , in lamont v. postmaster gen eral , the court held that a federal statute requiring the postal service to withhold foreign mailings classified as "communist political propaganda" from addressees unless they requested delivery of the mailings in writing amounted "to an unconstitutional abridgment of the addressee's first amendment rights. .

the court concluded that the "regime of this act is at war with the 'uninhibited , robust , and wide - open' debate and discussion that are contemplated by the first amendment. .

whether or when the government must observe the first amendment in its interactions with foreign nationals in order to preserve the rights of u.s. citizens is uncertain .

as then – d.c .

circuit judge ruth bader ginsburg noted in a dissenting opinion , "[t]he [f]irst [a]mendment secures to persons in the united states the respect of our government for their right to communicate and associate with foreign individuals and organizations. .

referring to lamont , she observed that "the first federal law the supreme court ever held violative of the [f]irst [a]mendment involved a condition on international correspondence — a restraint on delivery of mail from abroad. .

while finding it unnecessary to decide in that case "whether the [f]irst [a]mendment limits the actions of u.s. officials in their dealings with foreign parties," judge ginsburg noted the following principle from the restatement ( third ) of foreign relations : the provisions of the united states constitution safeguarding individual rights generally control the united states government in the conduct of its foreign relations as well as in domestic matters , and generally limit governmental authority whether it is exercised in the united states or abroad , and whether such authority is exercised unilaterally or by international agreement .

judge ginsburg concluded by stating that she "would hesitate long before holding that in a united states - foreign citizen encounter , the amendment we prize as 'first' has no force in court. .

based on these principles and decisions , there may be some cases involving social media content posted by foreign nationals that implicate the free speech rights of u.s. citizens , who may be members of the particular online forum or otherwise have access to it .

however , there could be prudential limitations on a foreign national's ability to assert those rights .

and , even if a court concludes that a particular foreign national has standing in a given case , it is not clear that the first amendment would protect his or her online activities based solely on the purported interests of other internet users .

in contrast , the supreme court has recognized that u.s. citizens regularly exercise first amendment rights when communicating online , so free speech protections are more directly in play when considering the united states' regulation of its own citizens' online speech .

accordingly , the remainder of this report discusses the principles that bear on the government's ability to regulate online content promoting terrorism or violence when there is no dispute about the first amendment's applicability .

a key initial consideration in evaluating whether a law or a particular application of that law comports with the first amendment is whether the law at issue regulates conduct or speech .

the distinction is sometimes elusive because speech may occur during a course of conduct , and actions themselves can sometimes be inherently expressive or "symbolic" speech protected by the first amendment .

as a potential starting point , a law typically regulates conduct if it dictates what the regulated persons or entities "must [or must not] do .

 .

 .

not what they may or may not say . .

but the touchstone for deciding whether such a law implicates the first amendment appears to be whether the law targets expression .

to determine whether a law targets expression and depending on the facts of the case , a court might consider ( 1 )  the express terms ( i.e. , "the face" ) of the law , ( 2 )  the purpose of the law , or ( 3 )  its practical application to see whether the law is directed at certain content or speakers or applies to the challenger's activities solely as a result of what that party seeks to communicate .

if a law does not target expression , the first amendment extends the government more leeway to regulate that activity even if the regulation incidentally burdens speech .

as the supreme court has explained , [r]estrictions on protected expression are distinct from restrictions on economic activity or , more generally , on nonexpressive conduct .

 .

 .

 .

[t]he first amendment does not prevent restrictions directed at commerce or conduct from imposing incidental burdens on speech .

that is why .

 .

 .

"an ordinance against outdoor fires" might forbid "burning a flag" .

 .

 .

 .

however , the conduct - focused nature of a law does not necessarily preclude first amendment review where the government seeks to penalize a person under that law because of ideas or messages that person communicated .

the supreme court applied these principles in its 2010 decision in holder v. humanitarian law project , which involved the constitutionality of a federal statute concerning the provision of material support to u.s. - designated foreign terrorist organizations ( ftos ) .

the statute imposes criminal penalties on anyone who "knowingly provides material support or resources to [an fto] , or attempts or conspires to do so. .

it defines "material support or resources" in relevant part as "any property , tangible or intangible , or service , including .

 .

 .

training , expert advice or assistance , .

 .

 .

false documentation or identification , communications equipment , .

 .

 .

personnel ( 1 or more individuals who may be or include oneself ) .

 .

 .

 , except medicine or religious materials. .

in humanitarian law project , a group of u.s. citizens and domestic organizations brought a preenforcement challenge to the law , arguing that it would be unconstitutional to punish them for the types of support that they wished to provide to two ftos .

specifically , the plaintiffs sought to ( 1 )  train members of one fto on how to use humanitarian and international law in peaceful dispute resolution ; ( 2 ) teach that fto's members how to petition international organizations for relief ; and ( 3 )  engage in political advocacy for the rights of certain groups , including by supporting one of the ftos "as a political organization" for this purpose .

after concluding that most of these activities clearly constituted "training" or "expert advice or assistance" under the law , the court proceeded to address the first amendment implications of applying the statute to the plaintiffs' activities .

the humanitarian law project court rejected the "extreme positions" advanced by both sides .

on the one hand , it rejected the plaintiffs' contention that the statute banned their "pure political speech," noting that the law did not prevent the plaintiffs from becoming members of the ftos , speaking and writing freely about these organizations , or engaging in independent advocacy .

the court reasoned that "congress has prohibited 'material support,' which most often does not take the form of speech at all .

and when it does , the statute is carefully drawn to cover only a narrow category of speech to , under the direction of , or in coordination with foreign groups that the speaker knows to be terrorist organizations. .

on the other hand , the court rejected the government's position that applying the law to the plaintiffs' activities implicated only conduct , not speech .

it reasoned that the law itself "regulates speech on the basis of its content" because whether plaintiffs are subject to prosecution "depends on what they say. .

referring to the statutory definitions of "training" and "expert advice or assistance," the court noted that if the plaintiffs' speech to the organizations "imparts a 'specific skill' or communicates advice derived from 'specialized knowledge' — for example , training on the use of international law or advice on petitioning the united nations — then it is barred. .

even if the law " generally functions as a regulation of conduct," the court reasoned , in these circumstances , "as applied to plaintiffs the conduct triggering coverage under the statute consists of communicating a message. .

as discussed in more detail infra , the court ultimately held that the material support statute did not violate the first amendment as applied to the plaintiffs' proposed activities because the challenged statutory prohibitions were necessary to further the government's asserted interests in combating terrorism .

unlike a law involving "material support," which , in the court's view , "most often" takes the form of conduct rather than speech , a law that expressly prohibits or restricts , for example , social media posts promoting terrorism or violence would more clearly involve speech because of its central focus on communications .

although the supreme court has not had many occasions to consider laws that expressly restrict online content , in a first amendment challenge to a federal law that restricted the online transmission of certain "indecent" and "patently offensive" content , both the parties and the court evaluated the law as regulating speech , not conduct .

once it is established that a law regulates speech , the next consideration is whether it does so on the basis of content .

first amendment law historically has distinguished between laws that restrict speech because of its content or viewpoint and those that do not draw content - based distinctions or that have a content - neutral justification .

although the justices of the court have sometimes disagreed over whether a particular law is content - based for first amendment purposes , the court has largely settled on the following definition: government regulation of speech is content based if a law applies to particular speech because of the topic discussed or the idea or message expressed .

this commonsense meaning of the phrase "content based" requires a court to consider whether a regulation of speech "on its face" draws distinctions based on the message a speaker conveys .

some facial distinctions based on a message are obvious , defining regulated speech by particular subject matter , and others are more subtle , defining regulated speech by its function or purpose .

courts scrutinize content - based distinctions because of the potential for the government to silence speech with which it disagrees by prohibiting or imposing special burdens on an entire category of speech: "content discrimination 'raises the specter that the government may effectively drive certain ideas or viewpoints from the marketplace.' .

justice anthony kennedy wrote in a case involving federal restrictions on the transmission of sexually explicit cable programming: "the history of the law of free expression is one of vindication in cases involving speech that many citizens may find shabby , offensive , or even ugly .

it follows that all content - based restrictions on speech must give us more than a moment's pause. .

the supreme court has repeatedly stated that content - based laws are "presumptively unconstitutional" and subject to the court's most stringent review , at least insofar as they involve fully protected speech .

in current first amendment parlance , such laws must survive "strict scrutiny," meaning that the government must demonstrate that they are narrowly tailored to serve compelling governmental interests .

under the court's current formulation , a law that expressly regulates what topics can be discussed in a social media post would likely be considered a "content - based" restriction on speech , as the regulation "applies to particular speech because of the topic discussed or the idea or message expressed. .

as such , as a general matter , such a law would likely be subject to strict scrutiny and presumptively invalid .

however , this level of scrutiny may not apply if the regulated content falls within a category of speech that the court has said is not fully protected , as discussed in the next section .

if a law regulates speech , the next consideration in the first amendment analysis is whether that speech is considered protected ( sometimes referred to as "fully protected" ) or instead falls within one of the narrow categories of so - called "unprotected" speech ( sometimes referred to as the first amendment's "exceptions" ) recognized by the supreme court .

such categories are not determinative of whether a law is constitutional , but the government generally has greater leeway to regulate unprotected speech based on its content .

the supreme court has long considered political and ideological speech to be at the "core" of the first amendment and the ability to exchange ideas to be integral to a functioning democracy .

our cases have often noted the close connection between our nation's commitment to self - government and the rights protected by the first amendment .

 .

 .

 .

the first amendment creates "an open marketplace" in which differing ideas about political , economic , and social issues can compete freely for public acceptance without improper government interference .

the government may not prohibit the dissemination of ideas that it disfavors , nor compel the endorsement of ideas that it approves .

these principles extend even to speech that many would consider to be deeply offensive or hateful .

accordingly , a law that restricts speech concerning "politics , nationalism , religion , or other matters of opinion" generally receives strict scrutiny .

but the first amendment does not just protect core political and ideological speech .

even in cases involving speech historically considered to have lower "social value," the government generally "has no power to restrict expression because of its message , its ideas , its subject matter , or its content. .

the same is generally true for speech that the legislature considers "too harmful to be tolerated," as the government generally may not proscribe speech based on its content unless that speech falls within one of the narrow categories of unprotected speech recognized by the supreme court .

three of those categories are of particular relevance in the context of online speech that promotes terrorism or violence .

whether the government seeks to regulate protected speech , unprotected speech , or both , the first amendment imposes some limitations on the means the government may use to achieve its regulatory objectives .

when a law regulates protected speech , courts generally apply strict scrutiny and require the government to show that the law is narrowly tailored to achieve a compelling governmental interest .

in contrast , laws that primarily regulate nonexpressive conduct or unprotected speech normally are not subjected to strict scrutiny .

however , such laws can sometimes be challenged as unduly overbroad on the grounds that a "substantial number of [their] applications are unconstitutional , judged in relation to the statute's plainly legitimate sweep. .

this section examines the strict scrutiny test and the overbreadth doctrine , as well as applications of those doctrines in the context of terrorism - related offenses and criminal prosecutions involving online speech , as those standards and precedents are likely to affect how the government may regulate online speech promoting terrorism or violence .

as the discussion above illustrates , regulating online content in accordance with the first amendment — even online content promoting terrorism or violence — presents challenges .

these challenges are due in large part to the complexities of free speech jurisprudence and the lack of controlling authority about how doctrines developed nearly 50 years ago — many in the context of statements made by identifiable speakers at political or ideological rallies — apply to speech on the internet where the lines between advocacy , incitement , threats , and conduct can be even more blurred .

nevertheless , the cases and scholarship to date suggest some general guideposts for evaluating the free speech implications of scholarly or legislative proposals to restrict online content promoting terrorism or violence .

first , a law that primarily regulates conduct online as opposed to speech may not trigger heightened first amendment scrutiny .

likewise , a general regulatory scheme that incidentally regulates online content is unlikely to trigger heightened scrutiny .

however , if a law expressly regulates certain types of online communications based on the words used or their effect on other internet users , it may be assumed to regulate speech rather than conduct .

second , a law that is narrowly drafted to prohibit online speech that falls within one of the so - called unprotected categories of speech may not trigger heightened first amendment scrutiny .

in this regard , speech on the internet advocating violence as an abstract proposition would likely be considered protected , while speech that incites imminent violence , constitutes a true threat , or is integral to criminal conduct may be deemed unprotected .

third , even if alaw is directed at nonexpressive conduct or unprotected speech on the internet , it may still be subject to an overbreadth challenge if , in practice , it prohibits a substantial amount of protected speech in relation to its plainly legitimate sweep .

fourth , except under some circumstances involving unprotected speech , a law that regulates online speech on the basis of its content would likely be subject to strict scr utiny .

a law that regulates online content on the basis of the viewpoints expressed would likely present a clearer case of content discrimination and would be presumptively invalid regardless of whether the underlying speech is protected .

finally , the government may have more leeway to regulate online content when asserting its interests in national security and foreign affairs ; however , such laws , to the extent they restrict or burden protected speech , would likely have to withstand heightened ( if not strict ) first amendment scrutiny .

in addition to the considerations listed above , close attention to legal challenges regarding the enforcement of existing laws as applied to online activities may provide guidance to lawmakers seeking to balance the first amendment interests of internet users with the safety and security of u.s. citizens on and offline .

