technological convergence , in general , refers to the trend or phenomenon where two or more independent technologies integrate and form a new outcome .

one example is the smartphone .

a smartphone integrates several independent technologies — such as telephone , computer , camera , music player , television ( tv ) , and geolocating and navigation tool — into a single device .

the smartphone has become its own , identifiable category of technology .

currently , over 35% of the global population are smartphone users and over 3 billion active devices are in circulation .

in the united states , about 80% of the u.s. population are smartphone users , and over 280 million active devices are in circulation .

the technological convergence has resulted in establishing a new and prominent smartphone industry sector , worth over $350 billion globally , according to some estimates .

technological convergence may present a range of issues where congress may take legislative and / or oversight actions .

three selected issue areas associated with technological convergence are regulatory jurisdiction , digital privacy , and data security .

first , merging and integrating multiple technologies from distinct functional categories into one converged technology may pose challenges to defining regulatory policies , roles , and responsibilities .

determining oversight jurisdictions and regulatory authorities for converged technologies may become complicated as the boundaries that once separated single - function technologies are blended together .

in other words , delineating which policy authorizes which government agency to apply which standards to regulate which industry is no longer simple and straightforward .

how congress chooses to oversee certain industries and government agencies may also become complicated due to converging technologies that blur and blend existing categorical boundaries .

second , digital privacy concerns stem from converged technologies' collection and usage of personal and machine data .

technological convergence facilitates increasing consumption and collection of data , which poses potential digital privacy concerns for consumers .

data collection and usage are tied to digital privacy issues because a piece or aggregation of information could identify an individual or reveal patterns in their activities .

converged technologies leverage large volumes of data to try to improve the user experience by generating more tailored and anticipatory results .

this data can also potentially be used to identify , locate , track , and monitor an individual without the person's knowledge .

the same data can potentially be sold to third - party entities without an individual's awareness .

as the use of converged technologies continues to propagate , digital privacy issues will likely remain central to the policy debate .

third , data security concerns are often associated with smart devices .

as devices are able to interconnect , the convenient ubiquitous features may create vulnerabilities that could be exploited by malicious actors .

data security , a component of cybersecurity , protects data from unauthorized access and use .

along with digital privacy , data security is a pertinent issue for converged technologies , which generate and consume large volumes of data .

technological convergence poses three potential data security concerns: increased number of access points susceptible to cyberattacks , linkage to physical security , and theft of data .

the first section of this report describes technological convergence along with closely associated media convergence and network convergence .

the report uses the internet of things ( iot ) and smart home devices as primary examples .

of these three convergences , consumers most often directly engage with converged technologies .

in contrast , general consumers may not have the same level of engagement or understanding of media and network convergences , as they often occur in the background .

the second section of this report presents regulatory , digital privacy , and data security issues pertaining to technological convergence .

the current state , challenges , and recent legislative activities are discussed .

the third section of this report concludes with potential considerations for congress .

an overarching consideration for regulatory , digital privacy , and data security issues may be determining the role , if any , of the federal government in an environment where technological evolution changes quickly and continues to disrupt existing frameworks .

policies governing these three issues — regulations , digital privacy , and data security — may be of interest to congress as well as other stakeholders , including u.s. government agencies , commercial entities , and the general public .

"technological convergence" is a concept whereby merging , blending , integration , and transformation of independent technologies leads to a completely new converged technology .

this broad , complex concept encompasses a wide range of technologies , including iot and smart home devices .

when a converged technology emerges , it often replaces single - function technologies or renders them obsolete .

in this sense , technological convergence can be viewed as a progression or evolution of technology .

a discussion of technological convergence in isolation is difficult because technological convergence is closely associated with media convergence and network convergence .

technological , media , and network convergences are interdependent , but each possesses subtle distinctions .

these three terms are often used interchangeably , further complicating the discussion of an already complex topic .

figure 1 illustrates relationships between technological , media , and network convergences .

technological convergence : this occurs when the functions of different technologies are merged and interoperate as a single unit .

a converged unit can typically process multiple types of media that correspond to each technology that merged .

technological convergence includes devices and systems that interface with end users .

for example , a user interacts with converged devices , such as a smart television ( tv ) , to access the contents that are distributed over a network .

a smart tv has combined the functions of a traditional tv , a computer , and several other devices that used to have one specific purpose .

in addition to displaying over - the - air broadcast tv channels , smart tvs interface with users to surf the internet , view photos taken from smartphones and stored in the "cloud," display feeds from home security cameras connected to a network , play music , notify users of incoming calls and messages , and allow video teleconferencing .

smart tvs can process a variety of formats of media to perform multiple functions .

media convergence : this refers to content that is made available through multiple forms , formats , and access points .

media convergence proliferated as analog mediums of communication became digitized .

for example , the contents on a newspaper used to be available only in print .

the same content is currently available in both print and digital forms , as text , visual , and / or audio formats , and through multiple devices and platforms including social media .

network convergence : this refers to a single network infrastructure that handles and distributes multiple types of media .

network convergence became prominent when telecommunications and information networks integrated ; it became prevalent when mobile cellular communications incorporated access to the internet and made it widespread .

for example , today's cable companies process information in forms of voice , video , and data on a single network and often offer their services as a bundle package ( eg , phone , television , and internet services ) .

similarly , cellular networks , which distribute information to and from mobile devices and fixed platforms , process voice , video , and data .

prior to network , media , and technological convergences , a separate , independent network was dedicated to handling and distributing one particular type of media that was processed by a single - function device .

for example , a telephone network distributed audio information ( i.e. , voice ) between telephone handsets .

a broadcasting network delivered video to television sets .

convergence removes such pairing ( i.e. , "decouples" ) between media , network , and device .

decoupling gives convergence its versatility , flexibility , and complexity .

regulation , digital privacy , and data security are three selected issues associated with technological convergence that may be of interest to many stakeholders , including congress .

as identified in the smart home example in the previous section , each of these three issues is discussed further in subsequent subsections .

the three selected issues are tied to the three characteristics of converged technologies discussed previously in the " characteristics of smart devices " section .

first , convergence of technologies blend and blur existing categorical distinctions for each technology because a converged technology can perform multiple functions .

second , technological convergence consumes , collects , and generates a large volume of both personal and machine data .

third , converged technologies allow ubiquitous access points to the end users .

these characteristics are typically observed as a result of decoupling the devices from media and network .

with relatively few policies in place for specifically overseeing technological convergence , congress may consider potential policy options to address the issues discussed in this report .

the fundamental policy considerations to identifying options may be determining the role , if any , of the federal government in overseeing technological convergence , digital privacy , and data security .

regulating technological convergence may entail policies for jurisdictional deconfliction , harmonization , and expansion to address blended or new categories of technology .

currently , aspects of converged technologies may be regulated by different agencies based on the individual technologies that compose the convergence , but not as a whole .

regulating a converged technology as a whole can also be challenging because the combinations of technologies may generate too many possible outcomes .

when converged technologies establish a new domain and fall outside of existing regulatory jurisdictions , they are often left to self - regulate .

congress and the administration could take a number of approaches in regulating technological convergence .

three potential approaches are discussed here .

first , the federal government could continue to allow industry to self - regulate , especially where technology evolves quickly .

this may promote innovative space , but relies on the industry to exercise responsible and accountable practices .

second , congress and the administration could maintain current regulatory jurisdiction but leverage a deconfliction or harmonization policy so that convergent technologies are regulated under one primary authority instead of potentially multiple authorities .

preserving existing regulatory jurisdiction may require minimal restructuring and allow relatively short timeline for implementation .

while a deconfliction or harmonization policy could increase coordination , overlaying such policy on an existing regulatory framework may not present the most efficient process .

third , the administration could consider expanding regulatory jurisdictions and authorities to include new and emerging convergent technologies that are self - regulated .

this may require a complete overhaul of the technology regulatory framework , requiring congressional action and a relatively lengthy adaptation timeline for the affected industries .

some could also view such actions as extensive regulation that stifles innovation and commercial growth .

on the other hand , this approach could present an opportunity to update policies on par with technology progressions and posture for emerging capabilities .

federal data protection laws currently in place apply to specific types of data and have varied privacy and data security provisions .

a federal law that comprehensively addresses digital privacy for all types of data is not in place .

while illegal use of personal information ( such as identity theft and fraud ) is defined and enforced by federal agencies , legal use of data generated by users or converged technologies ( such as social media and iot ) is not regulated to the same extent .

transparency into the activities of legal data brokers and collectors is limited .

congress may choose to define the role of the federal government overseeing digital privacy by introducing new comprehensive federal law ( s ) and / or by determining minimal required standards of digital privacy .

an alternative option could be expanding existing digital privacy authorities .

this could include deciding whether federal entities , such as the ftc , should have their rulemaking abilities clarified or expanded .

an expanded or new federal digital privacy policy may require a variety of decisions by congress .

two of many potential decisions pertaining to federal digital privacy policy are determining how data privacy and data security could be addressed legislatively and determining whether various types , or categories , of personal data should be treated equally or differently under varied guidance .

data security , as it pertains to technological convergence , may impact both the cyber and physical fronts .

some of the federal data protection laws currently in place have data security provisions , though they vary and may be focused predominantly on the cyber - aspect .

this also means that different data security protocols apply to different types of data .

for instance , the guidance for notifying users when personal data gets compromised is different for health , financial , and location data .

similar to the digital privacy considerations , congress could begin by determining whether overarching legislation for data security is necessary .

congress may consider new legislation explicitly addressing data security concerns pertaining to technological convergence .

or , congress may consider new legislation to expand existing cybersecurity missions to address data security issues .

data security is often considered as a component of cybersecurity , but protection of the data is equally important as safeguarding a network or a system .

as with any security challenge , finding the right balance between convenience and security measures is a key component of an effective security policy .

a data security policy that predominantly focuses on security measures to address potential vulnerabilities created by converged technologies could negate convenient features and beneficial capabilities , such as ubiquitous access , offered by the converged technologies .

on the other hand , allowing maximum accessibility without a security measure exposes both the data and the system to risks .

not having an updated data security policy relies on existing cybersecurity measures to address potential vulnerabilities introduced by technological convergence .

congress may determine whether data privacy and data security should be addressed in one policy .

data privacy and data security are linked and complementary , especially for digital information .

while two coupled topics could be addressed in a single policy , data privacy and data security are two distinct issues .

having separate complementary policies could potentially focus more clearly on specific aspects of each issue .

