congress has shown an interest in the department of defense's ( dod's ) electronic warfare ( ew ) portfolio , requiring an independent assessment of ew plans and programs in the fy2019 national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) .

this report addresses u.s. military ew funding across research , development , test , and evaluation ( rdt&e ) and procurement appropriations .

using the fy2019 through fy2021 budget request documents , this analysis compares funding profiles between fiscal years , as well as projected funding across the future years defense program ( fydp ) .

using unclassified sources , crs estimates that dod seeks to invest approximately $9.7 billion in fy2021 funding for ew programs .

discussion of specific ew - related programs , as well as an overview of electronic warfare , are outside the scope of this report .

the following analysis looks at ew funding identified by the dod's ew executive commission ( ew excom ) .

the ew excom identified a series of rdt&e program elements from three of the military services ( air force , army and navy ) , as well as several defense agencies ( defense advanced research projects agency , defense information systems agency , the joint staff , office of the secretary of defense operational test and evaluation , and u.s. special operations command ) .

using the program elements identified , this analysis extrapolates procurement funding to provide an overview of dod investments in electronic warfare in fy2019 and fy2020 and requested investments in fy2021 .

over the past two decades , china and russia have seen u.s. military command and control , intelligence surveillance , and reconnaissance ( c2isr ) networks as a critical capability that they must develop capabilities against which to effectively compete .

both countries , as a result , have invested heavily in ew - related systems .

according to one analyst , the russian military views electronic warfare as a "type of armed struggle using electronic means against enemy c4isr [command , control , communications , computers] to 'change the quality of information,' or using electronic means against various assets to change the condition of the operational environment. .

similarly , china has developed sophisticated ew capabilities to disrupt and deny adversary access to command and control systems—particularly space - based systems .

not only has the chinese military been developing new systems , but it routinely exercises with them .

in its most recent annual report to congress , dod documented at least four major exercises the people's liberation army used to test and demonstrate their capabilities .

the national defense strategy commission , an independent congressional commission charged with evaluating the dod's national defense strategy , identified ew as a critical capability to achieve the goals of the national defense strategy .

similarly , in its fy2019 through fy202 1 defense budget overview request documents , dod identified ew as a priority to improve platform and network survivability ; provide advanced jamming techniques to disrupt radars , communications , and command and control systems ; and provide measures to defend the space domain and maintain power projection forces .

the executive branch and the congress have placed a higher priority on ew programs in recent years .

in 2015 , the deputy secretary of defense established the ew excom —co - chaired by the under secretary of defense for acquisition and sustainment ( usd a&s ) and vice chairman of the joint chiefs of staff—to identify emerging ew technologies .

the fy2017 ndaa required the ew excom to develop an ew strategy .

in its strategy , the ew excom identified program elements and projects with ew facets in each of the services' and defense - wide research , development , test and evaluation ( rdt&e ) appropriations .

it did not , however , identify procurement lines due to complexity and classification issues .

furthermore , some program elements the excom identified might not clearly refer to ew capabilities , like darpa's electronics technology .

other program elements that support ew operations , however , such as the navy's e - 2d hawkeye , are not included in the excom's program list .

with these methodological limitations , this report treats the ew excom's list of 65 program elements and projects as encompassing dod ew programs .

the following analysis compares the fy2019 budget request for these programs with the fy2020 and fy2021 requests .

the analysis includes funding for the army , navy , air force , darpa , defense information systems agency ( disa ) , the joint staff , office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) , operational test and evaluation ( ot&e ) , and special operations command ( socom ) , using program elements identified by excom in its strategy document , which are aggregated at the department or agency level .

the fy2021 request includes space force programs , which had been part of the air force request in prior years .

though the ew excom did not identify ew procurement programs , dod procurement justification documents ( p - 40s ) identify related research and development program elements .

using the defense technical information center investment budget search tool , this analysis identified the associated ew procurement programs—28 in fy2019 , 36 in fy2020 , and 33 in fy2021 .

some research and development efforts—such as the f / a - 18 hornet fighter jet and mq - 9 reaper drone—did not differentiate funding for ew - specific procurement and therefore included procurement for aircraft .

these procurements were excluded so as not to artificially inflate the funding profile .

based on the rdt&e profiles and program element searches , crs did not identify disa , joint staff , osd , and darpa programs with procurement appropriations .

dod has stated that it has prioritized ew funding above other programs .

this report compares funding requests between the three fiscal years to assess if dod seeks to increase funding of the ew portfolio ( by increasing funding ) , decrease funding , or keep the portfolio relatively unchanged .

to assess these changes , the percentage change from fy2019 to fy2020 is calculated for each appropriations category , and then compared to an overall dod percentage change .

 figure 6 , above , shows the relationship between rdt&e and procurement .

some might be concerned looking exclusively at the planned funding levels for rdt&e since this appropriation declines over the fydp .

however , several programs currently receiving rdt&e funding—such as the ngj and the e - 11 bacn—transition from being developmental programs to fielded systems .

also of note , it appears that the administration may have changed its plans on fielding new programs .

based on funding projections the administration plans on accelerating the next generation jammer quicker than previously anticipated .

in addition , it appears the administration decided to accelerate the f - 15 electronic warfare systems ( f - 15 epaws ) .

the increase in planned procurement funding in fy2020 is particularly significant compared to the planned funding profile in fy2019 .

combining both appropriations , dod requested an additional $662.5 million for ew in fy2021 compared to what it had initially projected in the fy2019 request ; however , the fy2021 request is $591.3 million lower than had been projected from the fy2020 request .

this represents a 7.3% increase in the portfolio from fy2019 projections but a 5.7% decrease compared to projections from the fy2020 projections .

one potential issue for congress is the overall funding level for ew programs .

dod requested approximately $9.7 billion dollars in fy2021 for the ew portfolio , based on unclassified budget request documents .

historically , individual ew programs have not been generally seen as large enough for in - depth congressional scrutiny ; however , combined , these programs represent funding levels nearly as much as an aircraft carrier ( $12.5 billion in total procurement for cvn - 80 ) or the f - 35 joint strike fighter procurement ( $10.7 billion in fy2019 ) .

congress may ask whether $10.2 billion is sufficient for dod to execute its missions , or , conversely , whether this funding level is too much .

second , congress may ask whether each of the military services is funding unique programs , or whether there are overlapping programs that provide similar capabilities .

to understand these questions , congress may consider a historical perspective on how much the dod allocated for ew to compare if current funding exceeds or under resources the portfolio .

a second metric congress may potentially consider using is the ratio of spending for procurement and rdt&e appropriations to understand where in the lifecycle ew programs currently are , and if the current portfolio is an anomaly .

many ew programs are highly classified due to their close relationship with intelligence and command and control programs .

as a result , there is potentially insufficient unclassified information to assess how much dod is currently spending on ew .

this limitation of data presents a potential oversight issue for congress .

some have argued that dod has not adequately prioritized ew over the past several years .

the budget projections described above may support the argument that dod is now prioritizing investment in ew funding .

congress may consider whether dod uses research and development funding to procure new electronic components .

congress might consider requiring dod to report all ew - related funding for procurements , as well as ensuring that dod is not procuring new or advanced electronics through other appropriations .

the ew excom has stated that many procurement programs have ew - related spending , and it is difficult and complex to differentiate among them .

as a result , this report does not include all ew - related procurement programs , and therefore does not account for all ew funding .

if congress maintains interest in ew procurement , it may consider requiring dod to report all ew - related procurement programs , as well as to break out specific ew - related initiatives within a larger procurement program .

congress has shown an interest in developing a comprehensive assessment of ew plans and programs across each of the dod services and agencies .

the fy2019 ndaa ( p.l .

115-232 ) required dod to contract with a scientific organization to perform an independent assessment of dod - related ew plans and programs .

according to the legislation , this assessment identified u.s. programs , orders of battle and doctrine ; analyze adversary programs , orders of battle and doctrine ; and make recommendations for how the u.s. military might counteract adversary plans and programs .

the center for strategic and budgetary assessments delivered the ndaa mandated study in december 2019 ; however , the fy2020 ndaa required a similar study to be performed .

in addition to requesting an independent assessment of ew programs and plans , the fy2019 ndaa required dod to update its electronic warfare strategy from 2017 and submit it to congress .

congress has expressed concern that dod has not synchronized its efforts to ensure its dominance in the electromagnetic spectrum .

for dod to remain competitive , congress directed the secretary of defense and a senior designated official to develop a process and procedure to integrate and enhance ew mission areas across dod ( i.e. , to ensure each of the services cooperates and is integrated in the joint force , as opposed to having service - specific solutions ) .

this section of the ndaa requires dod to develop a "defense - wide strategy , planning , and budgeting [process and procedures] with respect to conduct of such operations [electronic attack] by the department , including activities conducted to counter and deter such operations by malign actors. .

the strategy was delivered in 2019 ; however , much of the detail of this particular strategy is classified .

