 ( william l. painter ; february 28 , 2019 ) congress at times has sought to ascertain how much the government spends on securing the homeland , either in current terms or historically .

several factors compromise the authoritativeness of any answer to this question .

one such complication is the lack of a consensus definition of what constitutes home land security , and another is that homeland security activities are carried out across the federal government , in partnership with other public and private sector entities .

this insight examines those two complicating factors , and presents what information is available on historical homeland security budget authority and current dhs appropriations .

 ( michael e. devine ; february 1 , 2019 ) intelligence support of homeland security is a primary mission of the entire intelligence community ( ic ) .

in fulfilling this mission , changes to ic organization and process , since 9 / 11 , have enabled more integrated and effective support than witnessed or envisioned since its inception .

the terrorist attacks of 9 / 11 revealed how barriers between intelligence and law enforcement , which originally had been created to protect civil liberties , had become too rigid , thus preventing efficient , effective coordination against threats .

in its final report , the commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( the 9 / 11 commission ) identified how these barriers contributed to degrading u.s. national security .

the findings resulted in congress and the executive branch enacting legislation and providing policies and regulations designed to enhance information sharing across the u.s. government .

the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) gave the department of homeland security ( dhs ) responsibility for integrating law enforcement and intelligence information relating to terrorist threats to the homeland .

provisions in the intelligence reform and terrorist prevention act ( irtpa ) of 2004 ( p.l .

108-458 ) established the national counterterrorism center ( nctc ) as the coordinator at the federal level for terrorism information and assessment and created the position of director of national intelligence ( dni ) to provide strategic management across the 17 organizational elements of the ic .

new legal authorities accompanied these organizational changes .

at the federal , state , and local levels , initiatives to improve collaboration across the federal government include the fbi - led joint terrorism task forces ( jttfs ) and , more recently , the dhs national network of fusion centers ( nnfc ) .

within the ic , the fbi intelligence branch ( fbi / ib ) , and dhs's office of intelligence and analysis ( oia ) , and the coast guard intelligence ( cg - 2 ) enterprise , are most closely associated with homeland security .

oia combines information collected by dhs components as part of their operational activities ( i.e. , those conducted at airports , seaports , and the border ) with foreign intelligence from the ic ; law enforcement information from federal , state , local , territorial and tribal sources ; and private sector data about critical infrastructure and strategic resources .

oia analytical products focus on a wide range of threats to the homeland to include foreign and domestic terrorism , border security , human trafficking , and public health .

oia's customers range from the u.s. president to border patrol agents , coast guard personnel , airport screeners , and local first responders .

much of the information sharing is done through the nnfc — with oia providing personnel , systems , and training .

the coast guard intelligence ( cg - 2 ) enterprise is the intelligence component of the united states coast guard ( uscg ) .

it serves as the primary uscg interface with the ic on intelligence policy , planning , budgeting and oversight matters related to maritime security and border protection .

cg - 2 has a component counterintelligence service , a cryptologic group , and an intelligence coordination center to provide analysis and supporting products on maritime border security .

cg - 2 also receives support from field operational intelligence components including the atlantic and pacific area intelligence divisions , maritime intelligence fusion centers for the atlantic and pacific , and intelligence staffs supporting coast guard districts and sectors .

fbi / ib includes four component organizations: the directorate of intelligence has responsibility for all fbi intelligence functions , and includes intelligence elements and personnel at fbi headquarters in field divisions .

the office of partner engagement develops and maintains intelligence sharing relationships across the ic , and with state , local , tribal , territorial , and international partners .

the office of private sector conducts outreach to businesses impacted by threats to vulnerable sectors of the economy such as critical infrastructure , the supply chain , and financial institutions .

finally , the bureau intelligence council provides internal to the fbi a forum for senior - level dialogue on integrated assessments of domestic threats .

while the intelligence organizations of fbi and dhs are the only ic elements solely dedicated to intelligence support of homeland security , all ic elements , to varying degrees , have some level of responsibility for the overarching mission of homeland security .

for example , in addition to nctc , the office of the dni ( odni ) includes the cyber threat intelligence integration center ( ctiic ) .

it was established in 2015 and is responsible at the federal level for providing all - source analysis of intelligence relating to cyber threats to the united states .

much like nctc for terrorism , ctiic provides outreach to other intelligence organizations across the federal government and at the state , and local levels to facilitate intelligence sharing and provide an integrated effort for assessing and providing warning of cyber threats to the homeland .

ic organizational developments since 9 / 11 underscore the importance of adhering to privacy and civil liberties protections that many feared might be compromised by the more integrated approach to intelligence and law enforcement .

this is particularly true considering the changing nature of the threat: the focus of intelligence support of homeland security has evolved from state - centric to increasingly focusing on nonstate actors , often individuals acting alone or as part of a group not associated with any state .

collecting against these threats , therefore , requires strict adherence to intelligence oversight rules and regulations , and annual training by the ic workforce for the protection of privacy and civil liberties .

 ( daniel morgan ; january 22 , 2019 ) .

 ( john w. rollins , january 29 , 2019 ) on october 4 , 2018 , president trump released his administration's first national strategy for counterterrorism .

the overarching goal of the strategy is to "defeat the terrorists who threaten america's safety , prevent future attacks , and protect our national interests. .

in describing the need for this strategy , national security advisor john bolton stated that the terrorist "landscape is more fluid and complex than ever" and that the strategy will not "focus on a single organization but will counter all terrorists with the ability and intent to harm the united states , its citizens and our interests. .

the strategy states that a " new approach " will be implemented containing six primary thematic areas of focus: ( 1 ) pursuing terrorists to their source ; ( 2 ) isolating terrorists from their sources of support ; ( 3 ) modernizing and integrating the united states' counterterrorism authorities and tools ; ( 4 ) protecting american infrastructure and enhancing resilience ; ( 5 ) countering terrorist radicalization and recruitment ; and ( 6 ) strengthening the counterterrorism abilities of u.s. international partners .

in announcing the strategy , president trump stated , "when it comes to terrorism , we will do whatever is necessary to protect our nation. .

in contrast , former president obama's final national strategy for counterterrorism , published on june 28 , 2011 , primarily focused on global terrorist threats emanating from al qaeda and associated entities .

the overarching goal of this strategy was to "disrupt , dismantle , and eventually defeat al qaeda and its affiliates and adherents to ensure the security of our citizens and interests. .

this strategy stated that the "preeminent security threat to the united states continues to be from al qaeda and its affiliates and adherents. .

the strategy focused on the threats posed by geographic dispersal of al qaeda , its affiliates , and adherents , and identified principles that would guide united states counterterrorism efforts: adhering to core values , building security partnerships , applying tools and capabilities appropriately , and building a culture of resilience .

in announcing the release of this strategy , president obama included a quote from the speech he gave announcing the killing of osama bin laden , "as a country , we will never tolerate our security being threatened , nor stand idly by when our people have been killed .

we will be relentless in defense of our citizens and our friends and allies .

we will be true to the values that make us who we are .

and on nights like this one , we can say to those families who have lost loved ones to al qaeda's terror: justice has been done. .

since president trump's counterterrorism strategy was published , many security observers have pointed to the similarities and differences between the two administration's approaches to counterterrorism .

table 1 , below , presents the language contained in each strategy identifying major thematic aspects of the two counterterrorism strategies .

 ( paul parfomak ; march 1 , 2019 ) ongoing threats against the nation's natural gas , oil , and refined product pipelines have heightened concerns about the security risks to these pipelines , their linkage to the electric power sector , and federal programs to protect them .

in a december 2018 study , the government accountability office ( gao ) stated that , since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , "new threats to the nation's pipeline systems have evolved to include sabotage by environmental activists and cyber attack or intrusion by nations. .

in a 2018 federal register notice , the transportation security administration stated that it expects pipeline companies will report approximately 32 "security incidents" annually — both physical and cyber .

the pipeline and lng facility cybersecurity preparedness act ( h.r .

370 , s. 300 ) would require the secretary of energy to enhance coordination among government agencies and the energy sector in pipeline security ; coordinate incident response and recovery ; support the development of pipeline cybersecurity applications , technologies , demonstration projects , and training curricula ; and provide technical tools for pipeline security .

 ( shawn reese ; march 6 , 2019 ) congress has historically legislated and conducted oversight on the u.s. secret service ( usss ) because of usss' public mission of protecting individuals such as the president and his family , and the usss mission of investigating financial crimes .

most recently , the 115 th congress conducted oversight on challenges facing the service and held hearings on legislation that addressed costs associated with usss protective detail operations and special agents' pay .

these two issues remain pertinent in the 116 th congress due to recent , but failed , attacks on usss protectees , and the media's and public's attention on the cost the usss incurs while protecting president donald trump and his family .

 ( shawn reese ; february 19 , 2019 ) due to the october 2018 attempted bombing attacks on current and former government officials ( and others ) , there may be congressional interest in policy issues surrounding protective details for government officials .

attacks against political leaders and other public figures have been a consistent security issue in the united states .

according to a 1998 u.s .

marshals service ( usms ) report , data on assassinations and assassination attempts against federal officials suggest that elected officials are more likely to be targeted than those holding senior appointed positions .

congress also may be interested due to media reports of costs or budgetary requests associated with funding security details for the heads of some departments and agencies , including the department of education , the department of labor , and the environmental protection agency .

in a 2000 report , the government accountability office ( gao ) stated that it was able to identify only one instance when a cabinet secretary was physically harmed as a result of an assassination attempt .

this occurred when one of the lincoln assassination conspirators attacked then - secretary of state william seward in his home in 1865 .

even with few attempted attacks against appointed officials , gao reported that federal law enforcement entities have provided personal protection details ( ppds ) to selected executive branch officials since at least the late 1960s .

in total , gao reported that from fy1997 through fy1999 , 42 officials at 31 executive branch agencies received security protection .

personnel from 27 different agencies protected the 42 officials: personnel from their own agencies or departments protected 36 officials , and personnel from other agencies or departments , such as the u.s. secret service ( usss ) and the usms , protected the remaining 6 officials .

this insight provides a summary of the statutory authority for executive branch official security , a trump administration proposal to consolidate this security under the usms , and issues for congressional consideration .

 ( kristin finklea ; january 31 , 2019 ) the united states sustains a multi - billion dollar illegal drug market .

an estimated 28.6 million americans , or 10.6% of the population age 12 or older , had used illicit drugs at least once in the past month in 2016 .

the 2018 national drug threat assessment indicates that mexican transnational criminal organizations ( tcos ) continue to dominate the u.s. drug market .

they "remain the greatest criminal drug threat to the united states ; no other group is currently positioned to challenge them. .

the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) indicates that these tcos maintain and expand their influence by controlling lucrative smuggling corridors along the southwest border and by engaging in business alliances with other criminal networks , transnational gangs , and u.s. - based gangs .

tcos either transport or produce and transport illicit drugs north across the u.s. - mexico border .

traffickers move drugs through ports of entry , concealing them in passenger vehicles or comingling them with licit goods on tractor trailers .

traffickers also rely on cross - border subterranean tunnels and ultralight aircraft to smuggle drugs , as well as other transit methods such as cargo trains , passenger busses , maritime vessels , or backpackers / "mules. .

while drugs are the primary goods trafficked by tcos , they also generate income from other illegal activities such as the smuggling of humans and weapons , counterfeiting and piracy , kidnapping for ransom , and extortion .

after being smuggled across the border , the drugs are distributed and sold within the united states .

the illicit proceeds may then be laundered or smuggled as bulk cash back across the border .

while the amount of bulk cash seized has declined over the past decade , it remains a preferred method of moving illicit proceeds — along with money or value transfer systems and trade - based money laundering .

more recently , traffickers have relied on virtual currencies like bitcoin to move money more securely .

to facilitate the distribution and local sale of drugs in the united states , mexican drug traffickers have sometimes formed relationships with u.s. gangs .

trafficking and distribution of illicit drugs is a primary source of revenue for these u.s. - based gangs and is among the most common of their criminal activities .

gangs may work with a variety of drug trafficking organizations , and are often involved in selling multiple types of drugs .

current domestic drug threats , fueled in part by mexican traffickers , include opioids such as heroin , fentanyl , and diverted or counterfeit controlled prescription drugs ; marijuana ; methamphetamine ; cocaine ; and synthetic psychoactive drugs .

while marijuana remains the most commonly used illicit drug , officials are increasingly concerned about the u.s. opioid epidemic .

as part of this , the most recent data show an elevated level of heroin use in the united states , including elevated overdose deaths linked to heroin and other opioids , and there has been a simultaneous increase in its availability , fueled by a number of factors including increased production and trafficking of heroin by mexican criminal networks .

increases in mexican heroin production and its availability in the united states have been coupled with increased heroin seizures at the southwest border .

according to the dea , the amount of heroin seized in the united states , including at the southwest border , has generally increased over the past decade ; nationwide heroin seizures reached 7,979 kg in 2017 , with 3,090 kg ( 39% ) seized at the southwest border , up from about 2,000 kg seized at the southwest border a decade earlier .

in addition to heroin , officials have become increasingly concerned with the trafficking of fentanyl , particularly nonpharmaceutical , illicit fentanyl .

fentanyl can be mixed with heroin and / or other drugs , sometimes without the consumer's knowledge , and has been involved in an increasing number of opioid overdoses .

nonpharmaceutical fentanyl found in the united states is manufactured in china and mexico .

it is trafficked into the united states across the southwest border or delivered through mail couriers directly from china , or from china through canada .

federal law enforcement has a number of enforcement initiatives aimed at countering drug trafficking , both generally and at the southwest border .

for example , the organized crime drug enforcement task force ( ocdetf ) program targets major drug trafficking and money laundering organizations , with the intent to disrupt and dismantle them .

the ocdetfs target organizations that have been identified on the consolidated priority organization targets ( cpot ) list , the "most wanted" list of drug trafficking and money laundering organizations .

in addition , the high intensity drug trafficking areas ( hidta ) program provides financial assistance to federal , state , local , and tribal law enforcement agencies operating in regions of the united states that have been deemed critical drug trafficking areas .

there are 29 designated hidtas throughout the united states and its territories , including a southwest border hidta that is a partnership of the new mexico , west texas , south texas , arizona , and san diego - imperial hidtas .

several existing strategies may also be leveraged to counter southwest border drug trafficking .

for instance , the national southwest border counternarcotics strategy ( nsbcs ) , first launched in 2009 , outlines domestic and transnational efforts to reduce the flow of illegal drugs , money , and contraband across the southwest border .

in addition , the 2011 strategy to combat transnational organized crime provided the federal government's first broad conceptualization of transnational organized crime , highlighting it as a national security concern and outlining threats posed by tcos — one being the expansion of drug trafficking .

the 116 th congress may consider a number of options in attempting to reduce drug trafficking from mexico to the united states .

for instance , congress may question whether the trump administration will continue or alter priorities set forth by existing strategies .

policymakers may also be interested in examining various federal drug control agencies' roles in reducing southwest border trafficking .

this could involve oversight of federal law enforcement and initiatives such as the ocdetf program , as well as the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) and its role in establishing a national drug control strategy and budget , among other efforts .

 ( audrey singer ; february 11 , 2019 ) the united states' southern border with mexico runs for approximately 2,000 miles over diverse terrain , varied population densities , and discontinuous sections of public , private , and tribal land ownership .

the department of homeland security ( dhs ) customs and border protection ( cbp ) is primarily responsible for border security , including the construction and maintenance of tactical infrastructure , installation and monitoring of surveillance technology , and the deployment of border patrol agents to prevent unlawful entries of people and contraband into the united states ( including unauthorized migrants , terrorists , firearms , narcotics , etc. ) .

cbp's border management and control responsibilities also include facilitating legitimate travel and commerce .

existing statute pertaining to border security confers broad authority to dhs to construct barriers along the u.s. border to deter unlawful crossings , and more specifically directs dhs to deploy fencing along "at least 700 miles" of the southern border with mexico .

the primary statute is the illegal immigration and immigrant responsibility act ( iirira ) as amended by the real id act of 2005 , the secure fence act of 2006 , and the consolidated appropriations act of 2008 .

on january 25 , 2017 , president trump issued executive order 13767 "border security and immigration enforcement improvements," which addresses , in part , the physical security of the southern border and instructed the dhs secretary to "take all appropriate steps to immediately plan , design , and construct a physical wall along the southern border , using appropriate materials and technology to most effectively achieve complete operational control. .

the order did not identify the expected mileage of barriers to be constructed .

the three main dimensions of border security are tactical infrastructure , surveillance technology , and personnel .

tactical infrastructure .

physical barriers between ports of entry ( poe ) on the southern border vary in age , purpose , form , and location .

gao reports that at the end of fy2015 , about one - third of the southern border , or 654 miles , had a primary layer of fencing: approximately 350 miles designed to keep out pedestrians , and 300 miles to prevent vehicles from entering .

approximately 90% of the 654 miles of primary fencing is located in the five contiguous border patrol sectors located in california , arizona , and new mexico , while the remaining 10% is in the four eastern sectors ( largely in texas ) where the rio grande river delineates most of the border .

about 82% of primary pedestrian fencing and 75% of primary vehicle fencing are considered "modern" and were constructed between 2006 and 2011 .

across 37 discontinuous miles , the primary layer is backed by a secondary layer ( pedestrian ) as well as an additional 14 miles of tertiary fencing ( typically to delineate property lines ) .

no new miles of primary fencing have been constructed since the 654 miles were completed in 2015 , but sections of legacy fencing and breached areas have been replaced .

additional tactical infrastructure includes roads , gates , bridges , and lighting designed to support border enforcement , and to disrupt and impede illicit activity .

surveillance technology .

to assist in the detection , identification , and apprehension of individuals illegally entering the united states between poes , cbp also maintains border surveillance technology .

ground technology includes sensors , cameras , and radar tailored to fit specific terrain and population densities .

aerial and marine surveillance vessels , manned and unmanned , patrol inaccessible regions .

personnel .

approximately 19,500 border patrol agents were stationed nationwide , with most ( 16,600 ) at the southern border in fy2017 .

subject to available appropriations , executive order 13767 calls on cbp to take appropriate action to hire an additional 5,000 border patrol agents .

however , cbp continues to face challenges attaining statutorily established minimum staffing levels for its border patrol positions despite increased recruitment and retention efforts .

southern border security may be improved by changes to tactical infrastructure , surveillance technology , and personnel .

a challenge facing policymakers is in determining the optimal mix of border security strategies given the difficulty of measuring the effectiveness of current efforts .

while the number of apprehensions of illegal entrants has long been used to measure u.s. border patrol performance , it does not measure illegal border crossers who evade detection by the border patrol .

when apprehensions decline , whether it is due to fewer illegal entrants getting caught or fewer attempting to enter illegally is not known .

other difficulties include measuring the contribution of any single border security component in isolation from the others , assessing the extent to which enforcement actions deter illegal crossing attempts , and evaluating ongoing enforcement efforts outside of border - specific actions and their impact on border security .

section 1092 of the fy2017 national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) directs the secretary of homeland security to provide annual metrics on border security that are intended to help address some of the challenges of measuring the impact of border security efforts .

dhs has produced baseline estimates that go beyond apprehensions statistics to measure progress towards meeting the goals contained in executive order 13767 .

congress , through cbp appropriations — and appropriations to its predecessor agency , the immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) — has invested in tactical infrastructure , surveillance technology , and personnel since the 1980s .

given the changing level of detail and structure of appropriations for border infrastructure over time , it is not possible to develop a consistent history of congressional appropriations specifically for border infrastructure .

however , cbp has provided the congressional research service ( crs ) with some historical information on how it has allocated funding for border barrier planning , construction , and operations and support .

between fy2007 and fy2018 , cbp allocated just over $5.0 billion to these activities , including almost $1.4 billion specifically for border barrier construction and improvement through a new "wall program" activity in its fy2018 budget .

the 116 th congress is considering a mix of tactical infrastructure , including fencing , surveillance technologies , and personnel to enhance border security between u.s. poes .

some experts have warned that the northern border may need more resources and oversight than it is currently receiving in light of potential national security risks .

other border security priorities that may be considered during the 116 th congress include improvements to existing facilities and screening and detection capacity at u.s. poes .

 ( shawn reese ; february 19 , 2019 ) the united states is threatened by a wide array of hazards , including natural disasters , acts of terrorism , viral pandemics , and man - made disasters , such as the deepwater horizon oil spill .

the way the nation strategically prioritizes and allocates resources to prepare for all hazards can significantly influence the ultimate cost to society , both in the number of human casualties and the scope and magnitude of economic damage .

as authorized in part by the post - katrina emergency reform act of 2006 ( pkemra ; p.l .

109-295 ) , the president , acting through the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) administrator , is directed to create a "national preparedness goal" ( npg ) and develop a "national preparedness system" ( nps ) that will help "ensure the nation's ability to prevent , respond to , recover from , and mitigate against natural disasters , acts of terrorism , and other man - made disasters" ( 6 u.s.c .

§§743-744 ) .

currently , npg and nps implementation is guided by presidential policy directive 8: national preparedness ( ppd - 8 ) , issued by then - president barack obama on march 30 , 2011 .

ppd - 8 rescinded the existing homeland security presidential directive 8: national preparedness ( hspd - 8 ) , which was released and signed by then - president george w. bush on december 17 , 2003 .

as directed by ppd - 8 , the nps is supported by numerous strategic component policies , national planning frameworks ( eg , the national response framework ) , and federal interagency operational plans ( eg , the protection federal interagency operational plan ) .

in brief , the nps and its many component policies represent the federal government's strategic vision and planning , with input from the whole community , as it relates to preparing the nation for all hazards .

the nps also establishes methods for achieving the nation's desired level of preparedness for both federal and nonfederal partners by identifying the core capabilities necessary to achieve the npg .

a capability is defined in law as "the ability to provide the means to accomplish one or more tasks under specific conditions and to specific performance standards .

a capability may be achieved with any combination of properly planned , organized , equipped , trained , and exercised personnel that achieves the intended outcome. .

a core capability is defined in ppd - 8 as a capability that is "necessary to prepare for the specific types of incidents that pose the greatest risk to the security of the nation. .

furthermore , the nps includes annual national preparedness reports that document progress made toward achieving national preparedness objectives .

the reports rely heavily on self - assessment processes , called the threat and hazard identification and risk assessment ( thira ) and stakeholder preparedness review ( spr ) , to incorporate the perceived risks and capabilities of the whole community into the nps .

in this respect , the nps's influence may extend to federal , state , and local budgetary decisions , the assignment of duties and responsibilities across the nation , and the creation of long - term policy objectives for disaster preparedness .

it is within the administration's discretion to retain , revise , or replace the overarching guidance of ppd - 8 , and the 116 th congress may provide oversight of the nps .

congress may have interest in overseeing a variety of factors related to the nps , such as whether the nps conforms to the objectives of congress , as outlined in the pkemra statute ; the nps is properly informed by quantitative and qualitative data and outcome metrics , such as those gathered by the thira and spr , as has been regularly recommended by the government accountability office ; federal roles and responsibilities have , in congress's opinion , been properly assigned and resourced to execute the core capabilities needed to prevent , protect against , mitigate the effects of , respond to , and recover from the greatest risks ; nonfederal resources and stakeholders are efficiently incorporated into nps policies ; and federal , state , and local government officials are allocating the appropriate amount of resources to the disaster preparedness mission relative to other homeland security missions .

ultimately , if the nps is determined not to fulfill the objectives of the 116 th congress , congress could consider amending the pkemra statute to create new requirements , or revise existing provisions , to manage the amount of discretion afforded to the president in nps implementation .

this could mean , for example , the 116 th congress directly assigning certain preparedness responsibilities to federal agencies through authorizing legislation different than those indicated by national preparedness frameworks .

as a hypothetical example , congress could decide that certain federal agencies , such as the department of commerce or housing and urban development , should take more or less of a role in the leadership of disaster recovery efforts following major incidents than is prescribed by the national disaster recovery framework .

congress also may consider prioritizing the amount of budget authority provided to some core capabilities relative to others .

as a hypothetical example , congress may prioritize resourcing those federal programs needed to support the nation's core capability of "screening , search , and detection" versus resourcing those federal programs needed to support "fatality management services. .

 ( elizabeth m. webster ; february 26 , 2019 ) after the president issues an emergency or major disaster declaration under the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( stafford act , 42 u.s.c .

§§5121 et seq .

 ) , the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) may provide various temporary housing assistance programs to meet disaster survivors' needs .

however , limitations on these programs may make it difficult to transition disaster survivors into permanent housing .

this insight provides an overview of the primary housing assistance programs available under the stafford act , and potential considerations for congress .

 ( elizabeth m. webster ; february 26 , 2019 ) the disaster recovery reform act of 2018 ( drra , division d of p.l .

115-254 ) , which became law on october 5 , 2018 , is the most comprehensive legislation on the federal emergency management agency's ( fema's ) disaster assistance programs since the passage of the sandy recovery improvement act of 2013 ( sria , division b of p.l .

113-2 ) and , previous to that , the post - katrina emergency management reform act of 2006 ( pkemra , p.l .

109-295 ) .

the legislation focuses on improving predisaster planning and mitigation , response , and recovery , and increasing fema accountability .

as such , it amends many sections of the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( stafford act , 42 u.s.c .

§§5121 et seq .

 ) .

generally , drra's amendments to the stafford act apply to major disasters and emergencies declared on or after august 1 , 2017 .

other new authorities apply to major disasters and emergencies declared on or after january 1 , 2016 .

congress may consider tracking the implementation of drra's requirements , which include "more than 50 provisions that require fema policy or regulation changes for full implementation.... " in addition to its reporting and rulemaking requirements — many of which include 2019 deadlines — much of drra's implementation is at fema's discretion .

this insight provides an overview of some of drra's broad impacts with a few significant , illustrative provisions , and potential considerations for congress .

 ( diane p. horn ; february 19 , 2019 ) the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) is authorized by the national flood insurance act of 1968 ( title xiii of p.l .

90-448 , as amended , 42 u.s.c .

§§4001 et seq. ) .

and is the primary source of flood insurance coverage for residential properties in the united states .

the nfip has two main policy goals: ( 1 ) to provide access to primary flood insurance , thereby allowing for the transfer of some of the financial risk from property owners to the federal government , and ( 2 ) to mitigate and reduce the nation's comprehensive flood risk through the development and implementation of floodplain management standards .

a longer - term objective of the nfip is to reduce federal expenditure on disaster assistance after floods .

the nfip engages in many "noninsurance" activities in the public interest: it identifies and maps flood hazards , disseminates flood - risk information through flood maps , requires community land - use and building - code standards , contributes to community resilience by providing a mechanism to fund rebuilding after a flood , and offers grants and incentive programs for household - and community - level investments in flood - risk reduction .

over 22,000 communities participate in the nfip , with more than 5.1 million policies providing over $1.3 trillion in coverage .

the program collects more than $4.7 billion in annual revenue from policyholders' premiums , fees , and surcharges .

floods are the most common natural disaster in the united states , and all 50 states have experienced floods in recent years .

 ( diane p. horn ; february 19 , 2019 ) .

 ( michael h. cecire ; april 24 , 2019 ) the community disaster loan ( cdl ) program was developed to help local governments manage tax and other revenue shortages following a disaster .

administered by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , cdls provide financial liquidity to local governments through a structured loan that may be converted to grants when certain financial conditions are met .

cdls are codified in section 417 of the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( 42 u.s.c .

§5184 , as amended ) .

modified "non - traditional" cdl programs were developed in response to hurricanes rita and katrina in 2005 , and cdl - type programs for puerto rico and the u.s. virgin islands ( usvi ) were developed following 2017's hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria .

this insight provides an overview of traditional and non - traditional cdls and the policy issues they may raise in the 116th congress , particularly with regard to cdl - type instruments developed for puerto rico and usvi .

the cdl program may be of interest to congress given observed increases in frequency and severity of disaster events and apparent congressional interest in oversight issues related to federal disaster response in puerto rico and usvi .

 ( lennard p. kruger ; march 27 , 2019 ) .

 ( jill c. gallagher ; january 29 , 2019 ) .

 ( sarah a. lister , february 11 , 2019 ) in its quadrennial national health security strategy , the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) states: u.s. national health security actions protect the nation's physical and psychological health , limit economic losses , and preserve confidence in government and the national will to pursue its interests when threatened by incidents that result in serious health consequences whether natural , accidental , or deliberate .

the strategy aims to ensure the resilience of the nation's public health and health care systems against potential threats , including natural disasters and human - caused incidents , emerging and pandemic infectious diseases , acts of terrorism , and potentially catastrophic risks posed by nation - state actors .

by law , the hhs secretary "shall lead all federal public health and medical response to public health emergencies and incidents covered by the [ national response framework ]," and the hhs assistant secretary for preparedness and response ( aspr ) shall "[s]erve as the principal advisor to the secretary on all matters related to federal public health and medical preparedness and response for public health emergencies. .

however , under the nation's federal system of government , state and local agencies and private entities are principally responsible for ensuring health security and responding to threats .

the federal government's ability to affect national health security , through funding assistance and other policies , is relatively limited .

the nation's public health emergency management laws have expanded considerably following the terrorist attacks in 2001 .

since then , a number of public health emergencies revealed both improvements in the nation's readiness , and persistent gaps .

the national health security preparedness index ( nhspi , or the index ) , a public - private partnership begun in 2013 , currently assesses preparedness , using 140 measures , across all 50 states and the district of columbia .

in its latest comprehensive report , for 2017 , nhspi found overall incremental improvements over earlier years .

however , the report highlighted differing preparedness levels among states , stating: large differences in preparedness persisted across states , and those in the deep south and mountain west regions lagged significantly behind the rest of the nation .

if current trends continue , the average state will require 9 more years to reach health security levels currently found in the best - prepared states .

in addition , measures of health care delivery — for example , the number of certain types of health care providers ( including mental health providers ) per unit of population , access to trauma centers , the extent of preparedness planning in long - term care facilities , and uptake of electronic health record systems — continued to yield the lowest scores .

the readiness of individual health care facilities and services to respond to a mass casualty incident or other public health emergency has been a persistent health security challenge .

aiming to address this , the hhs centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) has implemented a rule that requires 17 different types of health care facilities and service providers to meet a suite of preparedness benchmarks in order to participate in ( i.e. , receive payments from ) the medicare and medicaid programs .

the emergency preparedness ( ep ) rule became effective in november 2017 .

policymakers may be interested to see , in nhspi results and through other studies , the extent to which the ep rule yields meaningful improvements in national health system preparedness in the future .

for incidents declared by the president as major disasters or emergencies under the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( p.l .

93-288 , as amended ) , public assistance is available to help federal , state , and local agencies with the costs of some public health emergency response activities , such as ensuring food and water safety .

however , no federal assistance program is designed specifically to cover the uninsured costs of individual health care services that may be needed as a consequence of a disaster .

there is no consensus that this should be a federal responsibility .

nonetheless , during mass casualty incidents , hospitals and health care providers may face expectations to deliver care without a clear payment source of reimbursement .

also , the response to an incident could necessitate activities that begin before stafford act reimbursement to hhs has been approved , or that are not eligible for reimbursement under the act .

 ( for example , there is no precedent for a major disaster declaration under the stafford act for an outbreak of infectious disease , and only one declaration of emergency , for west nile virus in 2000. ) .

although the hhs secretary has authority for a no - year public health emergency fund ( phef ) , congress has not appropriated monies to it for many years , and no funds are currently available .

on several occasions congress has provided supplemental appropriations to address uncompensated disaster - related health care costs and otherwise unreimbursed state and local response costs flowing from a public health emergency .

these incidents include hurricane katrina and hurricane sandy , the 2009 h1n1 influenza pandemic , and the ebola and zika virus outbreaks .

supplemental appropriations for hurricane relief were provided for costs ( such as uncompensated care ) that were not reimbursed under the stafford act .

the act was not invoked for the three infectious disease incidents , and supplemental appropriations were therefore needed to fund most aspects of the federal response to those outbreaks .

some policymakers , concerned about the inherent uncertainty in supplemental appropriations , have proposed dedicated funding approaches for public health emergency response .

two proposals in the 115 th congress ( s. 196 , h.r .

3579 ) would have appropriated funds to the phef .

these measures did not advance .

in appropriations for fy2019 ( p.l .

115-245 ) , congress established and appropriated $50 million ( to remain available until expended ) to an infectious diseases rapid response reserve fund , to be administered by the director of the hhs centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) "to prevent , prepare for , or respond to an infectious disease emergency. .

the 116 th congress may choose to examine any uses of this new fund by cdc , and to consider appropriations to the phef , as well as other options to improve national health security preparedness .

 ( chris jaikaran ; march 29 , 2019 ) .

 ( barbara l. schwemle ; february 8 , 2019 ) human resources management ( hrm ) underlies the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) mission and performance .

dhs's chief human capital officer ( chco ) "is responsible for the department's human capital program," which is described as including such elements as "human resources policy , systems , and programs for strategic workforce planning , recruitment and hiring , pay and leave , performance management , employee development , executive resources , labor relations , work / life and safety and health. .

under title 5 , section 1402 , of the united states code , a chco's functions include "setting the workforce development strategy" and aligning hrm with "organization mission , strategic goals , and performance outcomes. .

dhs's management directorate web page includes the chco position under the under secretary for management ( usm ) .

the organizational chart and leadership web pages do not include the position under the usm nor explain that difference .

at dhs , the chco is a career senior executive service position .

the incumbent chco assumed the position in january 2016 .

the 116 th congress may decide to conduct oversight of dhs chco operations — including placement , role , and functions within the department — and dhs human resources management .

such reviews could focus on the department's plans for , and performance of , hrm .

these plans are set forth in a strategic plan and an annual performance report .

the latter report for fy2020 is expected to be published along with the release of the department's budget request .

congress may also examine dhs activities related to the president's management agenda ( pma ) , particularly the agenda's cross - agency priority goal ( cap ) to develop the federal workforce .

these topics are briefly discussed below .

hearings , roundtables , and meetings with officials and employees could inform congressional oversight on dhs appropriations , administration , and management as they relate to hrm .

annually , on or about the anniversary of dhs's official inception , which occurred on march 1 , 2003 , congress could consider conducting a review that focuses specifically on the chco operations and hrm policies and programs .

the dhs fy2020 budget request , anticipated in march 2019 , may enable congress to conduct such a review within the context of the department's strategic plan , performance report , and pma activities .

 ( william l. painter ; march 8 , 2019 ) an unresolved debate dating from the origin of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) is the extent of department management involvement in the functioning of departmental components .

some policy experts supported a strong management function , which would replace the leadership of the components , while others supported a limited management function that allowed dhs components to function freely in their areas of expertise , much as they had before .

once the department was established in 2003 , it became clear that a small management cadre could not provide adequate coordination of policy or oversight of the department .

the benefits of coordinated action by a large organization , including setting operational and budgetary priorities , were being lost due to the lack of a capable management cadre with the capacity to manage the department's diverse missions .

as its components continued to perform their missions , the department undertook efforts to establish a unified identity and way of doing business .

the term "one dhs" was used to describe these initiatives under tom ridge , the first secretary of dhs , and the efforts continued through secretaries michael chertoff and janet napolitano .

on april 22 , 2014 , jeh johnson , the fourth secretary of dhs , issued a memorandum to dhs leadership , entitled "strengthening departmental unity of effort. .

this now - widely circulated memorandum set out an agenda to reform the department of homeland security's way of doing business by implementing new analytical and decisionmaking processes to develop strategy , plan , and identify joint requirements across multiple department components .

these would bring component leadership together above the component level to ensure unity of effort across the department .

secretary johnson described it this way in a federal times interview: we've embarked on a unity of effort initiative that promotes greater coordination among departments , greater centralized decision - making at headquarters , a more strategic approach to our budget building process , a more strategic departmentwide approach to our acquisition strategy .

it is clearly a balance .

within the department of homeland security there are components that long predated the department of homeland security .

and so what we are not asking components to do is to all act and behave together .

they are distinct cultures... .

but what we are asking and expecting our component leadership to do is participate with us in a more strategic approach to promote greater efficiency in how we operate , how we conduct ourselves , particularly in our budget process and in our acquisitions .

the memorandum laid out four areas of initial focus .

1 .

the first was to bring together senior leaders of the department in two groups: a senior leaders council to discuss "overall policy , strategy , operations and departmental guidance," and a deputies management action group ( dmag ) to "advance joint requirements development , program and budget review , acquisition reform , operational planning , and joint operations. .

2 .

the second area was to make improvements to the departmental management processes for investments .

specifically , incorporating strategic analysis and joint requirements planning into the annual budget development process , directing the dmag to develop and facilitate a component - driven joint requirements process , and reviewing and updating the dhs acquisition oversight framework .

3 .

the third was developing a stronger strategy , planning , and analytic capability within the office of policy .

4 .

the fourth was to improve coordination of cross - component operations .

bipartisan and bicameral support for these reforms was shown in several hearings during the 113 th and 114 th congresses .

both house and senate appropriations committee reports have included language supportive of the department's managerial reorganization , although there has been concern expressed about keeping congress informed about progress and consequences of reorganizations in the field .

several of the action items included in the memorandum were completed in 2014 , such as the establishment of a cost analysis division in the office of the chief financial officer in may 2014 .

the role of this division is to ensure life - cycle cost estimates are part of major acquisition plans .

dhs also completed development of a southern border and approaches campaign plan — a four - year strategic framework for joint operations securing the southern border of the united states .

in 2015 , dhs implemented a unity of effort award , presented by the secretary , recognizing "outstanding efforts to significantly improve efficiency and effectiveness across the u.s. department of homeland security," specifically noting contributions to the unity of effort initiative .

at the end of the 114 th congress , title xix of the fy2017 national defense authorization act provided specific statutory authority to dhs for certain activities connected with the unity of effort initiative , including authorizing joint task forces and redefining the role of the former office of policy and renaming it the office of strategy , policy , and plans .

at the confirmation hearing for general john kelly , interest in management reform and the future of johnson's unity of effort initiative was apparent , with both general kelly and some senators praising the progress that had been made .

however , secretary kelly's six - month tenure at the department was largely devoted to other issues .

then - deputy secretary elaine duke , after a six - month tenure as acting secretary , noted in early 2018 that the border security mission at dhs was one where the unity of effort initiative was maturing , as components worked together to accomplish their missions .

secretary kirstjen nielsen , who assumed the post in december 2017 , indicated in her pre - confirmation questionnaire that she intended "to assess the effectiveness of current unity of effort programs and processes and strengthen them where needed," highlighting interest in "integrating and leveraging" capabilities and promoting joint education and training .

congress may debate the appropriate role of departmental management at dhs , the extent of engagement congress should have as reforms go forward , and the progress of management reforms , including whether they are having the desired effect .

congress may wish to follow up on the secretary's priorities as outlined in her questionnaire .

