o ver the last several years , the public and lawmakers in the united states have been alarmed over the increasing number of drug overdose deaths , most of which have involved opioids .

congress has responded to the issue through legislative activity , oversight , and funding , while the administration has sought to reduce the supply and demand of illicit drugs through enforcement , prevention , and treatment .

this faq report answers questions about the opioid epidemic and federal efforts to control the supply of opioids .

it does not provide a comprehensive overview of opioid abuse and the criminal justice response .

instead , it answers common questions that have arisen due to rising drug overdose deaths and the availability of illicit opioids in the united states .

this section answers questions on the nature of the opioid epidemic in the united states .

the answers provide background on the types of opioids that are being abused , the associated harm to the abusers of these substances , and the extent of the abuse .

heroin , fentanyl , and prescription opioids are significant drug threats in the united states—in 2017 , approximately 44% of domestic local law enforcement agencies responding to the national drug threat survey ( ndts ) reported heroin as the greatest drug threat in their area .

while the percentage of ndts respondents reporting high availability of controlled prescription drugs ( cpds ) , which include some opioids , has declined over the last several years ( 75% of ndts respondents reported high availability in 2014 , compared to 52% in 2017 ) , the reported availability of heroin has increased ( 30% reported high availability in 2014 , compared to 49% in 2017 ) .

further , there has been a rise in the availability of illicit fentanyl—the primary synthetic opioid available in the united states .

across the country , states have adapted elements of their criminal justice responses—including police , court , and correctional responses —in a variety of ways due to the opioid epidemic .

while this section does not provide a state - by - state analysis , it highlights several examples of how states' justice systems have responded to the opioid crisis .

these examples were selected because they are some of the more common state policy approaches to confronting the opioid epidemic .

many states are increasing law enforcement officer access to naloxone , an opioid overdose reversal drug , in an effort to reduce the number of overdose deaths .

officers receive training on how to identify an opioid overdose and administer naloxone , and they carry the drug so they can respond immediately and effectively to an overdose .

as of november 2018 , over 2,400 police departments in 42 states reported that they had officers that carry naloxone —this figure more than doubled over two years .

in addition , most states that have expanded access to naloxone have also provided immunity to those who possess , dispense , or administer the drug .

generally , immunity entails legal protections ( for civilians ) from arrest or prosecution and / or civil lawsuits for those who prescribe or dispense naloxone in good faith .

state and local law enforcement coordinate special operations and task forces to combat fentanyl and heroin trafficking in their jurisdictions .

in addition to participation in federal initiatives , state and local police and district attorneys lead operations to dismantle trafficking networks in areas plagued by high numbers of opioid overdoses .

for example , in southeast massachusetts the bristol county district attorney recently announced the conclusion of a year - long investigation of a "highly organized and complex" fentanyl network that resulted in 11 arrests .

this investigation was led by the bristol country district attorney's office and involved several local police agencies , the massachusetts state police , and the u.s. department of homeland security .

another criminal justice adaptation is the enactment of what are known as "good samaritan" laws to encourage individuals to seek medical attention ( for themselves or others ) related to an overdose without fear of arrest or prosecution .

in general , these laws prevent criminal prosecution for illegal possession of a controlled substance under specified circumstances .

while the laws vary by state as to what offenses and violations are covered , as of june 2017 , 40 states and the district of columbia have some form of good samaritan overdose immunity law .

most states have drug diversion or drug court programs for criminal defendants and offenders with substance abuse issues , including opioid abuse .

some states view drug courts as a tool to address rising opioid abuse and have moved to expand drug court options in the wake of the opioid epidemic .

over the last several years , the national governors association has sponsored various activities to assist states in combatting the opioid epidemic , including learning labs to develop best practices for dealing with opioid abuse treatment for justice - involved populations—such as the expansion of opioid addiction treatment in drug courts .

in november 2017 , the president's commission on combating drug addiction and the opioid crisis stated that doj should urge states to establish drug courts in every county .

in recent years , several states have also enacted legislation increasing access to medication - assisted treatment ( mat ) for drug - addicted offenders who are incarcerated or have recently been released .

in march 2019 , samhsa released guidance to state governments on increasing the availability of mat in criminal justice settings .

