many u.s. officials and members of congress consider poland to be a key ally of the united states and one of most pro - u.s. countries in europe .

according to the u.s. state department , areas of close bilateral cooperation with poland include "nato capabilities , counterterrorism , nonproliferation , missile defense , human rights , economic growth and innovation , energy security , and regional cooperation in central and eastern europe. .

the congressional caucus on poland is a bipartisan group of members of congress who seek to maintain and strengthen the u.s. - poland relationship and engage in issues of mutual interest to both countries .

of the central european and baltic countries that have joined the north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) and the european union ( eu ) , poland is by far the most populous , has the largest economy , and is the most significant military actor .

in 1999 , with strong backing from the united states , poland was among the first group of post - communist countries to join nato .

in 2004 , again with strong support from the united states , it was among a group of eight post - communist countries to join the eu .

many analysts assert that poland , more than many other european countries , continues to look to the united states for foreign policy leadership .

recently , developments related to russia's resurgence and the attendant implications for u.s. policy and nato are likely to have continuing relevance for congress .

a variety of factors make poland a central interlocutor and partner for the united states in examining and responding to these challenges .

since poland's 2015 parliamentary election , some members of congress also have expressed concerns about trends in the country's governance , discussed below .

since the end of the cold war , poland and the united states have had close relations .

the united states strongly supported poland's accession to nato in 1999 .

warsaw has been an ally in global counterterrorism efforts and contributed large deployments of troops to both the u.s. - led coalition in iraq and the nato - led mission in afghanistan .

links between the united states and poland are further anchored by extensive cultural ties ; approximately 9.6 million americans are of polish heritage .

the law and justice - led government has sought to cultivate ties with the trump administration .

in a visit to the united states in september 2018 , polish president duda suggested that a permanent u.s. military base in poland might be named "fort trump. .

on february 13-14 , 2019 , poland and the united states co - hosted the "ministerial to promote a future of peace and security in the middle east," a conference attended by vice president mike pence and secretary of state michael pompeo .

president trump earlier delivered a speech in warsaw on july 6 , 2017 .

the president's remarks on nato , russia , u.s. - polish ties , and poland's resilience throughout history were well received by many polish observers , and especially by the polish government and its supporters .

at the same time , critics asserted that the tone of the president's visit , during which he apparently did not raise concerns about poland's domestic policies , emboldened the government to move ahead with controversial new judicial bills shortly afterward .

while relations between poland and the united states remain largely positive , there have been points of tension over the past several years .

following president trump's warsaw speech , the u.s. state department released a statement expressing concern about judicial independence and the rule of law in poland .

some members of congress also have expressed concerns about the polish government's judicial and media reforms .

in february 2016 , for example , senators mccain , durbin , and cardin co - authored a letter urging poland to "recommit to the core principles of the [organization for security and cooperation in europe] and the eu , including the respect for democracy , human rights , and rule of law. .

u.s. officials ( along with many of their european and israeli counterparts ) objected to controversial holocaust - related legislation ( amendment to the act on the institute of national remembrance ) passed by poland's parliament and signed by president duda in early 2018 .

the legislation initially criminalized attributing responsibility for nazi crimes to the polish state or nation , potentially punishable by a prison sentence of up to three years , with exemptions for art and academic research .

under continued international pressure , the polish government amended the law in june 2018 , making violations a civil ( rather than criminal ) offense .

in recent years , polish officials have objected to instances in which commentators and press articles have referred to auschwitz and other nazi concentration camps on polish soil as "polish death camps," preferring such phrasing as "nazi concentration camp in german - occupied poland" ( president obama apologized after using the term "polish death camp" in 2012 ) .

scholars agree that the term "polish death camp" is inaccurate and misleading and that the polish state did not collaborate in the nazi genocide against jews .

at the same time , historical research has documented instances in which some poles committed atrocities against jews during and after world war ii .

critics fear the 2018 legislation may serve to stifle debate about such issues and whitewash the culpability of individual poles in such cases .

in november 2018 , a leaked letter from u.s .

ambassador georgette mosbacher to prime minister morawiecki reportedly angered some polish officials by raising concerns about media freedom .

the polish government reportedly had contemplated prosecuting the polish television station tvn , which is owned by u.s. company discovery communications , after it aired footage alleging to show a polish neo - nazi group celebrating adolf hitler's birthday .

following the murder of gdaå„sk mayor paweå‚ adamowicz in january 2019 by a mentally ill assailant , representative marcy kaptur , a co - chair of the congressional caucus on poland , expressed concern about whether poland's divided political environment could have played a role in motivating the perpetrator .

adamowicz was a well - known liberal critic of the law and justice - led government .

in february 2019 , representative kaptur introduced the paweå‚ adamowicz democratic leadership exchange act of 2019 ( h.r .

1270 ) , a bill that would reauthorize the united states - poland parliamentary exchange program .

historically , poland has had a difficult relationship with russia .

poland's view of russia remains affected by the experience of soviet invasion during world war ii and soviet domination during the communist era .

in more recent years , polish leaders have consistently expressed warnings about the nature of vladimir putin's government in russia , tending to view russia as a potential threat to poland and its neighbors .

this perception predates russia's invasion of georgia in 2008 , but events in ukraine since 2014 have sharpened polish concerns about russia's intentions and have put security at the top of poland's national agenda .

the law and justice - led government has maintained a hard line in its approach to russia and entrenched poland's position as one of the eu's most hawkish countries on russia policy .

poland has been one of the leading advocates for adopting and maintaining robust eu sanctions against russia in response to its actions in ukraine , although it has been one of the countries most affected by russian retaliatory sanctions .

one area of particular relevance to poland's security is kaliningrad , a 5,800-square - mile russian exclave wedged between poland and lithuania ( see figure 1 ) .

ceded to russia by germany following world war ii , kaliningrad is a key strategic territory for russia , allowing it to project military power into nato's northern flank .

the territory has a heavy russian military presence , including the baltic fleet and two airbases .

russia has repeatedly deployed iskander short - range nuclear - capable missiles in kaliningrad , and reports indicated that a 2018 deployment could be permanent .

according to nato officials , russia is using kaliningrad to pursue an anti - access / area denial ( a2 / ad ) strategy that involves layering surface - to - air missiles to potentially block off access to the baltic states and much of poland .

kaliningrad's geographic isolation also allows for a scenario in which russia tries to seize the suwaå‚ki gap , the 100-kilometer border between poland and lithuania that separates kaliningrad from russia's ally belarus .

poland has been a leading opponent and critic of the nord stream 2 pipeline that would allow germany to increase the amount of natural gas it imports directly from russia via the baltic sea .

poland argues that the completion of nord stream 2 would allow gazprom , russia's state - owned gas company , to further consolidate its monopoly over the central european gas market , as gazprom would have full control of all gas transmission routes and russian gas would dominate the european network hubs in germany and austria .

poland maintains that russia would further gain geopolitical leverage because it could arbitrarily shift supply corridors in europe , giving it the ability to continue supplying european markets through germany while restricting or completely halting gas transit through poland and / or ukraine .

polish officials have expressed the view that u.s. involvement , including the adoption of sanctions , is crucial for efforts to oppose construction of the pipeline .

while approximately two - thirds of the natural gas and most of the oil consumed in poland comes from russia , poland continues to rely on domestically produced coal for much of its electricity generation .

russian gas accounts for less than 10% of poland's primary energy supply .

successive polish governments have prioritized efforts to diversify the country's energy sources .

poland has been taking steps to expand pipeline interconnectivity with its neighbors , including plans to develop the baltic pipe project , expected to be operational in 2022 , which would connect poland's gas infrastructure via denmark to norwegian supplies .

poland's supply contract with gazprom expires in 2022 , and poland is unlikely to seek its renewal .

poland also has developed the ability to reverse the flow of gas in the polish section of the yamal pipeline , which runs from russia to germany via belarus and poland , in order to import natural gas from the west in the case of a crisis involving a cut - off of russian gas from the east .

a liquefied natural gas ( lng ) terminal on the baltic sea coast near the german border ( åšwinoujå›cie ) became operational in 2015 , and in october 2018 the polish state energy company signed a 20-year contract to purchase lng from a u.s. supplier .

the polish government also has been a leading advocate for a stronger eu energy policy that reduces collective dependence on russia .

poland has been active in projects that enhance regional energy security by interconnecting national gas networks through the construction of new pipelines .

the construction of new connectors with slovakia and the czech republic is underway , and the planned gas interconnection poland - lithuania ( gipl ) , expected to become operational by 2022 , would link the natural gas grid of the baltic countries to the rest of the eu .

many u.s. officials and members of congress have regarded european energy security as a u.s. interest .

in particular , there has been concern in the united states over the influence that russian energy dominance could have on the ability to present a united transatlantic position when it comes to other issues related to russia .

successive u.s. administrations have encouraged eu member states to reduce energy dependence on russia through diversification of supply and supported european steps to develop alternative sources and increase energy efficiency .

in the 116 th congress , related bills include the european energy security and diversification act 2019 ( house - passed h.r .

1616 and s. 704 ) and the protect european energy security act ( h.r .

1081 ) .

introduced by representative adam kinzinger and senator christopher murphy , the european energy security and diversification act 2019 aims to prioritize and enhance u.s. efforts to encourage european countries to diversify energy sources and supply routes and increase regional energy security .

introduced by representative denny heck , the protect european energy security act would require reports to congress by the secretary of state , secretary of the treasury , and the director of national intelligence detailing u.s. diplomatic efforts to oppose the construction of nord stream 2 and to promote european energy security and decrease european dependence on russian energy .

poland appears likely to remain a strong u.s. ally and an increasingly important u.s. security partner in europe .

many analysts believe that close cooperation between the united states and poland will continue for the foreseeable future in areas such as efforts to deter potential russian aggression , the future of nato , energy security , and economic issues .

statements by polish leaders suggest that poland is likely to continue looking to the united states for leadership on foreign policy and security issues .

during the 116 th congress , the issue of establishing a permanent u.s. military base in poland or increasing the size of the u.s. military presence in poland may remain of interest to members of congress .

contracted and prospective u.s. arms sales to poland , including major items such as the f - 35 and patriot missile systems , also may be of congressional interest .

some members may wish to consider poland's status with regard to the u.s. visa waiver program .

poland is likely to be of continuing importance in the area of european energy security .

members of congress also may wish to remain informed about legislative , governance , and rule - of - law issues in poland , including with regard to the numerous controversial domestic reforms enacted over the past several years .

members of congress may have an interest in monitoring political developments in relation to the polish parliamentary election due to occur in october or november 2019 .

