the united states is currently experiencing the longest economic expansion in its history .

although short - term forecasts are predicting continued economic expansion , some economists have expressed uncertainty over how long the expansion will continue .

history has shown that economic expansions inevitably give way to economic slowdowns .

if the next slowdown is significant , the economy could enter a recession , which is typically characterized by falling output and rising unemployment .

predicting when the economy may transition from expansion to recession , however , is notoriously difficult , as the ebb and flow of the economy is determined by many different factors , including a number that lie outside the country's borders .

countercyclical fiscal policy may help to stabilize the economy when it enters a recession .

countercyclical fiscal policy refers to short - term tax and spending adjustments to stimulate consumer and business demand in an effort to counteract economic contraction and return the economy to its potential .

effective fiscal stimulus does not always require contemporaneous legislative action by congress .

there are certain "automatic stabilizers" that work without congressional action to lower taxes and increase spending as the economy weakens .

as a result , an economic slowdown or recession does not necessarily warrant a policy response .

however , congress has a range of options it could consider when designing a stimulus package should a recession occur and automatic stabilizers are not sufficient to counteract it .

this report identifies and summarizes options congress may consider in response to a recession .

the analysis begins by reviewing the features effective countercyclical fiscal policies are commonly thought to have , and then distinguishes between countercyclical and growth - oriented policies .

next , the report summarizes and evaluates potential fiscal policy options that congress could consider .

the options presented are drawn from those policies considered during the great recession for which estimates of their potential economic impact exist .

the report concludes with a brief discussion about enacting fiscal stimulus in the context of the country's long - run budget outlook .

effective fiscal policy in response to recessions of average duration and severity is usually considered to have three general features: it is timely , targeted , and temporary .

for fiscal policy to be effective in returning the economy to its potential , it must stimulate the economy at the appropriate time .

implemented too early , and there is a risk that fiscal tools are wasted and not available if the downturn becomes more severe .

implemented too late , and there is a risk that the downturn becomes so severe that much more fiscal ( and monetary ) stimulus is needed to stabilize the economy .

alternatively , the economy could have already returned to a path toward full potential on its own , in which case untimely stimulus risks overheating the economy .

timely implementation of fiscal policy is made inherently difficult by three well - known lags: the lag in recognizing a recession , the lag in negotiating and implementing a policy response , and the lag between policy implementation and when the economy is affected .

a targeted fiscal stimulus will produce the most "bang for the buck," or , in economics jargon , involve changes with the largest "multipliers. .

fiscal policy multipliers measure the change in economic output in response to a dollar change in taxes or a dollar change in spending .

for example , a multiplier of 1.5 means that $1.00 of stimulus will lead to a $1.50 change in output .

conversely , a multiplier of 0.75 means that $1.00 of stimulus will lead to a $0.75 change in output .

larger multipliers suggest larger stimulative effects .

economists use multipliers to estimate the impact a particular fiscal policy , or collection of polices , will have on the economy .

on the revenue side , it appears that the largest multipliers are associated with tax reductions that are targeted at lower - income households and those with less access to liquid assets .

these individuals are more likely , out of necessity , to increase their spending in response to a tax cut or rebate than those with higher incomes or more accessible forms of wealth .

business tax reductions also are estimated to stimulate demand , but most analyses find the multiplier effects to be smaller than those of well - targeted individual tax reductions .

this finding is the result of research that indicates businesses are slow to respond to investment tax incentives , that business tax rate reductions primarily benefit existing capital rather than new investment , and that hiring incentives do not directly address the primary factor that influences the decision to bring on more employees , which is the demand for businesses' products and services .

direct spending increases usually register as highly stimulative on a per - dollar basis , although some spending increases are able to work their way more quickly into the economy than others .

for example , spending on unemployment benefits and food stamp assistance increase automatically during a recession and are targeted at households most vulnerable during a downturn .

as a result , their potential to stimulate demand are usually estimated to be quite large .

assistance to state and local governments to relieve budgetary pressures and maintain spending are estimated to be moderately cost effective .

spending on infrastructure , while believed to have a significant impact on the economy given enough time , can take many months to take effect due to the length of time it takes to plan and complete such projects .

temporary stimulus can help to contain the budgetary impact of tax reductions and spending increases , which , in turn , can increase the effectiveness of the stimulus by mitigating the adverse effect large deficits can have on long - term growth .

although fiscal stimulus must result in a deficit to affect overall spending , deficits themselves are not necessarily problematic .

large and sustained deficits , however , can have undesirable effects .

for example , as the economy starts to recover from a downturn , continued deficits can lead to higher interest rates as the government competes with the private sector for loanable funds .

higher interest rates can counteract the stimulus as the government's need to finance deficits "crowds out" private - sector investment and consumption .

these higher interest rates can also attract borrowing from abroad , causing the dollar to appreciate and reducing net exports .

deficits can also harm longer - run economic growth since they reduce national saving , which is closely linked to the capital formation process that is critical for economic growth .

before discussing potential policy options for countering an economic downturn , it is useful to distinguish between countercyclical fiscal policies and growth - oriented policies .

some confusion arises because of the terminology used and the time frame in question .

economists view cyclical fluctuations , also known as the business cycle , as short - run phenomena that occur as the result of various external "shocks" that temporarily move the economy away from its long - run growth path .

these transitory shocks often influence the economy via changes in total spending or , in economic terms , aggregate demand .

during a recession , total spending generally falls below the economy's productive capacity , resulting in rising unemployment and falling capital utilization .

in an expansion , total spending rises until it matches the economy's productive capacity , requiring firms to deploy previously idle resources .

countercyclical fiscal ( and monetary ) policies have the potential to affect aggregate demand ( i.e. , total spending ) and decrease the severity of fluctuations in the economy that occur over the business cycle .

in contrast to the business cycle , economic growth is a long - run phenomenon that is tied to factors that determine the productive capabilities of the economy .

thus , whereas countercyclical policies tend to focus on the demand side of the economy , growth - oriented polices target the supply side with the goal of influencing the sources of growth—mainly , the quantity and quality of employed labor , the amount of capital , and the level of technology .

the sources of long - run growth are taken to be more or less fixed in the short run , making them less of a concern over a single business cycle .

growth - oriented policies therefore take a longer - term approach to structuring the government's tax and spending initiatives with the aim of improving the incentives to work , invest , and innovate .

part of this approach is minimizing uncertainty over tax and spending policy itself , so that households and businesses can make long - lasting decisions that will support growth .

another part of this approach is prudent management of deficits and the debt so that high interest rates do not inhibit growth factors , such as investment .

this report analyzes policy options from a countercyclical , and not a long - term growth , perspective .

countercyclical fiscal policy tools may be sorted into two categories—automatic stabilizers and discretionary changes that require legislative action .

automatic stabilizers are features built into the economy's tax and transfer system that lower taxes and increase spending as the economy weakens .

they take effect automatically without the need for congressional action .

discretionary policies refer to legislative changes to individual and business taxes , and to government spending enacted in response to economic conditions .

the distinction between the two can become blurred ; automatic stabilization policies can be modified in response to an economic downturn by legislative action , and discretionary changes could be made to take effect and expire automatically if certain criteria are met .

the following sections review a select set of policy options that are often considered in response to a recession .

the options are drawn from the congressional budget office ( cbo ) and moody's analytics , both of which estimated the impact of specific policies or approaches in response to the great recession .

while a general approach to stimulating a weakened economy with reduced taxes and increased spending is often advocated , specific policies have different impacts on the economy and differing administrative complexities .

cbo's and moody's estimates provide insight into which specific policy options may be most worthwhile to implement during the next downturn .

the policy options presented—or variations of them—are ones commonly considered when designing a fiscal stimulus package and are not unique to either cbo or moody's .

however , policymakers may consider that the economy has the potential to return to full employment without intervention .

as such , one policy option is to allow the economy to correct itself .

fiscal policy's estimated impact in response to the next recession is likely different from the impact estimated by cbo and moody's in response to the great recession .

generally accepted economic theory holds that fiscal policy has a greater impact on the economy the further it is from full employment .

this is because there is a greater abundance of idle resources that can be brought back into producing goods and services .

the great recession was the most severe downturn since the great depression , and the economy was far from full employment .

thus , estimates of the impact of stimulus at that time may be an upper bound for fiscal policy's stimulative effect .

additionally , hindsight has allowed economists to improve their estimation techniques .

still , the relative magnitudes estimated by cbo and moody's will conceivably still hold if they are updated in the future .

it is important to briefly discuss the inherent difficulty of estimating the exact impact specific fiscal policies could have on the economy .

all of the estimates presented below ( and elsewhere ) are based on models that rely on a set of assumptions about how individuals and businesses may react to policy changes , and on assumptions about how the federal reserve may adjust monetary policy to accommodate or to offset a fiscal policy change .

the assumptions are subject to significant uncertainty .

it is also never known what would happen in the absence of a particular stimulus package change ( i.e. , the counterfactual ) .

as a result , the focus should be on the relative magnitudes of policies' impacts and not on individual point estimates .

one set of cbo estimates presented below is qualitative .

still , the estimates presented in this section were made using conventional methods and provide a starting point for understanding how specific policies may affect the economy .

the united states' recent budget deficits and the country's long - run budget outlook could influence the size of any stimulus package .

the fy2018 real ( inflation - adjusted ) deficit equaled 3.8% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) , which was higher than the average federal deficit since fy1969 ( 2.9% of gdp ) .

real deficits are projected to increase over the next 10 years .

in its latest economic forecast , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) projected that u.s. debt held by the public would also increase over the next 10 years , from 77.8% of gdp in fy2018 to 92.7% of gdp in fy2029 .

large and persistent budget deficits can hamper economic growth by lowering the rate of capital formation via reduced national saving , and can potentially offset short - term economic stimulus .

at the same time , high levels of debt relative to gdp can constrain a country's borrowing capacity .

there are no signs that federal borrowing capacity will be exhausted in the short term .

however , congress may consider the consequences of exhausted fiscal space in designing the next potential stimulus package since it would increase both deficits and the debt .

