motor vehicle electrification has emerged in the past decade as a potentially viable alternative to internal combustion engines .

although only a small proportion of the current motor vehicle fleet is electrified , interest in passenger vehicle electrification has accelerated in several major industrial countries , including the united states , parts of europe , and china .

despite advances in technology , electric vehicles ( evs ) continue to be significantly more expensive than similarly sized vehicles with internal combustion engines .

for this reason , governments in many countries have adopted policies to promote development and sales of electric vehicles .

this report discusses federal and state government policies in the united states to support electrification of light vehicles and transit buses , as well as proposals to reduce or eliminate such support .

more than 92 million light vehicles—passenger cars , pickup trucks , and suvs—were sold worldwide in 2018 .

the three largest markets were china ( 27 million vehicles sold ) , europe ( 20 million ) , and the united states ( 17 million ) .

most of these vehicles are powered by internal combustion engines .

the global market for electrified vehicles is small but growing: in 2018 , more than 2 million plug - in hybrid and battery electric vehicles were sold worldwide , a 64% increase over 2017 .

these account for about 2% of all passenger vehicle sales , both worldwide and in the united states .

demand for electric vehicles is expected to continue to grow , as some countries have called for a complete shift away from sales of new fossil - fuel vehicles by 2030 .

the market for urban transit buses is smaller than the passenger car and suv markets , but electric vehicles make up a larger part of its footprint .

china leads in this category , with 106,000 electric buses put in service in 2017 , bringing its total electric bus fleet to 384,000 .

it has been forecast to remain the largest electric bus market going forward .

in the european union ( eu ) and the united states , the pace of electrification is slower: more than 200 electric buses were sold in the eu in 2017 , bringing the total in service to 1,700 ; in the united states , approximately 100 electric buses were sold , bringing the total to 300 .

two basic types of electric vehicles are now in use: hybrid electric vehicles ( hevs ) have both internal combustion engines and electric motors that store energy in batteries .

they do not plug into external sources of electricity , but use regenerative braking and the internal combustion engine to recharge .

plug - in electric vehicles , of which there are two types: plug - in hybrid electric vehicles ( phevs ) use an electric motor and an internal combustion engine for power , and they use electricity from an external source to recharge the batteries .

battery electric vehicles ( bevs ) use only batteries to power the motor and use electricity from an external source for recharging .

in this report , electric vehicles refer to these two types of plug - in vehicles , unless otherwise noted .

electrification of vehicles has been limited by three factors: ( 1 ) the high cost of producing the lithium ion batteries ( currently the preferred battery chemistry ) that propel them ; ( 2 ) their limited range ; and ( 3 ) vehicle charging time and location .

not all motorists have easy access to charging stations at home or at work , and it can take several hours to fully charge the battery that powers the vehicle , depending on the type of charger used .

two types of tax incentives have been used to promote electric vehicles: consumer incentives for the purchase of plug - in electric vehicles and individual and business incentives to install electric - vehicle charging stations to expand the charging network .

investment in transportation electrification r&d is one approach to reducing the overall cost of electric vehicle technologies .

the obama administration made vehicle electrification a national goal—including increased spending on battery r&d , stimulus funding for construction of battery manufacturing plants in the united states , and development of doe electric vehicle research and demonstration programs such as the "ev everywhere grand challenge. .

the trump administration requested reductions in funding levels for vehicle technologies r&d for fy2018 and fy2019 , but congress instead increased the program's funding levels for those years .

federal r&d funding for electric vehicles and electric vehicle charging infrastructure is primarily administered through the doe's office of energy efficiency and renewable energy ( eere ) .

within eere , the office of transportation oversees the sustainable transportation r&d portfolio , which includes r&d programs in vehicle technologies , bioenergy technologies , and hydrogen and fuel cell technologies .

activities related to electric vehicles and charging infrastructure are within the vehicle technologies office .

in the 116 th congress , some legislative proposals would support r&d programs .

the vehicle innovation act of 2019 ( s. 1085 / h.r .

2170 ) would authorize r&d programs and other activities to develop innovative vehicle technologies ( including electric vehicles and charging infrastructure ) .

the following policies were generally established for purposes not directly related to vehicle electrification , but they have dimensions that may support that goal .

fully autonomous passenger vehicles hold the potential for safer transportation and new mobility for the elderly , the disabled , and those who cannot afford to purchase a car .

the projected timeline for emergence of fully autonomous vehicles varies from several years to several decades .

it is often assumed that autonomous vehicles—including those providing ride - sharing services—will employ electric motors instead of internal combustion engines , but that assumption is based on the types of federal and state policies that are put in place .

in the absence of policies favoring evs , future autonomous vehicles could be powered by fossil fuels .

there are several reasons why electrification may not be the ultimate choice for autonomous vehicles .

analyses by ford and volvo have for the following reasons led them to retain internal combustion engines for their ride - sharing ventures for the present: expense and i nconvenience .

electric vehicles remain expensive compared to conventional vehicles , and many models have short driving ranges and long refueling times .

shared vehicles , which may be on the road for many hours a day , magnify these shortcomings .

battery l ife .

frequent use of battery fast charging is known to lead to faster degradation of the battery .

energy - i ntensity .

autonomous vehicles rely on energy - intensive technologies .

it has been estimated that operation of an autonomous driving system for two hours in an electric vehicle could use as much as 10% of its stored energy before the vehicle moves , requiring even more frequent recharging .

these drawbacks are countered by the following factors that could make electrification of autonomous vehicles the more attractive power source: compatibility .

the extensive use of computers and sensors in autonomous vehicles may be easier to embed in electric vehicles , which have fewer mechanical—and more electronic—parts than a conventional vehicle .

operability .

electricity is generally less expensive than gasoline or diesel , and maintenance costs for electric vehicles , with many fewer parts , may be considerably lower .

emissions .

the power demands of autonomous vehicle equipment and computers will reduce the fuel economy of gasoline and diesel vehicles and increase emissions .

it has been estimated that increased power requirements will increase emissions from combustion vehicles by over 60 grams of co 2 equivalent per mile , equal to reducing fuel economy of a 35 mpg vehicle to 29 mpg .

switching to electricity would diminish the direct emissions .

acceptance of electric vehicles and related infrastructure is affected by legislation , regulations , and policies adopted by state agencies and electric utilities .

incentives vary widely from state to state .

the national conference of state legislatures tracks vehicle and charger incentives on a state - by - state basis .

forty - five states and the district of columbia currently offer incentives for certain hybrid or electric vehicles , or both .

those incentives include permitting solo drivers of electric and hybrid vehicles to use high - occupancy ( carpool ) lanes , income tax credits and rebates for the purchase of an electric vehicle , reduced registration fees , parking fee exemptions , excise tax and emission test waivers , and income tax credits for installation of a home or business charger .

these incentives have been found to vary in their effectiveness .

several analyses have shown that tax incentives for electric vehicles and infrastructure are the "dominant factors in driving pev adoption. .

rebates—which happen at the point of sale or within a short time after a vehicle purchase—have been identified as the most effective incentive because their value is clear to buyers at the time of a vehicle transaction .

the california air resources board ( carb ) adopted low - emission vehicle regulations in 1990 , requiring automakers to sell light vehicles in that state that meet progressively cleaner emissions standards .

as part of these emission regulations , carb also established the zero - emission vehicle ( zev ) program , which requires automakers to offer for sale the lowest - emission vehicles available , with a focus on battery electric , plug - in hybrid electric , and hydrogen fuel cell vehicles .

the number of zevs each automaker is required to sell is based upon its total light - vehicle sales in california .

carb has set zev sales percentages through a vehicle credit system , increasing annually to 2025 .

nine other states have adopted the california zev regulations .

the states affected by the regulations represent over one - third of all u.s. new light vehicle sales .

electric utilities , which are regulated by the state in which they are located , are in a unique position as the primary providers of electricity to aid in integrating evs into the grid .

utilities can provide incentives to consumers to charge evs during off - peak hours when there is excess generation .

utilities may also be in the position to install public electric charging infrastructure , assuming that there are no limits on their owning these assets .

many of the barriers utilities face with respect to electrification infrastructure are regulatory , and the role of tax policy in addressing such barriers may be limited .

sluggish growth in energy demand has posed a challenge for the electric utility sector .

the industry has recognized evs as an opportunity for growth .

for this reason , electric utilities may have their own market - based incentives ( absent federal intervention ) to invest in ev infrastructure and take measures to support consumer ev adoption .

further , electric utilities may support extending current - law vehicle and infrastructure tax credits .

at the same time , preparing the grid for a surge in electric car ownership could require substantial capital investments , if peak demand is increased .

a number of challenges are associated with providing tax incentives to utilities that provide ev infrastructure .

while 65% of electricity customers across the united states are customers of investor - owned utilities , most other users purchase electricity from cooperatives or municipal power providers .

there are limited options for providing a direct federal tax benefit to cooperative or municipal utilities that do not pay federal income taxes .

further , in many states customers may purchase electricity from competing suppliers and pay the local electric utility for delivering it .

a tax incentive to provide ev infrastructure might be made available only to utilities , to other electricity suppliers , or to both .

applicability of such an incentive would vary according to state policies or the type of utility .

state regulatory commissions typically establish prices or rates that allow utilities to earn a rate of return that the regulator determines to be reasonable .

this rate of return is fixed , such that additional tax incentives do not necessarily increase the return that a utility can realize .

federal taxes are an operating expense .

in some states , tax incentives that reduce utilities' operating expenses result in lower rates for electricity customers ( not higher returns for utilities ) .

hence , federal tax incentives may provide a limited near - term incentive for utilities to increase capital spending on ev infrastructure .

in the united states , the sale of electricity is governed by many different federal , state , and local regulations .

when it comes to the sale of electricity for the purpose of charging evs , the states generally have regulatory jurisdiction over retail electricity transactions , though federal and municipal authorities may also play a role .

state approaches to regulation vary considerably .

rules and regulations governing the retail sale of electricity generally originate with a state public utility commission .

an electric utility is defined in federal law as any person , state , or federal agency "which sells electric energy. .

this definition could potentially be interpreted to mean that electric vehicle charging station operators are electric utilities by virtue of the fact that they sell electricity , and are therefore subject to all laws , requirements , and regulations pertaining to electric utilities .

should charging station operators be subject to regulation as electric utilities , or is regulatory reform necessary to accommodate this new class of electricity transactions ? .

faced with the question of whether or how to regulate the operators , states have taken a variety of approaches: some states have issued new guidelines or regulations that define the requirements for regulated utilities to operate charging stations .

for example , some states ( eg , oregon ) allow existing regulated utilities to invest in and operate ev charging stations as separate , nonregulated ventures .

others ( eg , texas ) have effectively limited the operation of charging stations to electric distribution utilities by requiring operators to meet high technical and financial standards .

still others ( eg , kansas ) have prevented electric utilities from owning and operating charging stations altogether .

other states ( eg , new york ) have exempted charging station operators from public utility regulations .

this leaves questions as to which regulatory agency , if any , is responsible for regulating the charging station operators , as well as whether additional regulation is needed in order to ensure fair market practices .

finally , some states have refrained from taking action altogether .

without regulatory changes , private charging station operators in these states may be subject to regulation as a utility by the state's public commission .

lack of clarity about how operators will be regulated is seen by some as an impediment to the spread of the technology in these states .

in some cases , ev service providers have avoided regulation as a utility by providing charging services for free , or by charging customers by the minute rather than by the amount of electricity used .

whether public utilities or private companies may operate electric vehicle charging stations and whether station operators are subject to regulation as a utility may affect deployment of ev charging infrastructure .

state jurisdiction over retail electricity transactions may limit the potential role of the federal government in regulating the provision of ev charging services .

an additional consideration is the potential for electric vehicle batteries to be used for storage , referred to as vehicle - to - grid ( v2g ) storage .

v2g storage would allow idle vehicle batteries to be used for grid services , such as demand response .

the batteries could reduce vehicle owners' electricity demand during peak periods or provide electricity to the grid during peak periods in response to time - based rates or other financial incentives .

in the united states , utilities are beginning to test v2g performance in demonstration projects .

in addition to technology , other identified challenges include regulation , market , and end - user acceptance .

