the u.s. constitution establishes a two - step process for the house and senate to remove federal officials—including the president , vice president , judges , and other civil officers—for "treason , bribery , or other high crimes and misdemeanors. .

under the constitution , the house alone has the power to formally charge—that is , impeach—a federal official .

a house majority can accomplish this by adopting articles of impeachment , which are effectively written accusations ( similar to an indictment in ordinary criminal proceedings ) .

the senate alone has the power to try an impeachment and render a verdict regarding whether the individual should be removed from office and possibly barred from holding future office .

two - thirds of senators voting must agree to convict and remove an official from office .

the senate could also separately decide to disqualify an officer from holding future federal office .

disqualification requires only a majority vote .

the procedures the house has developed for accomplishing this constitutional responsibility are described below .

the house has used this process mostly to impeach federal judges , although the house has also impeached two presidents and one cabinet official .

the senate has voted to remove eight of these officials , and all of them were federal judges .

the summary of the rules and procedures the house might use to impeach a federal official presented here is drawn from published sources of congressional rules and precedents , as well as the public record of past impeachment proceedings .

it relies as well upon in - depth research conducted by betsy palmer and susan navarro smelcer , formerly of crs , on the practice in both chambers with respect to the impeachment of federal judges .

this report provides an overview of the procedures and should not be treated or cited as an authority on congressional proceedings .

consultation with the parliamentarian of the house is always advised regarding the possible application of rules and precedents .

for more information on impeachment , including a discussion of which federal officers are subject to impeachment and possible grounds for impeachment , see crs report r44260 , impeachment and removal , by jared p. cole and todd garvey .

the impeachment process may be initiated as the result of various actions and events , including the receipt and referral of information from an outside source , investigations by congressional committees under their general authority , or the introduction of articles of impeachment in the form of a house resolution .

regardless of what might instigate an inquiry into whether impeachment is warranted , there are normally three formal stages of congressional action .

first , an impeachment inquiry is authorized , and this is most often accomplished through the adoption of a simple resolution ( h.res.___ ) directing the judiciary committee to investigate an official .

second , the committee conducts its investigation , prepares articles of impeachment , and reports them to the house .

third , the full house considers the articles of impeachment and , if they are adopted , appoints managers from the committee to present the articles in the senate .

as discussed in detail below , the house relies upon many of its usual procedures to consider the resolution explicitly initiating an investigation , conduct the investigation , and consider the articles of impeachment .

if a resolution authorizing an impeachment investigation was introduced through the hopper and referred to the rules committee , that committee would then choose whether to report the resolution to the full house for consideration .

if reported , the resolution would be privileged , which means a member could call it up on the floor , though only at the direction of the rules committee .

the resolution would then be considered under the hour rule , a method of considering legislation in the house that permits members to speak for up to an hour—but also allows a numerical majority to vote to end debate and limit the opportunity for amendment .

specifically , the member who called up the resolution would be recognized for one hour .

debate on the resolution would likely last for that hour or even less , because a majority in the house could agree to order the previous question on the resolution .

when the house votes to order the previous question , it ends debate and any opportunity for amendment .

a motion to recommit the resolution with or without instructions could be offered after the previous question was ordered , but it would not be debatable .

the house could also , however , choose to consider the resolution under any of its other regular processes , including suspension of the rules ( requiring a two - thirds vote for passage ) , a rule from the rules committee ( requiring only a majority vote ) , or unanimous consent .

the two most recent resolutions adopted by the house to authorize an impeachment investigation were taken up by unanimous consent at the request of the rules committee chair .

rather than convene a committee meeting to order the resolutions reported with a quorum present , the chair asked unanimous consent that the house discharge the rules committee and agree to the resolution .

both of these resolutions concerned federal judges , and they were agreed to without debate .

in the three previous instances of judicial impeachments , however , the house did not approve a resolution explicitly authorizing an impeachment inquiry .

the rules of the house since 1975 have granted committees the power to subpoena witnesses and materials , administer oaths , and meet at any time within the united states—powers that were previously granted through resolutions providing blanket investigatory authorities that were agreed to at the start of a congress or through authorizing resolutions for each impeachment investigation .

in two of the three recent cases , the house agreed to separate resolutions to allow committee counsel to take affidavits and depositions .

if the house does approve an authorizing resolution , then in addition to the rules committee , the judiciary committee can report an original resolution authorizing an impeachment investigation if impeachment resolutions have been referred to the committee .

in the case of the most recent authorization of a presidential impeachment inquiry , the judiciary committee reported such a resolution , and the full house debated it .

as mentioned above , pursuant to a resolution agreed to by the house , the judiciary committee reviewed material submitted by an independent counsel appointed to investigate president bill clinton .

the judiciary committee then reported a resolution ( h.res .

581 , 105 th congress ) authorizing an investigation into whether sufficient grounds existed for the impeachment of the president .

the resolution was privileged for immediate consideration .

the chair of the judiciary committee called up the resolution and asked unanimous consent that instead of being recognized for the normal one hour , his time be extended to two hours , half of which he would yield to the ranking member of the judiciary committee for purposes of debate only .

after debate under the terms of this unanimous consent agreement , the house ordered the previous question on the resolution by voice vote , ending further debate of the resolution .

a minority - party representative offered a motion to recommit , and , pursuant to a unanimous consent agreement , the motion was debated for 10 minutes before being defeated on a roll call vote .

as noted , absent this unanimous consent agreement , the motion to recommit would not have been debatable .

the resolution was then agreed to by a record vote , 258-176 .

in the 93 rd congress ( 1973-1974 ) , multiple resolutions to impeach president richard m. nixon were introduced and referred to the judiciary committee .

the committee began an examination of the charges against the president under its general investigatory authority .

the house also approved a resolution , reported by the house rules committee , providing additional investigation authority that did not specifically mention impeachment .

in late 1973 , the house agreed to another resolution that provided for additional expenses of the committee , and floor debate and the report from the committee on house administration indicate that the funds were intended in part for the impeachment inquiry .

on february 1 , 1974 , the judiciary committee reported an original resolution ( h.res .

803 ; h.rept .

93-774 ) mandating an investigation to determine whether the house should impeach president nixon and continuing the availability of funds .

on february 6 , 1974 , the chairman of the judiciary committee called up the resolution as a question of privilege .

it was debated under the hour rule , with the chairman yielding time to other members for purposes of debate only .

the judiciary committee chair moved the previous question before any other member was recognized to control time under the hour rule , and the house ordered the previous question 342-70 .

the resolution authorizing the investigation was then agreed to , 410-4 .

the standing rules of the house that affect committee investigations apply as well to impeachment investigations by the judiciary committee .

a resolution authorizing an impeachment investigation might place additional limitations , or grant additional authorities , to the committee .

in addition , the committee itself might adopt rules specific to an impeachment inquiry .

it has not been unusual for the judiciary committee to authorize subcommittees or to create task forces to conduct impeachment investigations , and in that case the full committee would establish the authority of the subcommittee or task force .

although floor consideration of an impeachment resolution largely resembles floor consideration of legislation , there is one difference regarding disorderly language: under regular house procedures , it is not in order to use language that is personally offensive toward the president , which would include accusations that the president committed a crime or allusions to unethical behavior .

during consideration of an impeachment resolution , however , remarks in debate can refer to the alleged misconduct of the president that is under consideration by the house .

members should still abstain from other language "personally offensive" to the president .

after the house has agreed to articles of impeachment , it then appoints members to serve as managers in the senate trial .

in recent practice , the house has appointed managers by agreeing to a house resolution .

the house also , by resolution , informs the senate that it has adopted articles of impeachment and authorizes the managers to conduct the trial in the senate .

the house could agree to separate resolutions or , as has been the case with recent impeachments , to a single resolution accomplishing each of these purposes .

such resolutions are privileged , and sometimes they have been taken up and agreed to by unanimous consent .

after the senate receives the resolution ( s ) from the house , the senate informs the house when the managers can present the articles of impeachment to the senate .

at the appointed time , the house managers read the resolution authorizing their appointment and the resolution containing the articles of impeachment on the senate floor and then leave until the senate invites them back for the trial .

at the trial , the house managers , who might be assisted by outside counsel , present evidence against the accused and could be expected to respond to the defense presented by the accused ( or his or her counsel ) or to questions submitted in writing by senators .

a full description of senate procedures in an impeachment trial is beyond the scope of this report .

the senate has a special set of rules—agreed to in the 19 th century—that provide some guidance for impeachment trial proceedings .

however , in modern practice the senate has agreed to alternative or supplemental procedures both for judicial impeachment trials and the impeachment trial of president clinton .

the 19 th - century impeachment trial rules seemingly require a series of actions by the senate upon the receipt of articles of impeachment from the house .

the senate , however , just like the house , can set aside its rules by , for example , agreeing to a simple resolution .

under the regular rules of the senate that govern consideration of legislation , such a resolution would not be subject to any debate restrictions .

as a result , in that circumstance , a cloture process , requiring the support of three - fifths of the senate , would be necessary to reach a vote on the resolution .

once the senate has convened as a court of impeachment , however , the impeachment trial rules , not the regular rules of the senate , will apply .

the senate impeachment trial rules and related precedents restrict debate on many resolutions and motions .

the debate restrictions could allow a simple majority to determine some procedures for responding to articles of impeachment sent from the house .

