the united states has more nuclear power reactors than any country worldwide .

the 98 operable nuclear generating units provide approximately 20% of the electrical generation in the united states .

uranium is the fundamental element used to fuel nuclear power production .

the front - end of the nuclear fuel cycle comprises the industrial stages starting with uranium extraction from the earth and ending with power production in a nuclear reactor .

congressional interest in the front - end of the nuclear fuel cycle is associated with many factors , including ( 1 ) domestic uranium production and supply , ( 2 ) concerns about increasing reliance on uranium imports , and ( 3 ) the economic viability of u.s. nuclear power reactors .

historically , the u.s. atomic energy commission ( aec ) , a predecessor federal agency to the department of energy ( doe ) and the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) , promoted uranium production in the united states through federal procurement contracts between 1947 and 1971 .

the majority of domestic uranium concentrate production prior to 1971 supported the development of nuclear weapons and naval propulsion reactors .

after 1971 , uranium mill operators produced uranium concentrate primarily for use in commercial nuclear power reactors .

by the late 1980s , nuclear utilities and reactor operators in the united states purchased more uranium from foreign suppliers than domestic producers .

by 2017 , 93% of the uranium purchased by u.s. nuclear utilities and reactor operators originated in a foreign country .

nuclear utilities and reactor operators diversify uranium supplies among multiple domestic and foreign sources , intending to minimize fuel costs .

for example , a nuclear utility in the united states may purchase uranium concentrate that has been mined and milled in australia , converted in france , enriched in germany , and fabricated into fuel in the united states .

examination of the current status of the front - end of the nuclear fuel cycle highlights broad policy questions about the federal government's role in sustaining or promoting nuclear fuel production in the united states .

this report describes the front - end of the nuclear fuel cycle and the global uranium marketplace , analyzes domestic sources and imports of various types of uranium materials involved in the fuel cycle , and provides a discussion about the current issues .

the back - end of the nuclear fuel cycle comprises the storage of spent nuclear fuel ( snf ) after it is discharged from a nuclear reactor ; however , issues associated with snf storage and disposal are not discussed in this report .

this report does not discuss potential environmental , public health , and proliferation issues associated with the front - end of the nuclear fuel cycle .

the front - end of the nuclear fuel cycle is composed of four stages: uranium mining and milling is the process of removing uranium ore from the earth and physically and chemically processing the ore to develop "yellowcake" uranium concentrate .

uranium conversion produces uranium hexafluoride ( uf 6 ) , a gaseous form of uranium , from solid uranium concentrate .

uranium enrichment separates and concentrates the fissile isotope u - 235 in the gaseous uf 6 form to produce enriched uranium capable of sustaining a nuclear chain reaction in a commercial nuclear power reactor .

uranium fuel f abrication involves producing uranium oxide pellets , which are subsequently loaded into reactor - specific fuel rods and assemblies , which in turn are loaded into a nuclear power reactor .

the uranium market operates with multiple industries exchanging uranium products and services through separate , nondirect , and interrelated markets .

producers , suppliers , and utilities buy , sell , store , and transfer uranium materials .

for example , a contract may be established between a nuclear utility and a uranium producer for a given amount of uranium concentrate production over a certain number of years .

the uranium producer generates uranium concentrate , which is shipped to a conversion facility .

the utility contracts with a conversion facility to convert uranium concentrate to uf 6 .

finally , the utility may arrange a contract for uranium enrichment services .

uranium transactions occur through bilateral contractual agreements between buyers , sellers , and traders .

civilian nuclear power utilities purchase uranium through long - term multiyear contracts or through the spot market as a one - time purchase and delivery .

for uranium materials delivered in 2018 , roughly 84% were purchased through long - term contracts and about 16% through spot market purchases .

in the united states , utilities may simultaneously arrange contracts with multiple uranium producers or suppliers for a given number of years .

for example , a u.s. nuclear power utility may decide to engage with a uranium producer in canada , a uranium conversion facility in the united states , a uranium enrichment facility in germany , and a uranium fuel fabricator in the united states ( figure 3 ) .

that same utility may arrange another contract for uranium concentrate from australia , uranium conversion in france , uranium enrichment in the netherlands , and uranium fuel fabrication in the united states .

at the same time , the utility may also decide to acquire uranium materials from a secondary supply source or through a trader or broker .

traders or brokers may not produce uranium products or services , but they buy , sell , and store materials to utilities and other suppliers .

in this way , nuclear utilities and reactor operators may seek to diversify nuclear fuel sources between primary and secondary suppliers to avoid supply disruptions .

since the late 1980s , u.s. nuclear utilities and reactor operators have purchased increasingly more foreign - origin uranium for reactor fuel than domestically produced uranium .

historically , the aec , a predecessor federal agency to doe and nrc , promoted uranium production through federal procurement contracts between 1947 and 1971 .

after 1971 , uranium mill operators produced uranium concentrate primarily for the production of civilian nuclear energy .

in 1987 , about half of uranium used in domestic nuclear reactors was foreign origin ; by 2018 , eia reported 93% of uranium used in domestic nuclear reactors was foreign origin .

the doe recognizes the term domestic as physical facilities operating within the united states , regardless of a foreign corporation ownership .

several domestic uranium producers , suppliers , enrichers , and utilities operating in the united states have foreign ownership or are subsidiaries of foreign corporations .

on the other hand , doe does not consider brokers and traders of already milled , converted , or enriched uranium as part of the domestic industry , as they are not associated with physical production of those materials .

the term foreign is used to describe any non - u.s. based facility or material origin .

the following sections describe domestic uranium sources and foreign imports associated with the front - end of the nuclear fuel cycle by year and country .

uranium materials sourced from various countries may be associated with that country's natural resources , operational fuel cycle facilities , and trade agreements with the united states .

for example , australia , one of the largest exporters of uranium concentrate to the united states , has the largest reasonably assured uranium resources worldwide , but it does not have a commercial nuclear power plant in operation .

on the other hand , some overseas producers may not have the geologic resources to mine and mill uranium concentrate , but they may operate conversion or enrichment operations .

on january 16 , 2018 , two u.s. domestic uranium mining companies petitioned the u.s. department of commerce ( doc ) to investigate whether uranium imports from foreign state - owned enterprises , such as those in russia , china , and kazakhstan , pose a threat to national security .

the investigation into uranium import restrictions sparked a debate between uranium producers ; uranium mine and mill operators ; and nuclear utilities , reactor operators , and suppliers .

uranium producers asserted that a heavy reliance on foreign uranium constitutes a national security risk and threatens the viability of domestic uranium production .

conversely , nuclear utilities and reactor operators contended that increased fuel costs from trade restrictions would place additional financial burdens on nuclear utilities , potentially causing the premature shutdown of economically marginal nuclear power plants .

stakeholders on both sides of the debate generally agreed that the proposed quotas would increase fuel costs for nuclear utilities and increase revenues for domestic uranium mining .

for example , a report sponsored by the nuclear energy institute ( nei ) concluded that a 25% quota could increase fuel costs by $500 million to $800 million annually and potentially higher in the years immediately following implementation .

an economic study funded by the petitioners estimated uranium mining revenues from a 25% quota would increase by $551 million to $690 million per year and would increase fuel costs by $0.41 per megawatt - hour ( mwh ) .

another study estimated that the $0.41 per mwh increase in fuel costs for nuclear generators would translate to approximately $317 million per year .

the uranium section 232 investigation also raised policy questions about congress's role under section 232 .

under current federal law , trade actions imposed by the president under section 232 do not require congressional approval apart from actions related to petroleum imports .

as a broad policy matter , congress may consider the federal role in issues associated with the front - end of the nuclear fuel cycle .

the uranium materials and service industry delivers fuel for commercial nuclear power reactors , which is largely traded and purchased under private contracts in a global marketplace .

similar to other energy markets , uranium supply is an issue on which congress may or may not elect to intervene .

as discussed previously , the united states ceased production of heu for weapons in 1964 , due to the determination of sufficient stockpiles .

fuel for nuclear naval propulsion is supplied by government heu stockpiles , and the production of heu for naval propulsion ended by 1992 .

questions about the sufficiency of the defense uranium stockpile and future uranium requirements for defense and other purposes are beyond the scope of this report .

the financial viability in the short term and long term for domestic uranium producers—uranium miners and millers—in the united states remains uncertain .

domestic uranium production experienced a sharp decline during the early 1980s , and has remained at comparatively low levels over the past 25 years .

recently , global demand for uranium has been depressed due to a number of factors , including the continued shutdown of most japanese nuclear power reactors following the fukushima daiichi accident .

in 2018 , domestic uranium concentrate production was 1.5 million pounds , down approximately 40% from 2017 , and at the lowest annual production levels since 1950 .

u.s. uranium producers have dealt with poor market conditions by decreasing production and imposing employment layoffs .

domestic uranium producers have reportedly engaged in purchasing uranium concentrate on the market at lower spot market prices to fill delivery obligations at relatively higher contract prices .

states have proposed legislation intended to provide some financial relief for domestic uranium producers .

u.s. nuclear power plants face economic issues and a general uncertainty over their long - term economic viability .

of the 98 operating nuclear reactors , 12 are scheduled to shut down , prior to license expiration , by 2025 .

the plant vogtle nuclear expansion project in georgia , currently the only new construction of nuclear power reactors in the united states , is reportedly billions of dollars over budget and years behind schedule .

a 2018 report by the union of concerned scientists asserts that roughly one - third of nuclear power plants are unprofitable and modest changes in costs may have profound impacts on other nuclear power plants' economic viability .

some native american tribes and public interest groups in the united states opposed trade actions on uranium imports due to concerns that uranium import restrictions would promote increased domestic uranium mining and milling operations .

these groups suggested the health and environmental issues associated with historical uranium mining and milling have not been adequately addressed .

persistent soil , surface and groundwater contamination associated with historical uranium mining and milling remains a concern for some communities .

for example , federal , state , and tribal agencies manage environment impacts associated with historical uranium mining and milling operations that occurred on navajo nation lands .

given environmental impacts associated with historical domestic uranium mining and milling operations , congress may consider examining potential long - term environmental or public health consequences of expanding domestic uranium production and the adequacy of bonding and long - term financial assurance requirements for current or future uranium production operations undergoing site reclamation and decommissioning .

