the old - age , survivors , and disability insurance ( oasdi ) program provides monthly benefits to retired or disabled workers and their family members and to the family members of deceased workers .

the oasdi program operates as a pay - as - you - go program in which revenues ( collected from payroll taxes and taxation of benefits ) are paid out as monthly benefits .

these monthly benefits constitute a substantial portion of income for a large segment of recipients .

the payroll tax and the taxation of monthly benefits are major contributors to the oasdi program's revenues .

for many years , the program's revenues exceeded its costs ( i.e. , benefit payments ) , resulting in annual surpluses .

annual surpluses are not needed to cover scheduled benefits , and the money is credited to the old - age and survivors insurance trust fund and the disability insurance trust fund , or trust funds .

the oasdi trust funds are invested in nonmarketable u.s. government securities ( government bonds ) , where they earn interest .

this interest provides a third source of revenue to the oasdi program .

the combined oasdi trust funds had approximately $2.9 trillion in assets at the beginning of 2018 .

the oasdi trust funds' board of trustees ( the trustees ) manages the trust funds according to requirements set forth in the social security act .

under current law , the trust funds' assets may be invested only in u.s. government securities issued by the secretary of the treasury .

in practice , the trust funds invest solely in special , nonmarketable u.s. treasury securities .

by investing only in nonmarketable u.s. treasury securities , or special issues , the trustees have not intervened directly in the private economy .

investing in marketable securities would signify a departure from the norms that govern the current investment practice .

investing in equities — for example , by purchasing company stock in the open market — would demonstrate a similar departure from the trust funds' investment norms and would represent a government intervention into the private market .

some argue this expansion of investment options would be problematic because it dictates government ownership of , and possibly influence on , private companies .

although this event may never come to pass , the historically higher returns on equity investment may motivate policymakers to enact changes to the oasdi trust funds' investment options and practices .

section 201 ( c ) of the social security act establishes the board of trustees of the oasdi trust funds and states that the secretary of the treasury shall be the managing trustee .

subsequent sections outline the main duties of the managing trustee and provide instructions for how to conduct the trust funds' investment activities .

the directives include the following: 1 .

the managing trustee is to invest portions of the trust funds that are not required for current costs .

2 .

the funds not necessary to meet current costs are to be invested only in interest - bearing securities issued by the secretary of the treasury .

upon purchasing a government security ( i.e. , exchanging tax revenues or earned interest for a government security ) , the surplus funds are deposited into the general fund and the funds are available to the rest of the federal government to meet other spending needs , reduce taxes , or reduce publicly held debt .

this transaction essentially results in excess revenues being loaned to the government .

3 .

the u.s. treasury will make these securities available to the managing trustee for the trust funds' investments .

these issues are referred to as special issues or special obligations .

a .

the maturity of special issues is fixed with due regard for the needs of the trust funds .

b .

the interest rate earned by special issues is equal to the average market yield on marketable , interest - bearing government securities due at least four years in the future .

4 .

the managing trustee may redeem any of these special issues , at any time , at par ( i.e. , face value ) plus accrued interest .

the ability to redeem the special issues at any time for par value , thus ensuring they cannot lose value , makes them nonmarketable .

other u.s. government issuances , if sold prior to maturity , are redeemed at the prevailing market rate .

because these special issues can always be redeemed at par , their early redemption at any time does not negatively affect the trust funds' value .

if it is determined to be in the public interest , the managing trustee may purchase non - special issues ( eg , marketable u.s. securities ) at the original or market price .

doing so would imply that any redemption , if needed prior to the maturity date of such security , would return the market price and possibly result in losses to the trust funds' capital .

the 1957-1959 advisory council on social security financing acknowledged that the trust funds could invest in public ( i.e. , marketable ) issues , but recommended amending the social security act to allow investment in public issues only "when they will provide currently a yield equal to or greater than the yield that would be provided by the alternative of investing in special issues. .

had this amendment been enacted into law , it would have mandated the preference for special issues .

the social security act provides no direction on how the trust funds' investments should be redeemed .

in practice , the trustees have adopted two administrative policies to address this gap .

first , special issues are redeemed before maturity only when they are required to cover immediate costs .

this policy prevents special issues with a low yield from being redeemed and then immediately reinvested at a higher rate .

second , special issues are redeemed in maturity - date order .

this policy provides a reliable order of redemption .

actuarial note number 142 , published by the social security administration's office of the chief actuary ( ocact ) , outlines the oasdi trust funds' investment principles .

the note acknowledges that the legislative history of the social security act provides only limited guidance , and the rest can be inferred from the administrative policies adopted over the duration of the trust funds' existence .

the 1994-1996 advisory council on social security identified the demographic implications of the aging b aby b oom generation — those born from 1946 through 1964 — and the associated effects on the trust funds as an issue .

as a result , the council's final report recommended investing a portion of the trust funds in equities to help alleviate pressure on the oasdi program's long - term actuarial balance .

other alternatives included investments in private ( eg , corporate ) bonds , or in social and economic activities , such as housing construction .

the primary argument for the trust funds to invest in private equity is that historical returns on equity have been greater than returns on government bonds .

some critics of this approach are concerned that by investing in private companies and gaining some control over their activities , the federal government would be intervening in the market , resulting in what some have described as "socialism by the backdoor method. .

the advisory council reasoned as follows: another practical disadvantage would be the need for a far - reaching and deep - searching investment policy that would permit the trust funds to obtain an adequate rate of interest with reasonable security of principal .

under such a policy , the federal government would , in effect , be setting itself up as a rating organization , because the investment procedures would naturally have to be open to full public view .

if no preference were shown for different types of securities , but rather investments were made widely and indiscriminately , there would be a substantial risk of diminution of investment income , or even loss of principal .

alternatively , it could be argued that if the trust funds invested passively into an index fund , the managing trustee or board of trustees could forgo voting rights .

although this may help to solve , or at least alleviate , the issue of government control over private companies , it may introduce new risks .

the value of shares in companies included in the chosen index would receive a steady stream of support from routine and unconditional government purchase of their shares .

investing trust fund assets in index funds — for example , by investing in an index of the largest 500 companies — may effectively create an atmosphere where these companies , by the value of their market capitalization , are chosen as the "winners" via the trust funds' purchases .

the benefits of being among the winners could provide incentives for companies near the cutoff in market capitalization to adopt accounting methods not generally accepted as good practice .

deceptive accounting methods could be used to inflate stock prices and market capitalization for the purpose of becoming a winner wherein the company would benefit from consistent purchase of its stock by the trust funds .

investing the trust funds' assets in private equities or bonds could also introduce instability to the financial markets .

whereas figure 2 shows that the trust funds' values on a year - to - year basis are smooth , the trust funds' balance fluctuates greatly throughout the year .

the need to redeem the trust funds' assets throughout the year , combined with the trust funds' ebbs and flows , presents conditions that have the potential to disrupt private markets .

large sales of private stocks and bonds needed to smooth fluctuations in the trust funds' value may create a liquidity crisis where irregular price movements prohibit sales and purchases at market prices ; a lack of liquidity is also a reason critics cite for not investing in social projects such as housing or hospitals .

lastly , for the trust funds to purchase equities , some portion of the trust funds' existing special issues would need to be redeemed to provide the necessary capital .

research presented in the following sections suggests a phase - in of equity purchases worth 2.67 percentage points of the trust funds' value per year .

phasing in the purchase of equities in 2018 at 2.67 percentage points would have required the redemption of approximately $77 billion worth of special issues .

in other words , the federal government would have needed to find $77 billion to redeem these special issues so the cash could be invested in equities .

providing that capital for the new equity investments would require a corresponding increase in publicly held debt , a corresponding increase in tax revenue , or a corresponding reduction in other government spending .

subsequent years would require similar redemptions as well .

with accurate and precise knowledge of the oasdi trust funds' cash flows from 1983 through 2016 , it is possible to model the trust funds' performance had they participated in alternative investments .

research published by burtless et al .

at the center for retirement research in 2017 sought to determine how the trust funds would have benefited if alternative investments began in 1984 , after the social security amendments of 1983 ushered in a 34-year period of annual surpluses , and in 1997 , after the last advisory council on social security recommended trust fund investment in equity .

this analysis compares how incorporating equity investments would have affected the oasdi trust funds ratio .

the t rust f und s ratio is the measure of the trust funds' asset reserves at the beginning of the year divided by the projected total cost for the year .

according to the trustees , a trust funds ratio above 100% throughout the short - range period ( 10 years ) indicates a financially healthy program , whereas a ratio below 100% signals the program is in a financially inadequate position .

the results are presented in figure 4 below .

the scenarios presented below assume that the amount of the trust funds' reserves invested in equities would increase by 2.67 percentage points per year until 40% of reserves were allocated in equities .

that is , the trust funds' purchase of equities was phased in until equities represented 40% of total assets .

this analysis yields several insights , the most pertinent of which may be that if the trust funds had invested in equities in the past , they would have higher levels of assets today than they currently do .

figure 4 shows that at the end of 2016 , undertaking equity investments in 1983 would have left the trust funds with reserves enough to cover about an additional 1.2 years of program costs ( 424% less 302% ) ; equity investing beginning in 1997 would have supplied the trust funds with assets to cover an additional 0.88 years of program costs ( 390% less 302% ) .

in other words , the trust funds would still be facing long - term insolvency even with equity investment .

a second item of note is that from 1983 to 2008 , when the actual trust funds ratio peaked , the analysis shows that investing in equities would not have drastically improved the financial situation .

the actual trust funds ratio was 358% in 2008 , contrasted with a ratio of 371% if investment in equities began in 1984 and a ratio of 383% if investment began in 1997 .

by 2008 , the current investment strategy resulted in a similar trust funds ratio , accomplished with less risk , with no intervention into the capital markets , and at minimal cost .

a third observation is that despite several large downturns , most notably the 2008-2009 financial crisis , the trust funds would still stand in a better financial position today had equity investments been incorporated .

lastly , in each of these two alternative cases , the trust funds would have owned less than 10% of the total value of the stock market today .

this result owes to the growth in aggregate equity value contrasted with the phased - in purchases of equity .

trust fund ownership at this level would perhaps assuage the concerns of critics wary of government intervention in the equity markets .

under current law , and assuming the board of trustees' intermediate projections will unfold close to its assumptions , the long - range solvency of the oasdi trust funds is at risk .

in addition , under current law , the trust funds' financial position would not be improved by the inclusion of alternative investments , namely equity investments .

however , should congress pass legislation to reduce the actuarial deficit , available research suggests that investing the trust funds' newly increased assets in equities could result in a higher trust funds ratio ( i.e. , greater solvency ) than if the trust funds' assets were invested in only government bonds .

phasing in equity investments over a sufficient length of time could minimize adverse effects and result in the trust funds holding a relatively small position in the stock market .

although much smaller in scale , the practices of the rrb provide a framework and history for the use of equity investment in a trust fund ( see crs report rs22782 , railroad retirement board: trust fund investment practices ) .

this would , however , require putting aside current investment principles and methods that have guided investment practices .

these practices have led the oasdi trust funds to be managed at a low cost with minimal risk and resulted in no direct intervention in the private equity markets .

