"too big to fail" ( tbtf ) is the concept that a financial firm's disorderly failure would cause widespread disruptions in financial markets and result in devastating economic and societal outcomes that the government would feel compelled to prevent , perhaps by providing direct support to the firm .

such firms are a source of systemic risk — the potential for widespread disruption to the financial system , as occurred in 2008 when the securities firm lehman brothers failed .

although tbtf has been a perennial policy issue , it was highlighted by the near - collapse of several large financial firms in 2008 .

some of the large firms were nonbank financial firms , but a few were depository institutions .

to avert the imminent failures of wachovia and washington mutual , the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) arranged for them to be acquired by other banks without government financial assistance .

citigroup and bank of america were offered additional preferred shares through the troubled asset relief program ( tarp ) and government guarantees on selected assets they owned .

in many of these cases , policymakers justified government intervention on the grounds that the firms were "systemically important" ( popularly understood to be synonymous with too big to fail ) .

some firms were rescued on those grounds once the crisis struck , although the government had no explicit policy to rescue tbtf firms beforehand .

in response to the crisis , the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( hereinafter , the dodd - frank act ; p.l .

111-203 ) , a comprehensive financial regulatory reform , was enacted in 2010 .

among its stated purposes are "to promote the financial stability of the united states… , [and] to end 'too big to fail,' to protect the american taxpayer by ending bailouts. .

the dodd - frank act took a multifaceted approach to addressing the tbtf problem .

this report focuses on one pillar of that approach — the federal reserve's ( fed's ) enhanced ( heightened ) prudential regulation for large banks and nonbank financial firms designated as systemically important by the financial stability oversight council ( fsoc ) .

for an overview of the tbtf issue and other policy approaches to mitigating it , see crs report r42150 , systemically important or "too big to fail" financial institutions , by marc labonte .

the dodd - frank act automatically subjected all bank holding companies and foreign banks with more than $50 billion in assets to enhanced prudential regulation ( epr ) .

in addition , basel iii ( a nonbinding international agreement that u.s. banking regulators implemented through rulemaking after the financial crisis ) included several capital requirements that only apply to large banks .

in 2018 , the economic growth , regulatory relief , and consumer protection act ( referred to herein as p.l .

115-174 ) eliminated most epr requirements for banks with assets between $50 billion and $100 billion .

banks that have been designated as global - systemically important banks ( g - sibs ) by the financial stability board ( an international , intergovernmental forum ) or have more than $250 billion in assets automatically remain subject to all epr requirements , as modified .

p.l .

115-174 gives the fed discretion to apply most individual epr provisions to banks with between $100 billion and $250 billion in assets on a case - by - case basis only if it would promote financial stability or the institution's safety and soundness .

this report begins with a description of who is subject to enhanced prudential regulation and what requirements make up epr .

it then discusses several rules proposed by the fed that would reduce epr requirements for some large banks ; some in response to p.l .

115-174 and some before it was enacted .

under p.l .

115-174 , the application of epr remains mainly based on asset size and charter type .

broadly speaking , only three types of financial charters allow financial institutions to accept insured deposits — banks , thrifts , and credit unions .

banks operating in the united states can be u.s. or foreign based .

depository institutions are regulated much differently than other types of financial institutions .

this section discusses whether or not epr is applied to each of those types of institutions , as well as other types of financial firms .

a detailed discussion of which provisions apply at which size threshold is discussed in the " higher , tiered thresholds " section below .

all bhcs are subject to long - standing prudential ( safety and soundness ) regulation conducted by the fed .

the novelty in the dodd - frank act was to create a group of specific prudential requirements that apply only to large banks .

some of these requirements related to capital and liquidity overlap with parts of the basel iii international agreement .

under title i of the dodd - frank act , the fed is responsible for administering epr .

it promulgates regulations implementing the regime ( based on recommendations , if any , made by fsoc ) and supervises firms subject to the regime .

the dodd - frank regime is referred to as enhanced or heightened because it applies higher or more stringent standards to large banks than it applies to smaller banks .

it is a prudential regime because the regulations are intended to contribute toward the safety and soundness of the banks subject to the regime .

the cost to the fed of administering the regime is financed through assessments on firms subject to the regime .

some epr provisions are intended to reduce the likelihood that a bank will experience financial difficulties , while others are intended to help regulators cope with a failing bank .

several of these provisions directly address problems or regulatory shortcomings that arose during the financial crisis .

as of the date of this report , no bank has experienced financial difficulties since epr came into effect , but the economy has not experienced a downturn in which financial difficulties at banks become more likely .

thus , the risk mitigation provisions that have shown robustness in an expansion have not yet proven to be robust in a downturn , while the provisions intended to cope with a failing bank remain untested .

finally , some parts of enhanced regulation cannot be evaluated because , as noted below , they still have not been implemented through final rules .

the following sections provide more detail on the requirements that title i of the dodd - frank act ( which will be referred to hereinafter as title 1 ) and basel iii place on banks subject to epr .

subsequent to initial implementation , numerous regulatory changes over the years have tailored the individual provisions discussed in this section to reduce their regulatory burden ; this report does not provide a comprehensive catalog of those subsequent changes .

as of the date of this report , the fed and the other bank regulators have proposed several rules that would modify epr one set of rules , implementing section 401 of p.l .

115-174 , would raise the asset thresholds for epr .

this rule would exempt banks with less than $100 billion in assets from epr and reduce epr requirements mostly for banks with between $100 billion and $250 billion in assets .

a second proposed rule , implementing section 402 of p.l .

115-174 , would reduce capital requirements under the slr for three custody banks , two of which are g - sibs .

two other rules were proposed independently of any legislative action one would combine elements of stress tests requirements and basel iii to create a stress capital buffer requirement for large banks , effectively reducing capital requirements mainly for large banks that are not g - sibs .

the other would reduce capital requirements under the slr for g - sibs by changing how the slr is calculated .

this section summarizes these proposed rules and their projected effects .

prior to the enactment of p.l .

115-174 , u.s. regulators described the prudential regulatory regime applying to all banks as tiered regulation , meaning that increasingly stringent regulatory requirements are applied as metrics , such as a bank's size , increase .

these different tiers have been applied on an ad hoc basis — in some cases , statute requires a given regulation to be applied at a certain size ; in some cases , regulators have discretion to apply a regulation at a certain size ; and in other cases , regulators must apply a regulation to all banks .

in addition to $100 billion and $250 billion , notable thresholds found in bank regulation are $1 billion , $3 billion , $5 billion , and $10 billion .

p.l .

115-174 expanded tiered regulation for epr and other types of bank regulation ( see text box ) .

even before enactment of p.l .

115-174 , epr was itself an example of tiered regulation , as it imposed requirements only on banks with more than $50 billion in assets , banks with $250 billion in assets , or g - sibs , depending on the requirement .

before p.l .

115-174 , the fed's rules had also tailored some of the epr requirements for banks with more than $50 billion in assets , so that more stringent regulatory or compliance requirements were applied to banks with more than $250 billion in assets or g - sibs , depending on the requirement .

under p.l .

115-174 , epr would become much more tiered and tailored by bank size .

the fed has proposed rules that would implement changes to bank asset thresholds and specific epr requirements found in p.l .

115-174 and would make additional changes to epr requirements using the discretionary authority provided in p.l .

115-174 .

under these proposed rules , epr would impose progressively more stringent requirements across four categories of banks , as summarized in table 3 .

as proposed , the fed used the discretion granted by p.l .

115-174 to exempt banks with $100 billion to $250 billion from most , but not all , epr requirements unless they had other characteristics that made them qualify as category ii or iii banks .

consistent with p.l .

115-174 , banks with under $100 billion would be exempted from all epr requirements except those related to risk management .

under proposed rules , foreign banks would be placed in the same categories , based on their u.s. assets , with requirements for each category similar to those applied to u.s. banks .

in most cases , compared to the status quo for foreign banks , epr requirements for foreign banks in category ii and iii ( see table 2 ) would remain largely unchanged , whereas foreign banks with an ihc in category iv would be exempted from or face less stringent versions of most epr requirements , depending on the requirement .

most requirements would continue to be applied to the u.s. ihc , but a few would apply to all u.s. operations , including u.s. branches and agencies .

because assets of u.s. branches and agencies were not used to determine who was subject to epr previously , the proposed rule would apply a few epr requirements to foreign banks that were not previously subject to epr .

but overall the proposed rules would mostly continue to defer to home country regulation for foreign banks operating in the united states that do not qualify as category ii or iii banks .

stress tests and capital planning requirements play a specific role in epr — they provide the fed with an assessment of whether large banks have enough capital to withstand another crisis , as simulated using a specific adverse scenario developed by the fed .

this is similar to the role of capital requirements more generally and creates some overlap and redundancy between the two .

more generally , the fed points out that banks with more than $100 billion in assets must simultaneously comply with 18 capital requirements and g - sibs must simultaneously comply with 24 different capital requirements , each addressing a separate but related risk .

to try to minimize what it perceives as redundancy between these various measures , the fed has proposed a rule to combine elements of the stress tests and the basel iii requirements .

under the proposed rule , banks with more than $100 billion in assets would have to simultaneously comply with 8 capital requirements and g - sibs would have to simultaneously comply with 14 capital requirements .

the proposed rule would accomplish this by eliminating 5 requirements tied to the "adverse" scenario in the stress tests , which the fed is allowed to do under p.l .

115-174 , and by combining 4 requirements tied to the "severely adverse" stress tests with 4 basel iii capital requirements .

under current basel iii risk - weighted capital requirements , all banks must hold a common equity capital conservation buffer ( ccb ) equal to 2.5% of their risk - weighted assets ( on top of the minimum amount of common equity , tier 1 , and total capital required ) to avoid limitations on capital distributions .

they also must meet an unweighted leverage capital requirement .

under capital planning requirements , banks currently must hold enough capital to still meet the minimum amount required under the common equity , tier 1 , and total capital , and leverage requirements after their stress test losses , planned capital distributions ( such as dividends and share buybacks ) , and projected balance sheet growth ( because an increase in assets requires a proportional increase in capital ) .

the proposed rule would replace these separate requirements with a combined stress capital buffer ( scb ) requirement that banks hold enough capital to cover stress test losses and dividends or 2.5% of risk - weighted assets , whichever is larger ( see figure 1 ) .

the former is less restrictive than what banks face if their projected capital levels fall below the minimum under current stress test requirements .

the fed has provided three justifications for making these requirements less stringent than the current capital planning requirements .

first , the fed argues that because capital distributions would automatically face restrictions if the proposed stress capital buffer was not met , it would no longer be necessary for firms to hold enough capital to meet all planned capital distributions .

however , distributions are not entirely forbidden unless the stress capital buffer falls below 0.625% .

second , the fed argues for removing stock repurchases from capital planning on the grounds that only dividends are likely to be continued as planned in a period of financial stress .

finally , the fed argues that its previous assumption that balance sheets continue to grow in a stressed environment was an unreasonable one .

because the fed decided that banks would no longer have to hold capital to account for capital distributions other than dividends and balance sheet growth , they have reduced capital requirements relative to current stress tests for non g - sibs .

however , whether the stress capital buffer would be a lower capital requirement than the stress tests and the risk - weighted basel iii requirements it is replacing depends on whether losses under the stress tests were greater than 2.5% .

if they were less than 2.5% , then a bank is required to hold the same amount of capital under the proposal as currently under the capital conservation buffer .

if they were more than 2.5% , then a bank is required to hold less capital under the proposal than currently under the stress tests .

under the proposal , banks would also face a stress leverage buffer in lieu of the leverage ratio .

the stress leverage buffer would require large banks to hold tier 1 capital equal to stress tests losses and dividends , but the leverage buffer would not include any minimum ( see figure 2 ) .

currently , the leverage ratio does not include a buffer requirement , although banks must hold an additional 1% of capital to be considered well capitalized under prompt - corrective action requirements .

so in this case , whether the stress leverage buffer would be a lower capital requirement than the stress tests and basel iii leverage requirements it is replacing depends on whether losses , planned capital distributions , and projected balance sheet growth under the stress tests were greater than 1% — which the fed reports is generally the case .

these proposed buffers would work similarly to the ccb , in that capital restrictions would be automatically triggered if a bank's capital level falls below the buffers .

it would not feature the annual quantitative "pass / fail" announcement that is a current feature of the stress tests .

the fed calculated what would have happened if this proposed rule had been in place in recent years .

it found that the proposed rule would have reduced required capital for large banks that are not g - sibs ( because the stress test is currently the binding constraint ) by between $10 billion and $45 billion and would have required g - sibs to hold the same or more capital ( because the g - sib surcharge is being added to the stress capital buffer ) ; overall , capital requirements for g - sibs would have increased by between $10 billion and $50 billion .

the fed also found that all banks would have had enough actual capital in those years to meet the scb requirement .

custody banks provide a unique set of services not offered by many other banks , but are generally subject to the same regulatory requirements as other banks .

custody banks hold securities ; receive interest or dividends on those securities ; provide related administrative services ; and transfer ownership of securities on behalf of financial market asset managers , including investment companies such as mutual funds .

asset managers access central counterparties and payment systems via custodian banks .

custodian banks play a passive role in their clients' decisions , carrying out instructions .

as discussed in the " basel iii capital requirements " section above , under leverage ratios , including the slr , the same amount of capital must be held against any asset , irrespective of risk to ensure that banks have a minimum amount of total capital .

banks must hold capital against their deposits at central banks under the leverage or supplemental leverage ratio , although there is no risk associated with those deposits .

custody banks argue that this disproportionately burdens them because of their business model .

other observers counter that the purpose of the leverage ratio is to measure the amount of bank capital against assets regardless of risk , and to exempt "safe" assets undermines the usefulness of that measure .

section 402 of p.l .

115-174 allows for custody banks — defined by the legislation as banks predominantly engaged in custody , safekeeping , and asset servicing activities — to no longer hold capital against funds deposited at certain central banks to meet the slr , up to an amount equal to customer deposits linked to fiduciary , custodial , and safekeeping accounts .

all other banks would continue to be required to hold capital against central bank deposits .

in april 2019 , the banking regulators proposed a rule to implement this provision .

custody banks are generally an industry concept , not a regulatory concept .

p.l .

115-174 leaves it to bank regulators to define which banks meet the definition of "predominantly engaged in custody , safekeeping , and asset servicing activities. .

the proposed rule uses a ratio of at least 30 times more assets under custody than the banks' assets to determine "predominantly engaged. .

by this measure , three banks would qualify — bank of new york mellon , northern trust , and state street .

depending on who qualifies in the final rule , other large banks that offer custody services but do not qualify for relief under the "predominantly engaged" definition may be at a relative disadvantage under this provision .

under the proposed rule , northern trust would be able to reduce its capital by $3 for every $100 it deposits at central banks , and bank of new york mellon and state street ( as g - sibs ) would be able to reduce their capital by $6 for every $100 of banking subsidiary deposits at central banks — although the latter two would face a lower leverage ratio under the enhanced slr proposed rule discussed in the next section .

the proposed rule implementing section 402 estimates that the three eligible custody banks would be granted an exclusion equivalent to 21% to 30% of their assets and be able to reduce their capital requirements at the holding company level under the slr by an aggregate $8 billion .

however , the proposed rule states that the slr was not the binding capital requirement for the custody banks at the holding company level , but it was the binding requirement at the depository level for two of the banks , as of the third quarter of 2018 .

as a result , capital requirements would have declined by a combined $7 billion or 23% for those two banks had the rule been in effect .

as noted in the " basel iii capital requirements " section , g - sibs must currently comply with a higher slr than other banks with $250 billion in assets .

for g - sibs , the current enhanced slr is set at 5% at the holding company level and 6% for the depository subsidiary to be considered well capitalized .

in april 2018 , the fed and the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) proposed a rule to modify the enhanced slr for g - sibs .

instead of 5% and 6% , respectively , the enhanced slr would now be set for each g - sib at 3% plus half of its g - sib surcharge for both the holding company and the depository subsidiary .

in this way , the amount of capital required to be held by g - sibs would increase with their systemic importance .

because each g - sib has a surcharge that is less than 4% or 6% , respectively , the proposed rule would reduce capital requirements under the enhanced slr for each g - sib to between 3.75% and 4.75% , depending on the bank .

figure 3 compares the current slr requirement for g - sibs to the anticipated slr requirement for each g - sib if the proposed rule were finalized .

whether this reduces how much capital the g - sibs are required to hold depends on whether the slr is the binding capital ratio .

the fed reported that in 2017 , the slr was the binding ratio for each g - sib's bank subsidiary .

thus , the proposed rule would have reduced how much capital each g - sib had to hold at the subsidiary level by $121 billion in total .

the effect on the overall bhc would have been much smaller .

at the holding company level , the proposed rule would have reduced required capital by $400 million in total .

the fed argues that it is undesirable for the slr to be the binding capital requirement because it is intended to act as a backstop if risk - weighted requirements fail .

if the slr is the binding ratio , banks have more incentive to hold riskier assets .

to avoid having the slr be the binding ratio , banking regulators could raise risk - weighted capital requirements or reduce the slr , as is proposed .

the fed estimates that under the proposal , the slr would still be the binding ratio for three g - sibs .

the proposed rule would make similar changes to g - sibs' tlac requirement .

currently , g - sibs must meet a 9.5% leverage buffer under tlac .

under the proposed rule , g - sibs would be required to meet a leverage buffer equal to 7.5% plus half of their g - sib surcharge .

because all g - sibs currently have a surcharge below 4% , this would reduce their tlac requirement .

the proposed rule would also make a similar change to the tlac long - term debt requirement for g - sibs .

collectively , recent proposed changes would , to varying degrees , reduce capital and other advanced epr requirements for banks with more than $50 billion in assets .

in the view of the banking regulators and the supporters of p.l .

115-174 , these changes better tailor epr to match the risks that large banks pose .

opponents are concerned that the additional systemic and prudential risks these changes pose outweigh the benefits to society of reduced regulatory burden , believing that the benefits will mainly accrue to the affected banks .

one way these changes can be evaluated is by comparing the benefits of epr to its costs .

according to section 165 of the dodd - frank act , the purpose of enhanced regulation is "to prevent or mitigate risks to the financial stability of the united states that could arise from the material financial distress or failure , or ongoing activities , of large , interconnected financial institutions. .

general prudential regulation applying to all banks is intended to be microprudential , focusing mainly on the individual institution's safety and soundness .

enhanced regulation is intended to be macroprudential , focusing mainly on the broader systemic risk that large institutions pose .

in particular , it is meant to address concerns that large banks are tbtf .

enhanced regulation is not necessarily mutually exclusive with other policy approaches to eliminating tbtf , although combining approaches could dilute any single approach's effectiveness .

different parts of the dodd - frank act pursue several different approaches to eliminating tbtf .

in the case of proposed changes that would not apply to g - sibs , the main question from a systemic risk perspective is whether firms that have more than $50 billion in assets but are not g - sibs are a source of systemic risk .

if a bank does not pose systemic risk or is not perceived as tbtf , the main benefit of enhanced regulation is not present , "and it is subjected to unnecessary costs without any offsetting benefits. .

although there is widespread consensus that g - sibs pose the most systemic risk , there is little agreement on how much , if any , systemic risk is posed by the next tier of institutions .

ultimately , the risk to financial stability posed by a large bank failing — and the efficacy of epr in mitigating that risk — cannot be known for certain until a large bank fails , and no failure has occurred since the crisis .

quantifying the benefits of epr is difficult because the benefits of preventing another financial crisis are large , but the probability of another crisis at any given time is small .

furthermore , the ability to isolate the effects of any particular provision on financial stability is hindered because maintaining financial stability likely depends on the joint effects of a number of policies .

the effect of various proposals on systemic risk may jointly be greater than the sum of their individual parts .

although systemic risk mitigation is the main purpose of enhanced regulation , there are also other potential benefits that could be lost by reducing the number of banks subject to it .

first , enhanced regulation could reduce the likelihood that a bank's failure would result in taxpayer exposure to fdic insurance losses or due to "bailouts. .

for example , the government lost money on tarp investments following the financial crisis in some midsized institutions ( such as ally financial and cit group , which had between $50 billion and $250 billion in assets ) although they were not viewed as systemically important .

an inspector general report found that if washington mutual , which was taken into receivership in september 2008 , had been liquidated , it would have depleted the entire fdic deposit insurance fund .

second , epr could reduce the likelihood of a bank failure that did not pose systemic risk but could still result in localized or sectoral disruptions to the availability of credit and the provision of financial services .

third , some have argued that some enhanced prudential requirements ( eg , risk committees , chief risk officers , company - run stress tests ) represent good risk management practices that any large , well - managed firm should apply in the interest of shareholders .

comparing the magnitude of benefits to the costs epr imposes involves additional difficulty .

in general , enhanced prudential requirements impose costs on large banks .

however , the extent to which those costs are passed on to customers potentially depends on a variety of economic factors , such as the degree of market competition and the price sensitivity of customers .

furthermore , from an economic net benefit perspective , the cost to large banks is less relevant than the overall effects on the cost and availability of credit throughout the financial system .

if banks subject to epr face higher costs , then more credit will be supplied by other financial firms , at least partially offsetting the reduction in credit from banks subject to epr .

some of these firms will be small banks , but some financial intermediation could also migrate from large banks to firms that are not regulated for safety and soundness .

whether overall systemic risk is higher or lower if financial activity migrates from large banks subject to epr to less regulated sectors is beyond the scope of this report .

but in that sense , even if a heightened prudential regime worked as planned , net benefits ( i.e. , reduction of overall systemic risk ) could be smaller than anticipated .

the possibility that tbtf banks create market distortions creates additional considerations .

normally , higher costs imposed by regulation reduce economic efficiency , which must be balanced against the benefits they provide .

however , if tbtf banks create moral hazard — the theory that if tbtf firms expect that failure will be prevented , they have an incentive to take greater risks than they otherwise would because they are shielded from at least some negative consequences of those risks ( a market failure that reduces efficiency ) , then regulatory costs may increase efficiency ( from a societal perspective ) by reducing risk - taking .

put differently , if there is a tbtf "subsidy," then enhanced regulation may reduce that subsidy by partially offsetting the funding advantage that some believe is caused by moral hazard .

on these grounds , the costs and benefits of tailoring epr or removing some banks from epr will depend crucially on which banks are tbtf — a question that cannot be answered definitively until a bank fails .

tailoring also addresses the concern that enhanced regulation poses disproportionately greater compliance costs on smaller banks than on the largest banks .

some epr requirements are highly complex and more costly to comply with .

proponents of the recent proposals believe that epr could be modified to reduce costs for banks that are not tbtf without a substantial decline in benefits , while opponents disagree .

