b anks play a critical role in the united states economy , channeling money from savers to borrowers and facilitating productive investment .

among other things , banks provide loans to businesses , help individuals finance purchases of cars and homes , and offer services such as checking and savings accounts , debit cards , and atms .

in addition to occupying a central role in the american economy , the banking industry is a perennial subject of political interest .

while the nature of lawmakers' interest in bank regulation has shifted over time , most bank regulations fall into one of three general categories .

first , banks must abide by a variety of safety - and - soundness requirements designed to minimize the risk of their failure and maintain macroeconomic stability .

second , banks must comply with consumer protection rules intended to deter abusive practices and provide consumers with complete information about financial products and services .

third , banks are subject to various reporting , recordkeeping , and anti - money laundering requirements designed to assist law enforcement in investigating criminal activity .

the substantive content of these requirements remains the subject of intense debate .

however , the division of regulatory authority over banks between the federal government and the states plays a key role in shaping that content .

in some cases , federal law displaces ( or "preempts" ) state bank regulations .

in other cases , states are permitted to supplement federal regulations with different , sometimes stricter requirements .

because of its substantive implications , federal preemption has recently become a "flashpoint" in debates surrounding bank regulation , with one commentator observing that preemption is "[t]he issue at the center of most disputes between state and federal banking regulators. .

this report provides an overview of banking preemption .

first , the report discusses general principles of federal preemption .

second , the report provides a brief history of the american "dual banking system. .

third , the report discusses the supreme court's decision in barnett bank of marion county , n.a .

v. nelson , where the court held that federal law preempts state laws that "significantly interfere" with the powers of national banks .

fourth , the report reviews two supreme court decisions concerning the extent to which states may exercise "visitorial powers" over national banks .

fifth , the report discusses the office of the comptroller of the currency's ( occ's ) preemption rules and provisions in the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act concerning the preemption of state consumer protection laws .

finally , the report outlines a number of current issues in banking preemption , including ( 1 ) the extent to which non - banks can benefit from federal preemption of state usury laws , ( 2 ) the occ's decision to grant special purpose national bank charters to financial technology ( fintech ) companies , and ( 3 ) proposals to provide legal protections to banks serving marijuana businesses that comply with state law .

while the regulatory treatment of national and state banks has accordingly converged , federal preemption nevertheless confers certain unique benefits on national banks .

under the supreme court's decision in barnett bank of marion county , n.a .

v. nelson , federal laws that grant national banks the power to engage in specific activities impliedly preempt state laws that "significantly interfere" with the ability of national banks to engage in those activities .

in barnett bank , the court held that a federal law granting national banks the authority to sell insurance impliedly preempted a state law that prohibited banks from selling insurance , subject to certain exceptions .

in reaching this conclusion , the court explained that the state law posed an obstacle to the federal statute's purpose of granting national banks the authority to sell insurance "whether or not a state grants .

 .

 .

similar approval. .

the court inferred this purpose from the principle that "normally congress would not want states to forbid , or to impair significantly , the exercise of a power that congress explicitly granted. .

lower courts have followed barnett bank 's rule that absent indications to the contrary , federal statutes and regulations that grant national banks the power to engage in specific activities preempt state laws that prohibit or "significantly interfere" with those activities .

in wells fargo bank of texas n.a .

v. james , for example , the fifth circuit held that an occ rule granting national banks the power to "charge [their] customers non - interest charges and fees" preempted a state statute prohibiting banks from charging a fee for cashing checks in certain circumstances .

similarly , in monroe retail , inc. v. rbs citizens , n.a .

 , the sixth circuit held that this rule preempted state law conversion claims brought against a class of national banks based on fees they charged for processing garnishment orders .

specifically , the sixth circuit reasoned that under barnett bank , "the level of 'interference' that gives rise to preemption under the nba is not very high," and that the relevant conversion claims "significantly interfere[d]" with national banks' ability to collect fees .

finally , the ninth circuit employed similar reasoning in rose v. chase bank usa , n.a .

 , where it held that an nba provision granting national banks the power to "loan money on personal security" preempted a state statute imposing various disclosure requirements on credit card issuers .

in arriving at this conclusion , the ninth circuit reasoned that "[w]here .

 .

 .

congress has explicitly granted a power to a national bank without any indication that congress intended for that power to be subject to local restriction , congress is presumed to have intended to preempt state laws. .

federal courts have also adopted broad interpretations of an nba provision authorizing national banks to dismiss officers "at pleasure. .

in schweikert v. bank of america , n.a .

 , the fourth circuit held that this provision preempted a state law claim for wrongful discharge brought by a former officer of a national bank .

similarly , the ninth circuit has held that this provision preempted a claim brought by a former officer of a national bank for breach of an employment agreement , reasoning that "[a]n agreement which attempts to circumvent the complete discretion of a national bank's board of directors to terminate an officer at will is void as against [federal] public policy. .

finally , in wiersum v. u.s. bank , n.a .

 , the eleventh circuit relied on barnett bank and the fourth circuit's reasoning in schweikert to conclude that this "at pleasure" provision preempted a wrongful - termination claim brought by a former officer of a national bank under a state whistleblower statute .

while federal courts have accordingly adopted expansive views of the circumstances in which state laws "significantly interfere" with national banks' powers , they have also recognized certain general limits on the preemptive scope of federal banking statutes and regulations .

in gutierrez v. wells fargo bank , na , for example , the ninth circuit held that federal banking regulations did not preempt a generally applicable state law prohibiting certain types of fraud .

the gutierrez litigation involved a national bank's use of a bookkeeping method known as "high - to - low" posting for debit - card transactions , whereby the bank posted large transactions to customers' accounts before small transactions .

in gutierrez , customers of the bank brought a variety of state law claims based on the theory that the bank adopted high - to - low posting for the sole purpose of maximizing the overdraft fees it could charge customers .

in response , the bank argued that occ regulations preempted the state law claims .

the ninth circuit held that the occ regulations preempted some , but not all , of the customers' claims .

specifically , the court held that an occ regulation authorizing national banks to establish the method of calculating noninterest charges and fees "in [their] discretion" preempted claims premised on the theory that high - to - low posting was an unfair business practice .

the court also held an occ regulation providing that national banks may exercise their deposit - taking powers "without regard to state law limitations concerning .

 .

 .

disclosure requirements" preempted the customers' claims that the bank failed to affirmatively disclose its use of high - to - low posting .

however , the court held that federal law did not preempt claims that the bank defrauded its customers by making misleading statements about its posting method .

specifically , the court reasoned that these claims survived preemption because they were based on "a non - discriminating state law of general applicability that does not conflict with federal law , frustrate the purposes of the [nba] , or impair the efficiency of national banks to discharge their duties. .

in reaching this conclusion , the court rejected the argument that federal law preempted the customers' fraud claims because those claims "necessarily touche[d] on" national banks' authority to provide checking accounts .

the court rejected this argument on the grounds that such an expansive preemption standard "would swallow all laws. .

the ninth circuit accordingly allowed the customers' fraud claims to proceed because they did not "significantly interfere" with national banks' ability to offer checking accounts .

while the implications of barnett bank have been fleshed out most thoroughly in the lower federal courts , the supreme court has also applied that decision's reasoning in two cases concerning an nba provision prohibiting states from exercising "visitorial powers" over national banks .

in watters v. wachovia bank , n.a .

 , the court held that this provision — together with an occ regulation providing that national banks may conduct authorized activities through operating subsidiaries — preempted state licensing , reporting , and visitation requirements for the operating subsidiaries of national banks .

specifically , the court reasoned that the proper inquiry in analyzing whether state law interferes with federally permitted bank activities "focuse[s] on the exercise of a national bank's powers , not on its corporate structure. .

the court accordingly concluded that the operating subsidiaries of national banks should be treated "as equivalent to national banks with respect to powers exercised under federal law. .

and because "duplicative state examination , supervision , and regulation would significantly burden" national banks' ability to engage in authorized activities , the court held that those same regulatory burdens also unacceptably interfere with the ability of national bank subsidiaries to engage in those activities .

however , as discussed later in this report , congress has abrogated watters 's holding that states may not examine or regulate the activities of national bank subsidiaries .

while the court adopted a broad view of preemption in watters , it cabined the preemptive effect of the relevant nba provision two years later in cuomo v. c learing house association , llc .

in that decision , the court held that this nba provision did not preempt an information request that the new york attorney general ( nyag ) sent to several national banks .

specifically , the nyag had sent letters to several national banks requesting nonpublic information about their lending practices in order to determine whether the banks had violated state fair lending laws .

in response , a banking trade group and the occ argued that the relevant nba provision — together with an occ regulation interpreting that provision to mean that "[s]tate officials may not .

 .

 .

prosecut[e] enforcement actions" against national banks , "except in limited circumstances authorized by federal law" — preempted the information request .

the supreme court rejected this interpretation of the nba's visitorial powers provision , drawing a distinction between ( 1 ) "supervision," or "the right to oversee corporate affairs," which qualify as "visitorial powers," and ( 2 ) "law enforcement. .

because the court concluded that the nyag had issued the information requests in his "law enforcement" capacity — as opposed to "acting in the role of sovereign - as - supervisor" — it held that the nba did not preempt the requests .

as the above discussion makes clear , occ regulations have figured prominently in litigation over the preemptive scope of federal banking law .

while some commentators have contended that the nba's text and legislature history implicitly provides the occ with the authority to promulgate preemption rules , congress formally recognized that the occ has such authority in the riegle - neal interstate banking and branching efficiency act of 1994 ( riegle - neal act ) .

specifically , section 114 of the riegle - neal act provides that "[b]efore issuing any opinion letter or interpretive rule .

 .

 .

that concludes that federal law preempts the application to a national bank of any state law" concerning certain specified subjects , the occ must give the public notice and an opportunity submit written comments .

in the 1990s and early 2000s , the occ exercised this authority in a number of interpretive letters and legal opinions .

in these documents , the occ took the position that federal law preempted state laws that limited the ability of national banks to: advertise ; operate offices within a certain distance from state - chartered bank home offices ; operate atm machines ; engage in fiduciary activities ; finance automobile purchases ; sell annuities ; sell repossessed automobiles without an automobile dealer license ; and conduct internet auctions of certificates of deposit .

as the debates over section 1044 of dodd - frank make clear , a number of banking preemption issues remain the subject of active debate .

this final section of the report discusses three additional current issues involving banking preemption and related federalism questions .

a number of recent judicial decisions have generated debate over the circumstances in which non - bank financial companies can benefit from banks' ability to "export" the maximum interest rates of their "home" states .

as discussed , the supreme court has held that national banks may charge any interest rate allowable under the laws of their home states even when lending to borrowers in other states with stricter usury laws .

after this decision , congress extended the power to export maximum interest rates to federally insured state banks .

recently , courts have grappled with whether this exportation power extends to non - bank financial companies and debt collectors that purchase loans originated by federally insured banks .

that is , courts have addressed the circumstances in which loans originated by federally insured banks remain subject to the usury laws of the banks' home states even when the loans are ( 1 ) made to borrowers in other states with stricter usury laws , and ( 2 ) subsequently purchased by non - banks , which do not possess the exportation power when they originate loans themselves .

a number of courts have concluded that in certain contexts , a loan that is non - usurious when originated remains non - usurious irrespective of the identity of its subsequent purchasers — a principle that some commentators have labeled the "valid when made" doctrine .

however , in 2015 , the second circuit rejected the application of this rule in madden v. midland funding , holding that non - bank debt collectors that had purchased debt originated by a national bank could not benefit from the bank's exportation power .

in madden , a new york resident brought a putative class action under new york usury law against debt collectors that had purchased her credit card debt from a delaware - based national bank .

in response , the debt collectors argued that federal law preempted the new york usury claims because the credit card debt had been originated by a delaware - based national bank and was not usurious under delaware law .

the second circuit rejected this argument , reasoning that the application of new york usury law to the debt collectors did not "significantly interfere" with the national bank's powers under barnett bank .

specifically , the court reasoned that because the debt collectors were not national banks and were not acting "on behalf of" a national bank , the new york usury claims did not interfere with the national bank's power to export the maximum interest rates of its home state .

the second circuit's decision in madden has generated significant debate .

in an amicus brief supporting the debt collectors' petition for re - hearing before the second circuit , industry groups argued that the decision threatened to seriously disrupt lending markets .

specifically , these groups argued that the court's decision would "significantly impair" banks' ability to manage their risk by selling loans in secondary credit markets — a result that would ultimately inhibit their capacity to originate loans .

similarly , in an amicus brief submitted to the supreme court , the occ and the office of the solicitor general ( osg ) argued that the second circuit's decision was "incorrect," reasoning that "[a] national bank's federal right to charge interest up to the rate allowed by [the nba] would be significantly impaired if [a] national bank's assignee could not continue to charge that rate. .

in response , the plaintiff in madden argued that the second circuit's decision is unlikely to significantly affect credit markets .

specifically , the madden plaintiff argued that the court's decision will not disrupt credit markets because non - banks that purchase loans originated by banks retain the right to collect the balances of those loans within applicable state law usury limits .

while the second circuit ultimately denied the debt collectors' petition for re - hearing and the supreme court denied their petition for a writ of certiorari , the madden decision has attracted congressional interest .

the financial choice act — comprehensive regulatory reform legislation that passed the house of representatives in june 2017 but did not become law — would have codified the "valid when made" doctrine and abrogated madden .

a more limited bill directed solely at codifying the "valid when made" doctrine ( h.r .

3299 ) also passed the house in february 2018 but did not become law .

echoing the arguments made by industry groups , the bill's sponsor contended that the second circuit's decision will harm credit markets and impede financial innovation .

by contrast , the bill's critics argued that it would facilitate predatory lending by allowing non - banks to evade state usury laws .

these proposals have not been re - introduced in the 116th congress .

in a number of cases involving the scope of the exportation doctrine , non - bank financial companies have played a more active role in the origination process than the debt collectors in madden .

specifically , a number of these cases have involved arrangements in which a non - bank financial company solicits borrowers , directs a partner bank to originate a high - interest loan , and purchases the loan from the bank shortly after origination in order to benefit from the bank's exportation power .

some courts have held that non - banks employing these so - called "rent - a - charter" schemes are not eligible for federal preemption , reasoning that preemption depends on a transaction's economic realities rather than its formal characteristics .

specifically , these courts have concluded that non - banks do not assume their partner banks' exportation power when the economic realities surrounding a transaction indicate that the non - banks are the "true lenders. .

according to this "true lender" doctrine , non - banks that have established these types of relationships qualify as the "true lenders" when they possess the "predominant economic interest" in the relevant loans when the loans are originated .

in these circumstances , some courts have concluded that the non - banks are not entitled to the benefits of federal preemption .

like the second circuit's decision in madden , these "true lender" decisions have attracted congress's attention .

in the 115th congress , h.r .

4439 would have abrogated this line of decisions by making clear that a loan's originator is always the "true lender" for purposes of the exportation doctrine .

the bill's supporters argued that the "true lender" decisions threaten to undermine partnerships between banks and fintech companies — a broad category of businesses offering digital financial products that some commentators have hailed for their innovative potential .

the bill's opponents , by contrast , contended that the legislation would allow non - banks to circumvent state usury laws and questioned the value of bank - fintech partnerships designed with that purpose in mind .

h.r .

4439 was referred to the house committee on financial services during the 115th congress but has not been re - introduced in the 116th congress .

congress is not alone in considering whether to extend the benefits of federal preemption to fintech companies .

in july 2018 , the occ issued a policy statement announcing that it will begin accepting applications for "special purpose national bank charters" ( spnb charters ) from fintech companies that are engaged in "the business of banking" but do not take deposits .

in the policy statement , the occ explained that the nba provides it "broad authority" to grant national bank charters to institutions that engage in the "business of banking" — a category that includes paying checks and lending money .

the occ accordingly concluded that it has the statutory authority to grant national bank charters to fintech companies that engage in these core banking activities .

according to the occ , spnb charters will help foster responsible innovation and promote regulatory consistency between fintech companies and traditional banks .

the occ further explained that it will use its existing chartering standards and procedures to evaluate applications for spnb charters , and that fintech companies that receive such charters "will be supervised like similarly situated national banks , including with respect to capital , liquidity , and risk management. .

while the occ touted the ability of spnb charters to "level the playing field with regulated institutions" without explicitly mentioning federal preemption , commentators have observed that preemption represents "the central benefit" offered by such charters .

the occ's decision to accept applications for national bank charters from fintech companies has generated debate .

critics of the policy have contended that fintech companies' interest in such charters "is virtually entirely about avoiding state consumer protection laws," and that "[f]ederal chartering should not be a move to eviscerate" such laws .

state regulators have also filed lawsuits challenging the occ's authority to charter non - depository fintech companies .

in the spring of 2017 , the conference of state bank supervisors ( csbs ) and the new york department of financial services ( nydfs ) responded to an early occ proposal to charter fintech companies by filing suits in the u.s. district court for the district of columbia and the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york , respectively .

the csbs and nydfs made substantially similar claims , arguing that ( 1 ) the nba does not give the occ the authority to charter non - depository institutions , ( 2 ) the administrative procedure act requires the occ to follow notice - and - comment rulemaking procedures before issuing spnbs , ( 3 ) the occ's decision was arbitrary and capricious , and ( 4 ) the occ's decision violated the tenth amendment by invading states' sovereign powers .

both district courts dismissed the lawsuits on jurisdictional grounds , reasoning that the organizations failed to identify any imminent injuries to their members and that the case was not ripe for resolution because the occ had not issued any spnbs .

however , after the occ issued its policy statement in july 2018 , both organizations filed new lawsuits that remain pending .

policymakers have also turned their attention to how federal law affects traditional banks' responses to changes in state law — namely , state - level efforts to legalize marijuana .

while a number of states have legalized marijuana for medical or recreational use , federal law criminalizes the drug's sale , distribution , and possession , in addition to the aiding and abetting of such activities .

federal law also criminalizes money laundering , making it unlawful to: conduct a financial transaction involving the proceeds of a specified unlawful activity — a category that includes the sale or distribution of marijuana — "knowing that the transaction is designed .

 .

 .

to conceal or disguise the nature , the location , the source , the ownership or the control of the proceeds .

 .

 .

or to avoid a transaction reporting requirement under state or federal law" ; or knowingly engage in a monetary transaction in criminally derived property of a value greater than $10,000 that is derived from specified unlawful activity .

finally , the bank secrecy act ( bsa ) and associated regulations require that financial institutions report illegal and suspicious activities to the financial crimes enforcement network ( fincen ) and maintain programs designed to prevent money laundering .

federal banking regulators have broad powers to discipline banks for violations of these laws .

the federal reserve regularly conducts examinations of member banks that include evaluations of bsa compliance , and the fdic has the authority to terminate a bank's deposit insurance for violations of law .

because of marijuana's status under federal law , many banks have refused to serve marijuana businesses even when those businesses operate in compliance with state law .

while some small banks have offered accounts to marijuana businesses , an estimated 70 percent of marijuana businesses remain unbanked .

because of this inability to access the banking system , many marijuana businesses reportedly operate entirely in cash , raising concerns about tax collection and public safety .

these perceived problems have attracted congressional interest .

in march 2019 , the house committee on financial services approved legislation intended to minimize the legal risks associated with banking the marijuana industry .

the proposed bill — h.r .

1595 , the safe banking act of 2019 — would create a "safe harbor" under which federal banking regulators could not take various adverse actions against depository institutions for serving marijuana businesses that comply with applicable state laws ( "cannabis - related legitimate businesses" ) .

the legislation would also provide that for purposes of federal anti - money laundering law , the proceeds from transactions conducted by cannabis - related legitimate businesses shall not qualify as the proceeds of unlawful activity "solely because the transaction[s] [were] conducted by a cannabis - related legitimate business. .

finally , h.r .

1595 would require fincen to issue guidance concerning the preparation of suspicious activity reports for cannabis - related legitimate businesses that is "consistent with the purpose and intent" of the bill and "does not significantly inhibit the provision of financial services" to cannabis - related legitimate businesses .

variations on some of the safe banking act's provisions have been incorporated into broader marijuana - related legislation .

the responsibly addressing marijuana policy gap act of 2019 ( s. 421 and h.r .

1119 ) would eliminate federal criminal penalties for persons who engage in various marijuana - related activities in compliance with state law and create a "safe harbor" from adverse regulatory action for depository institutions that serve marijuana businesses .

another senate bill — s. 1028 , the states act — would provide that the controlled substances act's ( csa's ) marijuana - related provisions do not apply to persons acting in compliance with state marijuana regulation s , subject to certain exceptions .

while the bill does not have the type of "safe harbor" for depository institutions in h.r .

1595 , s. 421 , or h.r .

1119 , it contains a "rule of construction" clarifying that conduct in compliance with the legislation shall not serve as the basis for federal money laundering charges or criminal forfeiture under the csa .

