the 2017 tax revision , p.l .

115-97 , often referred to as the tax cuts and jobs act , and referred to subsequently as the act , was estimated to reduce taxes by $1.5 trillion over 10 years .

the act permanently reduced the corporate tax rate to 21% , made a number of revisions in business tax deductions ( including limits on interest deductions ) , and provided a major revision in the international tax rules .

it also substantially revised individual income taxes , including an increase in the standard deduction and child credit largely offset by eliminating personal exemptions , along with rate cuts , limits on itemized deductions ( primarily a dollar cap on the state and local tax deduction ) , and a 20% deduction for pass - through businesses ( businesses taxed under the individual rather than the corporate tax , such as partnerships ) .

these individual provisions are temporary and are scheduled to expire after 2025 .

the act also adopted temporary provisions allowing the immediate deduction for equipment investment and an increase in the exemption for estate and gift taxes .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimated in april of 2018 that the act would result in a $65 billion reduction in individual income taxes , a $94 billion reduction in corporate taxes , and a $3 billion reduction in other taxes , for a total of $163 billion ( after rounding ) for fy2018 .

numerous effects of the act were projected during consideration of the law and shortly after , including an increase in output and investment ; an increase in the debt to gdp ratio ; possible benefits for workers from tax cuts for businesses ; the repatriation of income held abroad by u.s. subsidiaries in the form of dividends ; and a decreased likelihood of inversions ( u.s. companies moving their headquarters abroad ) .

some claimed that business investment would increase because of ( 1 ) the flow of investment from abroad due to the lower corporate tax rate and ( 2 ) no longer imposing a tax penalty on paying dividends from foreign subsidiaries would free up resources .

this analysis examines the preliminary effects of the act during the first year , 2018 .

in some cases it is difficult to determine the effects of the tax cuts ( eg , on economic growth ) given the other factors that affect outcomes .

in other cases , such as the level of repatriation and use of repatriated funds , the evidence is more compelling .

this report discusses these potential consequences in light of the data available after the first year .

overall revenue changes were close to projections , with revenues only $9 billion smaller than projected , due to a $45 billion increase in individual income tax revenues , but a $7 billion decrease in payroll taxes , along with a $40 billion decline in corporate revenues .

as noted above , data on gdp are not consistent with a large growth effect in 2018 , and thus the tax cut is unlikely to provide enough growth to significantly offset revenue losses in 2018 .

data from fy2018 suggest that the tax cut for corporations may have been larger than the $94 billion cbo projected in its april 2018 baseline .

that baseline projected corporate revenues of $243 billion , but actual corporate revenues were $38 billion lower at $205 billion , 16% lower than projected .

cbo's january 2019 report on the budget and economic outlook indicated that these lower corporate tax revenues could not be explained by economic conditions and stated that the causes will not be apparent until information from tax returns becomes available over the next two years .

cbo also expected this decline in revenues to dissipate over time .

with little evidence of whether the decline will actually be temporary or permanent , cbo may have relied on the historical tendency of unexplained changes to dissipate over time .

it is also possible that estimated revenue losses from the corporate tax changes were too low in their earlier estimates .

the overall revenues were close to those projected as the lower corporate revenues were offset by gains from other taxes: a $45 billion increase in individual income tax revenues and a $7 billion decrease in payroll taxes .

these differences , particularly for payroll taxes , are much smaller as a percentage of revenue , and cbo does not indicate any need for an explanation of these changes outside of economic forces .

effective tax rates fell , with corporate effective tax rates declining significantly and individual effective income tax rates by a small amount .

distributional analyses of the tax change suggested that the tax revision favored higher - income taxpayers , in part because most of the tax cut benefited corporations and in part because the individual income tax cut largely went to higher - income individuals .

during the debate about taxes , however , arguments were made that these corporate tax cuts would benefit workers due to growth in investment and the capital stock .

after enactment , cbo projected these effects to be relatively small , with increases in labor productivity ( which should affect the wage rate ) negligible in 2018 and growing to 0.3% of gdp after 10 years .

cbo projected that the total wage bill would grow because of the increase in employment and hours per worker of 0.2% in 2018 .

the labor supply response would rise through 2024 , peaking at 0.8% and then decline as the individual tax cuts expired .

a council of economic advisors ( cea ) october 2017 study suggested a corporate rate reduction from 35% to 20% , if enacted , would eventually increase the average household's income by a conservative $4,000 a year .

this was a longer - run estimate , but the study also estimated that workers would immediately get a significant share ( 30% ) of the profits repatriated from abroad due to tax changes .

another cea october 2017 report suggested wages could increase by up to $9,000 with such a corporate rate change using more optimistic assumptions .

while the cea study with respect to the $4,000 to $9,000 amounts referred to a long - term effect , the study was portrayed by the administration as indicating an immediate effect .

the amounts associated with repatriation were short term .

a $4,000 to $9,000 effect per household , given the 126 million households that were estimated at that time , would produce a total effect ranging from $504 billion to $1,134 billion , or between 2.5% and 5.7% of gdp in 2018 .

the corporate rate cut from 35% to 21% cost about $125 billion over a full year , and it would cost about $133 billion with the additional percentage point rate reduction ( to 20% ) considered at that time .

thus , in these scenarios , the effects of the tax cuts would be many times ( 3.8 to 8.5 ) larger than the costs .

the projections for long - run growth in the cea study relied on a range of empirical economics literature , including the effects of changes in user cost on investment cost and corporate tax incidence .

the econometric estimates of corporate tax incidence are problematic for a number of reasons , and the effects on investment considering user cost did not appear to take into account the direct effect of the tax rate change on the interest .

in the absence of the tax cuts , wages should grow with the economy and wage rates should grow as the capital stock grows .

in addition , tight labor markets resulting from the approach to full employment should have put upward pressure on wage rates in any case .

evidence from 2018 indicated that labor compensation , adjusted to real values by the price indices for personal consumption expenditures , grew slower than output in general , at a 2.3% rate compared with a 2.9% growth rate overall .

if adjusted by the gdp deflator , labor compensation grew by 2.0% .

with labor representing 53% of gdp , that implies that the other components grew at 3.8% .

thus , pretax profits and economic depreciation ( the price of capital ) grew faster than wages .

figure 4 shows the growth rate of real wages compared with the growth rate of real gdp for 2013-2018 , indicating that wage growth has sometimes been faster than gdp growth and sometimes slower .

there is no indication of a surge in wages in 2018 either compared to history or relative to gdp growth .

this finding is consistent with the cbo projection of a modest effect .

the department of labor reports that average weekly wages of production and nonsupervisory workers were $742 in 2017 and $766 in 2018 .

wages , assuming full - time work , increased by $1,248 annually .

but this number must account for inflation and growth that would otherwise have occurred regardless of the tax change .

the nominal growth rate in wages was 3.2% , but adjusting for the gdp price deflator , real wages increased by 1.2% .

this growth is smaller than overall growth in labor compensation and indicates that ordinary workers had very little growth in wage rates .

one of the major sources of anticipated increased investment through supply - side effects is international capital flows , particularly in the short and medium term .

savings rates tend to be relatively unresponsive to changes in the rate of return and savings accumulate slowly .

thus the increased investment in the united states ( in the aggregate ) would need to come from abroad .

some expected foreign investment to flow due to the reduction in the user cost of capital .

some also argued that eliminating the tax barrier to repatriating funds ( as was done with the tax revision ) would lead to reinvestment in the united states of unrepatriated earnings held abroad in u.s. subsidiaries .

under prior law , these earnings would have been taxed at 35% , adjusted for credits on foreign taxes paid , if paid as dividends to the parent company .

the tax change exempted dividends from tax , imposed a transition tax on deemed repatriations of existing untaxed earnings at a rate lower than the new corporate rate of 21% ( 15.5% on liquid assets and 8% on illiquid assets ) , and imposed a global minimum tax on intangible income .

these changes meant paying dividends resulted in no tax consequences .

although estimates varied , they indicated close to $3 trillion of unrepatriated earnings .

there were a number of criticisms of the possibility that repatriation of these earnings would stimulate investment , considering the evidence that a repatriation holiday in 2004 had not affected investment .

not all of these amounts were held in cash , as some were earnings reinvested in physical assets ( such as plant and equipment ) and some might be invested in other assets that were not cash equivalents .

a federal reserve study estimated that $1 trillion was held in cash .

a significant amount of repatriations occurred in 2018 , as compared both to history and 2017 .

dividends in the previous three years ranged from $144 billion to $158 billion , as shown in figure 5 , whereas $664 billion was repatriated in 2018 .

simultaneously , reinvested earnings declined sharply before returning to more normal levels in the 4 th quarter of 2018 .

it is important , however , to measure international capital flows in true terms that reflect the inflow of resources for capital investment and not by financial transactions , such as repatriation of income earned abroad through dividend payments from foreign subsidiaries .

capital investment involves resources that reflect actual investment in the united states .

it could involve imports of investment goods directly , or it could involve imports of consumption goods that free up other resources for investment .

in either case , the true capital invested in the united states is largely measured by the excess of exports over imports , or more precisely by the current account , which can also include a small amount of net income payments .

in more fundamental terms , investment from abroad occurs in a real sense only when the amount of imported goods exceeds the amount of u.s. exports .

to measure this aggregate change in net capital inflows , examine the balance on the current account , which is generally negative , indicating a net capital inflow ( imports exceed exports , or a trade deficit ) .

adjusting these amounts by the gdp deflator and looking at the change , there was a small increase that amounted to 0.8% of private investment .

this change is relatively small and is not out of line with historical fluctuations ; see figure 6 .

again , many factors can affect net capital inflows , including domestic borrowing by the government and domestic saving , but the evidence does not suggest a surge in investment from abroad in 2018 .

increased funds , whether accessed from abroad or through tax cuts , could be used in several ways: investment , paying down debt , increasing wages , paying wage bonuses , paying dividends , or repurchasing shares .

during the passage of the tax revision and in the immediate aftermath , some argued that firms would use these funds to pay worker bonuses ( as discussed in the previous section on wages ) .

subsequently , a number of firms announced bonuses , which in some cases they attributed to the tax cut .

one organization that tracks these bonuses has reported a total of $4.4 billion .

with us employment of 157 million , this amount is $28 per worker .

this amount is 2% to 3% of the corporate tax cut , and a smaller share of repatriated funds .

it is consistent with what most economists would expect that a small percentage of increased corporate profits or repatriated funds ( if any ) would be used to compensate workers , as economic theory indicates that firms would pay workers their marginal product , a result of fundamental supply and demand forces .

the bonus announcements could have reflected a desire to pay bonuses when they would be deducted at 35% rather than 21% ( in late 2017 for firms with calendar tax years but in 2018 for firms with different tax years ) .

worker bonuses could also be a result of a tight labor market and attributed to the tax cut as a public relations move .

much of these funds , the data indicate , has been used for a record - breaking amount of stock buybacks , with $1 trillion announced by the end of 2018 .

a similar share of repurchases happened in 2004 , when a tax holiday allowed firms to voluntarily bring back earnings at a lower rate .

during the discussion of corporate tax revision over a number of years , one important issue repeatedly raised was the effect of the current tax system on incentives for firms to relocate abroad , or "invert. .

inversions involved firms relocating their headquarters to low - tax jurisdictions that generally had territorial taxes , allowing firms to shift profits out of their u.s. operations ( so - called earnings stripping ) as well as providing potential paths to repatriate earnings without taxes .

the earliest of these inversions , beginning in the early 1980s , were called "naked inversions," where a company simply relocated its headquarters without otherwise changing its activities .

a number of legislative and regulatory actions largely ended these types of inversions .

in 2004 , the american jobs creation act ( p.l .

108-357 ) required that any firm in which the former u.s. owners owned 80% or more of the new firm would continue to be treated as a u.s. firm .

firms with 60% to 80% ownership by former shareholders of the u.s. firm were considered inverted firms and subject to certain penalty taxes .

this legislation allowed naked inversions in cases where the firm had substantial business activity in the new headquarters country , but regulations issued in 2012 tightened these requirements after a series of inversions used this rule to relocate .

in 2014 , a new wave of inversions that involved mergers with smaller foreign firms began , with one of the most prominent being an announcement that pfizer , the pharmaceutical company , would acquire astra - zeneca with a uk headquarters ( although this merger never took place ) .

these inversions gave rise to a number of legislative proposals , but also led to numerous regulatory proposals , which were released in 2014 , 2015 , and 2016 .

these regulations addressed a number of issues , including restricting the use of serial inversions to allow a firm to fall under the ownership limits , limiting the ability to access earnings of subsidiaries abroad , and limiting earnings stripping through locating debt in the united states .

the 2017 act contained several provisions that made inversions less attractive ( aside from the lower corporate tax rate ) .

one notable provision required firms that inverted in the next 10 years to pay a deemed repatriation tax at 35% , rather than at the lower rates of 8% for non - cash holdings and 15.5% for cash or cash equivalents .

the act introduced a new minimum tax to address international profit shifting , the base erosion and anti - abuse tax ( beat ) , which adds back payments between related domestic and foreign companies to base income and then taxes that base at a lower rate .

beat excludes payments which reduce gross receipts with the result that payment for the cost of goods sold is not included under beat .

an exception applies for firms that invert after november 9 , 2017 , where payments to a foreign parent or any foreign firm in the affiliated group for cost of goods sold is included in beat .

the legislation also contained some other provisions making inversions less attractive .

the act also modified asset attribution rules .

the constructive ownership rules for purposes of determining 10% u.s. shareholders , whether a corporation is a controlled foreign corporation ( cfc ) , and whether parties satisfy certain relatedness tests , which can trigger certain tax provisions including restrictive ones , were expanded in the 2017 tax revision .

specifically , the new law treats stock owned by a foreign person as attributable to a u.s. entity owned by the foreign person ( so - called "downward attribution" ) .

as a result , stock owned by a foreign person may generally be attributed to ( 1 ) a u.s. corporation , 10% of the value of the stock of which is owned , directly or indirectly , by the foreign person ; ( 2 ) a u.s. partnership in which the foreign person is a partner ; and ( 3 ) certain u.s. trusts if the foreign person is a beneficiary or , in certain circumstances , a grantor or a substantial owner .

the downward attribution rule was originally conceived to deal with inversions .

in an inversion , without downward attribution , a subsidiary of the original u.s. parent could lose cfc status if it sold enough stock to the new foreign parent so the u.s. parent no longer had majority ownership .

with downward attribution , the ownership of stock by the new foreign parent in the cfc is attributed to the u.s. parent , so that the subsidiary continues its cfc status , making it subject to any tax rules that apply to cfcs ( such as subpart f and repatriation taxes under the old law , and subpart f and global low - taxed income ( gilti ) under the new law ) .

the act also contained other provisions affecting stockholders and stock compensation .

these provisions were intended to discourage inversions .

dividends ( like capital gains ) are taxed at lower rates than ordinary income .

the rates are 0% , 15% , and 20% depending on the rate bracket that ordinary income falls into .

certain dividends received from foreign firms ( those that do not have tax treaties and passive foreign investment companies ( pfics ) ) are not eligible for these lower rates .

dividends paid by firms that inverted after the date of enactment of p.l .

115-97 are added to the list of those not eligible for the lower rates .

also , in 2004 , an excise tax of 15% was imposed on stock compensation received by insiders in an expatriated corporation ; the 2017 act increased it to 20% , effective on the date of enactment for corporations that first become expatriated after that date .

these new laws did not change the definition of inverted firms but rather the consequences of inversions .

although the legislative changes in the 2017 act contributed to making inversions less attractive , announced inversions had already slowed substantially following the regulatory changes implemented in 2014 , 2015 , and 2016 .

in addition , data released by the bureau of economic analysis indicated that foreign acquisitions of us companies , which rose substantially in 2015 , fell by 15% in 2016 and 32% in 2017 ( data not available for 2018 ) .

some of the largest declines were in inversion - associated countries , such as ireland , where acquisitions fell from $176 billion in 2015 , to $35 billion in 2016 , and to $7 billion in 2017 .

