t he livestock mandatory reporting ( lmr ) act of 1999 ( p.l .

106-78 , title ix ; 7 u.s.c .

â§ 1635 et seq. ) .

amended the agricultural marketing act of 1946 ( 7 u.s.c .

â§1621 et seq. ) .

to require that meat packers report prices and other information on purchases of cattle , swine , and boxed beef ( wholesale cuts of beef ) to the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

lamb and lamb meat were added through initial rulemaking , and the act was amended to include wholesale pork in 2010 .

in september 2015 , congress reauthorized lmr until september 30 , 2020 , in the enacted agriculture reauthorizations act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-54 ) .

in past reauthorizations , most livestock industry stakeholders have supported reauthorization of the act and put forward proposals amending mandatory reporting .

this report provides an overview of lmr and its legislative and rulemaking history ; a description of the lmr program ; and issues that the cattle , swine , and lamb industries have raised with usda that could be considered during possible reauthorization .

information on house and senate bills that would reauthorize lmr will be added should they become available .

before congress enacted lmr in 1999 , the usda agricultural marketing service ( ams ) collected livestock and meat price and related market information from meat packers on a voluntary basis under the authority of the agricultural marketing act of 1946 .

ams market reporters collected and reported prices from livestock auctions , feedlots , and packing plants .

the information was disseminated through hundreds of daily , weekly , monthly , and annual written and electronic usda reports on sales of live cattle , hogs , and sheep and wholesale meat products from these animals .

the goal was to provide all buyers and sellers with accurate and objective market information .

by the 1990s , the livestock industry had undergone many changes , including increased concentration in meat packing and animal feeding , production specialization , and vertical integration ( firms controlling more than one aspect of production ) .

fewer animals were sold through negotiated ( cash or "spot" ) sales , while an increasing number of purchases were made under alternative marketing arrangements ( eg , formula purchases based on a negotiated price established in the future ) .

these formula purchases were based on prices not publicly disclosed or reported .

some livestock producers , believing that such arrangements made it difficult or impossible for them to assess "fair" market prices for livestock going to slaughter , called for mandatory price reporting for packers and others who process and market meat .

usda had estimated in 2000 that the former voluntary system was not reporting transactions of the order of 35% - 40% of cattle , 75% of hogs , and 40% of lambs .

during initial debate in congress on lmr , opponents , including some meat packers and other farmers and ranchers , argued that a mandate would impose costly new burdens on the industry and could cause the release of confidential company information .

nonetheless , some of these early opponents ultimately supported an lmr law .

livestock producers had experienced low prices in the late 1990s and were looking for ways to strengthen market prices .

some meat packers also supported a national consensus bill at least partly to preempt what they viewed as an emerging "patchwork" of state price reporting laws that could alter competition among packers operating under different state laws .

lmr was enacted in october 1999 as part of the fy2000 agriculture appropriations act .

 ( see table 1 , "legislative and rulemaking history." ) .

the law mandated price reporting for live cattle , boxed beef , and live swine and allowed usda to establish lmr for lamb purchases and lamb meat sales .

the law authorized appropriations as necessary and required usda to implement regulations no later than 180 days after the law was enacted .

lmr was authorized for five years , until september 30 , 2004 .

usda issued a final rule on december 1 , 2000 .

although reporting for lamb was optional in the lmr statute , usda established mandatory reporting for lamb in the final rule .

the rule was to be implemented on january 30 , 2001 , but usda delayed implementation until april 2 , 2001 , to allow for additional time to test the automated lmr program to ensure program requirements were being met .

the implementation of lmr did not affect the continuation of the ams voluntary price - reporting program .

ams continues to publish prices from livestock auctions and feeder cattle and pig sales through voluntary - based market news reports .

lmr authority lapsed for two months in october 2004 before congress extended it for one year to september 30 , 2005 .

authority for lmr lapsed again on september 30 , 2005 .

at that time , usda requested that all packers who were required to report under the 1999 act continue to submit required information voluntarily .

about 90% of packers voluntarily reported , which allowed usda to continue to publish most reports .

in october 2006 , congress passed legislation to reauthorize lmr through september 30 , 2010 .

this act also amended swine reporting requirements from the original 1999 law by separating the reporting requirements for sows and boars from barrows and gilts , among other changes .

because statutory authority for the program had lapsed for a year , usda determined that it had to reestablish regulatory authority through rulemaking in order to continue lmr operations .

on may 16 , 2008 , usda issued the final rule to reestablish and revise the mandatory reporting program .

this rule incorporated the swine reporting changes and was intended to enhance the program's overall effectiveness and efficiency based on ams's experience in the administration of the program .

the rule became effective on july 15 , 2008 .

mandatory wholesale pork price reporting was not included in the original lmr act because the swine industry could not agree on reporting for pork .

section 11001 of the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) directed usda to study the effects of requiring packers to report the price and volume of wholesale pork cuts , which was a voluntary reporting activity at the time .

the study was released in november 2009 and concluded that there would be benefits from a mandatory pork reporting program .

on september 27 , 2010 , the president signed into law the mandatory price reporting act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-239 ) , reauthorizing lmr through september 30 , 2015 .

the act added a provision for lmr of wholesale pork cuts , directed usda to engage in negotiated rulemaking to make required regulatory changes for mandatory wholesale pork reporting , and established a negotiated rulemaking committee to develop these changes .

the committee was composed of representatives of pork producers , packers , processors , and retailers .

the committee met three times , was open to the public , and developed recommendations for mandatory wholesale pork reporting .

usda released the final rule on august 22 , 2012 , and the regulation was implemented on january 7 , 2013 .

the agriculture reauthorizations act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-54 ) was enacted into law on september 30 , 2015 , extending lmr to september 30 , 2020 .

p.l .

114-54 included amendments to swine and lamb reporting and addressed certain issues that livestock stakeholders had raised about lmr .

 ( see " lmr provisions enacted in 2015 " below. ) .

lmr requires livestock buyers and sellers of meat products to report prices and other characteristics of their transactions .

ten types of transactions are reported for livestock , and each is described below .

several other marketing terms are defined in the text box following the description of transactions .

lastly , there is a discussion of lmr confidentiality requirements , ams reporting , and enforcement measures .

as part of the 2015 reauthorization study requirement , ams held several meetings with cattle , swine , and lamb industry stakeholders to gather feedback on the lmr program .

stakeholders represented at the meetings included industry associations , farm groups , meat processors and food companies .

in several cases ams has already implemented reporting changes to address industry concerns .

a common concern among stakeholders is the limited volume of the negotiated purchase market ( see figure 1 and figure 2 ) .

other concerns cited went to issues of confidentiality and the need for greater clarity in how transactions are categorized in reports .

some stakeholders want to see more detailed information on transactions , such as premiums , especially as pricing models evolve , as well as changes in reporting on the number of livestock committed to packers .

the sections below provide summaries of the baseline study and stakeholder feedback .

lmr , as enacted and amended over the past 20 years , has increased market transparency for all market participants and livestock analysts .

livestock stakeholders have been generally supportive of lmr and its reauthorization over the years .

the five - year reauthorization period has provided an opportunity for congress to receive input from livestock stakeholders and evaluate whether or not the law and its implementation is fulfilling its purpose .

this has proven especially critical when the industry is constantly changing and adapting to market and consumer demands .

the 2015 reauthorization law that required that usda provide a report to congress on the lmr program offers a potential starting point for congress to consider for possible 2020 reauthorization .

livestock stakeholders have offered specific proposals for congress to consider should it choose to address reauthorization legislation .

other recommendations may be forthcoming .

ams regularly engages the livestock industry on lmr reporting issues and makes changes to reporting .

during consideration of reauthorization , congress may consider legislation to bolster lmr and whether ams needs additional regulatory authority to address lmr issues .

stakeholders may have particular interest in adjusting confidentiality requirements for lamb reporting and expanding reporting requirements for certain attributes that address changing livestock markets .

