beneficial ownership refers to the natural person or persons who invest in , control , or otherwise reap gains from an asset , such as a bank account , real estate property , company , or trust .

in some cases , an asset's beneficial owner may not be listed in public records or disclosed to federal authorities as the legal owner .

for some years , the united states has been criticized by international bodies for gaps in the u.s. anti - money laundering ( aml ) system related to a lack of systematic beneficial ownership disclosure .

while beneficial ownership information is relevant to several types of assets , attention has focused on the beneficial ownership of companies , and in particular , the use of so - called "shell companies" to anonymously purchase assets , such as real property , and to store and move money , including through bank accounts and wire transfers .

while such companies may be created for a legitimate purpose , there are also concerns that the use of some of these companies can facilitate crimes , such as money laundering .

recent u.s. regulatory steps and legislation have particularly focused on beneficial ownership disclosure related to the use of shell companies with hidden owners that conduct financial transactions or purchase assets .

in the context of aml regimes , law enforcement authorities as well as financial institutions and their regulators may seek beneficial ownership information to identify or verify the natural persons who benefit from or control financial assets held in the name of legal entities , such as corporations and limited liability companies .

drug traffickers , terrorist financiers , tax and sanctions evaders , corrupt government officials , and other criminals have been known to obscure their beneficial ownership of legal entities for money laundering purposes .

to do so , they may form nominal legal entities , or "shell companies," which have no physical presence and generate little to no economic activity , but are used to anonymously store and transfer illicit proceeds .

by relying on third - party nominees to serve as the legal owners of record for such shell companies , criminals can control and enjoy the benefits of the assets held by such companies while shielding their identities from investigators .

although concealing beneficial ownership has long been a central element of many money laundering schemes , many jurisdictions around the world have not established or implemented policy measures that address beneficial ownership disclosure and transparency .

according to the financial action task force ( fatf ) —an intergovernmental standards - setting body for aml and countering the financing of terrorism ( cft ) —financial crime investigations are frequently hampered by the absence of adequate , accurate , and timely information on beneficial ownership .

fatf has accordingly identified beneficial ownership transparency as an enduring aml / cft policy challenge .

some u.s. government agencies have also long recognized that the ability to create legal entities without accurate beneficial ownership information is a key vulnerability in the u.s. financial system .

such ongoing vulnerabilities have placed the united states under domestic and international pressure , including from the fatf , to tighten its aml / cft regime with respect to beneficial ownership disclosure requirements .

in recent years , various u.s. regulators have taken actions to address this issue , and congressional interest in this topic has increased .

this report first provides selected case studies of high - profile situations where beneficial ownership has been obscured .

it then provides an overview of beneficial ownership issues relating to corporate formation and in real estate transactions .

next , it describes the recent history of beneficial ownership policy and legislation .

the report then discusses recent u.s. regulatory changes to address aspects of beneficial ownership transparency .

thereafter , the report analyzes selected current policy issues , including sectors not covered by existing treasury regulations , the status of international efforts to address beneficial ownership , and the evolution of the global legal entity identifier ( lei ) program .

finally , the report analyzes selected legislative proposals in the 116 th congress .

the current policy debate surrounding beneficial ownership disclosure is focused on addressing gaps in the u.s. aml regime and tracking changes made by the international community in its approach to addressing the problem .

a key area of congressional activity involves evaluating the risks associated with lack of beneficial ownership information in the corporate formation and real estate sectors .

the treasury's current cdd rule mandates that financial institutions must collect information—for beneficial owners who hold more than 25% of an entity—upon opening an account for the entity .

some legislative proposals would mandate that this type of information be collected when such legal entities are formed , and that the information be reported to fincen or another central repository that authorities can access .

international developments in beneficial ownership disclosure practices , including trends in the adoption of a program known as the global legal entity identifier system ( lei ) , also raise issues for u.s. policy consideration .

in response to some of the issues discussed above , a number of lawmakers have introduced legislation that would require the collection of beneficial ownership information for both newly formed and existing legal entities .

the subsections below discuss two of these proposals in the 116 th congress .

in june 2019 , the house committee on financial services approved legislation that would require many small corporations and llcs to report their beneficial owners to the federal government .

under h.r .

2513 , the corporate transparency act of 2019 , newly formed corporations and llcs would be required to report certain identifying information concerning their beneficial owners to fincen and annually update that information .

the bill would also impose these reporting requirements on existing corporations and llcs two years after fincen adopts final regulations to implement the legislation .

subject to certain exceptions , the bill defines the term beneficial owner to mean natural persons who "directly or indirectly" exercise "substantial control" over a corporation or llc ; own 25% or more of the equity of a corporation or llc ; or receive "substantial economic benefits" from a corporation or llc .

h.r .

2513 's reporting requirements are limited to small corporations and llcs .

specifically , the bill exempts a variety of regulated entities from its reporting requirements , in addition to any company that ( 1 ) employs more than 20 full - time employees , ( 2 ) files income tax returns reflecting more than $5 million in gross receipts , and ( 3 ) has an operating presence at a physical office within the united states .

the bill would also authorize fincen to promulgate a number of rules .

first , h.r .

2513 would allow fincen to adopt a rule requiring covered corporations and llcs to report changes in their beneficial ownership sooner than the annual update required by the legislation itself .

second , the bill would direct the treasury secretary to promulgate a rule clarifying the circumstances in which an individual receives "substantial economic benefits" from a corporation or llc for purposes of its definition of beneficial owner .

third , the legislation would require fincen to revise the cdd rule within one year of the bill's enactment in order to bring the rule "into conformance" with the bill's requirements and reduce any "unnecessary" burdens on financial institutions .

finally , h.r .

2513 would impose civil and criminal penalties on persons who knowingly provide fincen with false beneficial ownership information or willfully fail to provide complete or updated information .

in june 2019 , senator sheldon whitehouse introduced legislation that would require states receiving funds under the omnibus crime control and safe streets act of 1968 to adopt transparent incorporation systems within three years of the bill's enactment .

specifically , s. 1889 , the true incorporation transparency for law enforcement ( title ) act , would mandate that transparent incorporation systems require newly formed corporations and llcs to report certain identifying information concerning their beneficial owners to their states of incorporation .

under the bill , a compliant formation system would also require corporations and llcs to report changes in their beneficial ownership within 60 days .

these requirements would apply to existing corporations and llcs two years after a state's adoption of a compliant formation system .

subject to certain exceptions , s. 1889 defines the term beneficial owner to mean natural persons who "directly or indirectly" ( 1 ) exercise "substantial control" over a corporation or llc , or ( 2 ) have a "substantial interest" in or receive "substantial economic benefits" from a corporation or llc .

like h.r .

2513 , s. 1889 's requirements would be limited to small corporations and llcs .

specifically , s. 1889 would allow states to exempt various regulated entities , in addition to any company that ( 1 ) employs more than 20 full - time employees , ( 2 ) files income tax returns reflecting more than $5 million in gross receipts , ( 3 ) has an operating presence at a physical office within the united states , and ( 4 ) has more than 100 shareholders .

the bill would also impose civil and criminal penalties on persons who knowingly provide states with false beneficial ownership information or willfully fail to provide complete or updated information .

finally , s. 1889 would amend the bsa to include "any person engaged in the business of forming corporations or [llcs]" in its definition of a regulated "financial institution," and would direct fincen to issue a proposed rule requiring such persons to establish aml programs .

 figure a - 1 demonstrates hypothetically how hidden foreign or u.s. buyers might purchase real estate in the united states with minimal disclosure of their identities as hidden beneficial owners .

first , foreign or u.s. individuals might establish a foreign - incorporated llc , subject to that foreign jurisdiction's laws , which could present particular challenges to a u.s. law enforcement agency seeking to investigate the purchase .

alternately , foreign or u.s. individuals could create a u.s. llc incorporated in a u.s. state with only a "registered agent" required to be disclosed under various states' laws .

a foreign llc might pay for the property through a wire transfer from a foreign bank account .

if the foreign llc or the u.s. llc were to open a u.s. bank account to pay for the purchase , then , if this were a new account opened since may 2018 , the u.s. - regulated bank would look for beneficial owners owning more than 25% of the llc , and keep records of that information .

currently , however , that information would not be reported to fincen automatically , and law enforcement would most likely require a subpoena to procure that information from the bank's records .

to create additional layers that could obscure the actual buyers of the property , the llc , whether u.s. or foreign , could route the payment to the title company , which handles the real estate closing , through a law firm .

payments and wire transfers routed through law firms present an extra layer of information a prosecutor or law enforcement agent must go through to try to obtain details of individuals who own the llc and are purchasing a property .

often the u.s. attorney - client privilege can make it more difficult to exercise this subpoena authority , without at least the possibility that a legal challenge may arise .

finally , the payment is routed to the title company , which processes the property sale and distributes payment , normally to the seller's account .

if the seller obscures his or her identity through an llc as well , natural persons involved on both sides of the transfer may be hidden .

