prior to the september 2001 terrorist attacks on the united states , insurers generally did not exclude or separately charge for coverage of terrorism risk .

the events of september 11 , 2001 , changed this as insurers realized the extent of possible terrorism losses .

estimates of insured losses from the 9 / 11 attacks are more than $45 billion in current dollars , the largest insured losses from a nonnatural disaster on record .

these losses were concentrated in business interruption insurance ( 34% of the losses ) , property insurance ( 30% ) , and liability insurance ( 23% ) .

although primary insurance companies — those that actually sell and service the insurance policies bought by consumers — suffered losses from the terrorist attacks , the heaviest insured losses were absorbed by foreign and domestic reinsurers , the insurers of insurance companies .

because of the lack of public data on , or modeling of , the scope and nature of the terrorism risk , reinsurers felt unable to accurately price for such risks and largely withdrew from the market for terrorism risk insurance in the months following september 11 , 2001 .

once reinsurers stopped offering coverage for terrorism risk , primary insurers , suffering equally from a lack of public data and models , also withdrew , or tried to withdraw , from the market .

in most states , state regulators must approve policy form changes .

most state regulators agreed to insurer requests to exclude terrorism risks from commercial policies , just as these policies had long excluded war risks .

terrorism risk insurance was soon unavailable or extremely expensive , and many businesses were no longer able to purchase insurance that would protect them in future terrorist attacks .

in some cases , such insurance is required to consummate various transactions , particularly in the real estate , transportation , construction , energy , and utility sectors .

although the evidence is largely anecdotal , some were concerned that the lack of coverage posed a threat of serious harm — such as job loss — to these industries , in turn threatening the broader economy .

in november 2002 , congress responded to the fears of economic damage due to the absence of commercially available coverage for terrorism with passage of the terrorism risk insurance act ( tria ) .

tria created a three - year terrorism insurance program to provide a government reinsurance backstop in the case of terrorist attacks .

the tria program was amended and extended in 2005 , 2007 , and 2015 .

following the 2015 amendments , the tria program is set to expire at the end of 2020 .

 ( a side - by - side of the original law and the three reauthorization acts is in table 1 . ) .

the executive branch has been skeptical about the tria program in the past .

bills to expand tria were resisted by then - president george w. bush's administration , and previous presidential budgets under then - president obama called for changes in the program that would have had the effect of scaling back the tria coverage .

the current administration has not called for specific changes to tria , but has indicated that it is "evaluating reforms…to further decrease taxpayer exposure. .

the insurance industry largely continues to support tria , as do commercial insurance consumers in the real estate and other industries that have formed a "coalition to insure against terrorism" ( ciat ) .

however , not all insurance consumers have consistently supported the renewal of tria .

for example , the consumer federation of america has questioned the need for the program in the past .

although the united states has suffered attacks deemed "terrorism" since the passage of tria , no acts of terrorism have been certified and no payments have occurred under tria .

for example , although the april 2013 bombing in boston was termed an "act of terror," by the president , the insured losses in tria - eligible insurance from that bombing did not cross the $5 million statutory threshold to be certified under tria .

 ( see precise criteria under the tria program below. ) .

the original tria legislation's stated goals were to ( 1 ) create a temporary federal program of shared public and private compensation for insured terrorism losses to allow the private market to stabilize ; ( 2 ) protect consumers by ensuring the availability and affordability of insurance for terrorism risks ; and ( 3 ) preserve state regulation of insurance .

although congress has amended specific aspects of the original act , the operation of the program generally usually follows the original statute .

the changes to the program have largely reduced the government coverage for terrorism losses , except that the 2007 amendments expanded coverage to domestic terrorism losses , rather than limiting the program to foreign terrorism .

the tria statute does not specifically include or exclude property and casualty insurance coverage for terrorist attacks according to the particular methods used in the attacks , such as nuclear , biological , chemical , and radiological ( nbcr ) and cyber terrorism risks .

such nonconventional means , however , have the potential to cause losses that may or may not end up being covered by tria and have been a source of particular concern and attention in the past .

 table 1 presents a side - by - side comparison of selected provisions from the original tria law , along with the reauthorizing laws of 2005 , 2007 , and 2015 .

 table a - 1 contains illustrative examples of how the recoupment for the government portion of terrorism losses under tria might be calculated in the aggregate for various sizes of losses .

the total amount of the combined deductibles in the table is simply assumed to be 30% of the insured losses for illustrative purposes .

 ( the actual deductible amount is , as detailed above , based on the total amount of premiums collected by each insurer. ) .

without knowing the actual distribution of losses due to a terrorist attack , it is impossible to know what the actual total combined deductible amount would be .

table conclusions with regard to recoupment , however , hold across different actual deductible amounts .

the specific provisions of the law define the "insurance marketplace aggregate retention amount" ( column f ) for 2019 as the lesser of $37.5 billion or the total amount of insured losses ( column a ) .

the "mandatory recoupment amount" ( column g ) is defined as the difference between $37.5 billion and the aggregate insurer losses that were not compensated for by the program ( i.e. , the total of the insurers' deductible ( column b ) and their 19% loss share ( column c ) ) .

if the aggregate insured loss is less than $37.5 billion , the law requires recoupment of 140% of the government outlays ( column h ) .

for insured losses over $37.5 billion , the mandatory recoupment amount decreases , thus the secretary would be required to recoup less than 133% of the outlays .

depending on the precise deductible amounts , the uncompensated industry losses ( column d ) may eventually rise to be greater than $37.5 billion , which would then mean that the mandatory recoupment provisions would not apply .

the secretary would still retain discretionary authority to apply recoupment surcharges no matter what level uncompensated losses reached .

