u.s. foreign intelligence relations are a component of u.s. international relations that involve cooperation between a u.s. and a foreign state or non - state intelligence service over an area of mutual interest .

this cooperation may include simple liaison to discuss or exchange information , raw data , or finished intelligence .

intelligence liaison leverages the relative strengths of the interested intelligence services to provide tactical , operational , or strategic insight and perspective to provide warning of attack , corroboration of national sources , or additional , possibly unique , intelligence that the other service lacks .

other forms of cooperation include basing rights to enhance the range of u.s. collection coverage , joint operations and collection from the sovereign territory of a foreign state , and training to improve the capacity and professionalism of a foreign intelligence service .

in areas of the world where the u.s. intelligence community ( ic ) has few national intelligence assets , cooperative relations with a foreign intelligence service based in the region can effectively increase the range of u.s. intelligence coverage by using the partner's source network and linguistic , political , and cultural expertise .

although the director of national intelligence ( dni ) provides the policy and criteria , and conducts oversight for all ic element intelligence relationships with foreign intelligence services , the ic elements themselves have the statutory authority to enter into agreements with foreign counterparts .

normally every relationship is formalized through a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) or other written agreement .

this report provides a historic perspective of traditional and nontraditional foreign intelligence partnerships with the u.s .

it also discusses their risks and benefits in the context of the broader public discussion over the sorts of relationships the united states should have with various actors in the international community .

in many — but not all — instances , intelligence relations with a foreign partner may be viewed as an approximate reflection of the strategic condition of the relationship between the u.s. and that partner generally .

they indicate shared interests and a degree of trust in the professional ability of the partner to provide credible intelligence while protecting sources and maintaining security about the nature and extent of the relationship .

in discussing risk , this report emphasizes the risk to the united states .

however , foreign partners also bear risk ( eg , relying too heavily on u.s. intelligence , or having their sensitive sources compromised ) .

congress has a vested interest in understanding the nature and scope of the ic's relations with foreign intelligence services .

congress has expressed both confidence in the value of these relationships and reservations .

when the ic reduced national intelligence collection resources in the 1970s and the 1990s and the ic became heavily dependent upon intelligence obtained from foreign partners , congress intervened to rebalance national intelligence collection with collection from foreign partners .

congress was also critical of deficiencies in the ic's ability to assess independently the credibility of foreign intelligence sources , one of whom fabricated reporting on iraqi weapons of mass destruction , one reason cited by the bush administration for invading iraq in 2003 .

most recently , congress has expressed interest in the vulnerability of foreign intelligence partners' telecommunications technology to penetration by hostile intelligence services .

the united states has cultivated intelligence liaison relations with foreign partners through ( 1 ) the exchange of information , raw data , or finished intelligence ; ( 2 ) basing rights for conducting intelligence operations , or privileges to host technical intelligence equipment ; ( 3 ) burden sharing in the collection and reporting on issues of mutual interest ; ( 4 ) joint covert action , collection , or exploitation operations ; and ( 5 ) training .

most are bilateral .

the relationship with the united kingdom is among the oldest and the best known .

the ic also has multilateral relationships , with nato member states , five eyes partners ( united states , united kingdom , canada , australia , and new zealand ) , and the intelligence organizations supporting coalition partners in operational theaters such as iraq and afghanistan .

u.s. ic relationships with foreign intelligence partners have developed in parallel with global ic coverage , as well as the growing number of interests the u.s. shares with foreign partners ; it is also generally recognized that intelligence partnerships can provide mutual benefits for national security .

ic foreign partnerships have developed as consequences of the most pressing challenges for u.s. national security over the past century: two world wars , the cold war , and post - 9 / 11 counter - terrorism operations .

although the u.s. has periodically shared intelligence with adversaries involving a narrow range of mutual interests , this type of exchange represents the exception to the norm .

more typically , most intelligence sharing takes place with allied countries or u.s. affiliated non - state actors within relationships that have been shaped by decades of shared experience in war and peace .

u.s. intelligence exchange relationships with foreign partners , therefore , often reflect the high level of trust and professional confidence the u.s. ic places in partnerships with particular foreign allies' intelligence services , involving a broad range of overlapping national security , political , and economic interests .

a fundamental assumption , supported by decades of experience , is that building and maintaining these partnerships enhances u.s. national security by providing some benefit that the u.s. would otherwise lack: access to otherwise inaccessible or hostile targets , corroboration of sources , cultural or linguistic expertise , the capacity to conduct joint assessments , providing indications and warning of an attack , obtaining basing rights , or jointly planning and conducting covert operations or intelligence collection .

policy and authorities for initiating and managing ties between the ic and foreign intelligence services , and specifying the roles and responsibilities of personnel supporting these relationships , are found in statute , executive orders , and intelligence directives .

intelligence community directive ( icd ) - 403 , foreign disclosure and release of classified national intelligence , states u.s. government policy on disclosure of u.s. intelligence to foreign state or non - state intelligence entities: u.s. intelligence is a national asset to be conserved and protected and will be shared with foreign entities only when consistent with u.s. national security and foreign policy objectives and when an identifiable benefit can be expected to accrue to the u.s .

it is the policy of the u.s. government to share intelligence with foreign governments whenever it is consistent with u.s. law and clearly in the national interest to do so , and when it is intended for a specific purpose and general limited in duration .

icd - 403 also requires that determinations to disclose or release u.s. intelligence should take into account the professional ability of a foreign intelligence service to protect the classified intelligence from subsequent compromise posing a risk to u.s. national security .

however , in exceptional cases , there may be a benefit to u.s. interests to disclose or release intelligence to foreign entities under conditions where the recipient's safeguards are likely to be inadequate .

in such cases , the anticipated benefits must outweigh the potential damage of a likely compromise .

intelligence community policy guidance 403.1 ( icpg - 403.1 ) further expounds policy in icd - 403 by providing criteria for disclosing or releasing classified intelligence to a foreign intelligence entity .

its guidance pertains to classified u.s. intelligence only , which does not include other classified information , such as defense , military , or diplomatic information that is not intelligence .

disclosure or release of classified intelligence is appropriate when it: is consistent with u.s. foreign policy and national security objectives ; can be expected to result in an identifiable , commensurate benefit to the u.s. ; supports a u.s. diplomatic , political , economic , military , or security policy or treaties ; and aids u.s. intelligence or counterintelligence activities .

an intelligence sharing agreement is often formalized in a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) between the u.s. ic element and its foreign intelligence counterpart .

there are hundreds of these agreements between the ic and foreign intelligence services .

they are not legally binding and are generally classified .

this can present challenges for congressional oversight .

as one observer of the intelligence community remarked , "the near invisibility of liaison arrangements to oversight by elected officials is problematic .

oversight mechanisms have not kept pace with global issues. .

for military exchanges that include other types of classified information as well as intelligence , the department of defense ( dod ) uses general security of military information agreements ( gsomia ) that detail the level of classification for the exchange and the categories of information that can be exchanged .

whether an mou or gsomia , these agreements provide formal frameworks for intelligence relationships that can be fundamental to broader security relationships ( legal enforceability notwithstanding ) .

a former member of the senate select committee on intelligence remarked recently that foreign intelligence services provide the united states some of its most significant intelligence .

two examples are readily apparent .

following 9 / 11 , then - french president jacques chirac directed the french intelligence services ( the dgse and dgsi ) to share counterterrorist intelligence with the united states "as if they were your own service. .

similarly , on september 12 , 2001 , the day after the attacks , the senior leadership of the british intelligence services ( mi5 and mi6 ) visited their counterparts in washington , dc , to offer their assistance .

the u.s. ic also benefits from intelligence liaison with traditional adversaries , and non - state actors ( eg , kurdish organizations ) , on areas of mutual interest .

there is a variety of risks and obstacles to u.s. intelligence relationships with foreign partners .

they result from policy differences , differences in assumptions about a threat , failure to respect human rights , lapses in security , espionage , and legal and informal limits each side may place upon the other .

the strongest , most enduring relationships have weathered differences in policy or lapses in security that have led to temporary setbacks in intelligence cooperation .

more formidable to overcome are obstacles to intelligence sharing resulting from fundamental differences in values .

u.s. foreign intelligence relationships may be easily overlooked in discussions of the importance and inherent risks of cooperation with state and non - state actors in the international community .

little is publicly known about them , in particular how they are structured and how they contribute to u.s. national security .

the benefits of these relationships to the united states are weighed against their potential hazards , including outright failure .

congress's role in providing oversight here is different than its oversight of intelligence in other respects .

with the exception of covert action with foreign partners ( which is covered by oversight provisions in statute ) , congressional oversight of u.s. foreign intelligence relationships can be especially challenging due to the passive , low - profile character of sharing intelligence , and congress's inability to penetrate the internal dynamics of a foreign intelligence service .

nonetheless , these relationships will remain an integral , daily aspect of intelligence activities supporting u.s. national security objectives , and thus congress has a vested interest in conducting oversight of them .

