many members of the 116 th congress have demonstrated an ongoing interest in trump administration efforts to reform the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) .

the reforms , branded transformation at usaid , target a broad range of programs , structures , and processes in an effort to improve the agency's efficiency and effectiveness .

the reform process was initiated by an executive order and an office of management and budget ( omb ) memorandum , both issued in 2017 .

the omb memorandum called on u.s. government agencies to submit reform plans focused on making the government "lean , accountable , and more efficient. .

usaid provided several preliminary plans to the state department ( to which usaid reports ) and omb in the summer of 2017 , but the internal restructuring initiative began in earnest after mark green was confirmed as usaid administrator in august 2017 .

usaid submitted its own reform plan to omb , separate from state , though usaid cooperated with the state department's "redesign" initiative as well .

omb's government - wide reform plan , "delivering government solutions in the 21 st century," released in june 2018 , prescribed 32 government - wide reforms , several of which directly related to usaid .

these included restructuring u.s. humanitarian assistance programs , establishing a new development finance institution to incorporate usaid credit programs , and changing usaid's washington , dc - based bureau structure .

soon after the release of the omb report , usaid finalized and began implementing its reforms , newly branded as transformation .

no single public report or other document comprehensively details the transformation effort or what it encompasses .

this crs report relies on various publications on the usaid website focused on specific reforms or priorities described as being part of the transformation , the testimony of usaid administrator mark green before congress on multiple occasions , implementation documents such as the country roadmaps and the private sector engagement strategy , and the new usaid policy framework .

each of these sources differs in what they include , and in the emphasis given to different reform components , making it difficult to ascertain the full picture and the prioritization usaid ascribes to the various elements .

role of congress .

most of the reforms proposed under transformation do not require congressional approval , but some require advance notification to congress .

notification does not require congressional action , but it gives congress the opportunity to weigh in on the action being notified and to apply "holds" ( nonbinding but generally respected requests that action be deferred until a related member concern is resolved ) .

nevertheless , administrator green appears to have actively involved congress in the shaping and implementation of transformation and has suggested that he does not intend to move forward without congressional support .

congress has the power to shape usaid reforms through both oversight activities and funding requirements and restrictions .

this report analyzes key elements of current usaid reform efforts under the transformation umbrella .

although the report highlights key reforms and changes in usaid policy and practice , it is not a comprehensive overview of this broad initiative .

the report first discusses key objectives of transformation , then describes several process , structure , and workforce reforms intended to support these objectives , with an emphasis on reforms that are distinct from prior usaid reform efforts .

the report concludes with a discussion of broader issues that may be relevant to congressional perspectives on usaid reforms .

transformation at usaid is an implementation framework for reforms that are multifaceted and still evolving .

administrator green's testimony at april 2018 budget hearings described transformation as "experience - informed , innovation - driven reforms to optimize our structures and procedures and maximize our effectiveness. .

in these broad terms , many of the reforms are similar to general government or organization reform efforts in their focus on efficiency and effectiveness .

while much of transformation reflects incremental policy adjustments , several components signal a distinct vision for usaid's role in foreign affairs .

as noted , no single public document comprehensively details the components and objectives of transformation .

however , various usaid fact sheets , videos , and statements by administrator green since 2018 suggest some of the initiative's key objectives: supporting country transitions toward self - reliant , locally led development ; increasing usaid - private sector collaboration in development ; supporting u.s. national security strategy ; enhancing usaid's core capabilities and strengthening leadership ; and using taxpayer dollars more efficiently and effectively .

a consistent emphasis across usaid policy documents , including those describing transformation , is the core objective of "ending the need for foreign assistance" by supporting partner countries' "journey to self - reliance. .

as transformation has evolved , moving partner countries toward economic self - sufficiency has become the primary reform objective cited by usaid—the one that all the specific reform proposals are designed to support .

other stated objectives , such as advancing national security goals , are deemphasized in later transformation materials .

many of the proposed transformation reforms are consistent with efforts by past usaid administrators .

for example , successive administrations have sought to refine the deployment of foreign assistance to advance u.s. national security , asserting that it should be a major component of u.s. foreign policy strategy .

the obama administration's usaid forward initiative focused on bringing new partnerships , innovation , and a renewed focus on results to usaid's work .

under the george w. bush administration and administrator henrietta fore , usaid's development leadership initiative focused on building usaid's workforce capacity and leadership .

the self - reliance objective at the center of transformation has been cited as a goal in various usaid document for decades .

nearly every administration and usaid administrator has proposed reforms intended to improve usaid's efficiency and effectiveness , and transformation may be viewed as the latest step in the agency's evolution .

to implement the objectives and strategic priorities of transformation , the agency is making several changes to its programs and work processes intended to establish a more flexible and field - responsive approach to programming .

much like the strategic objectives described above , these adjustments build on efforts by previous administrations , aiming to align usaid's approach to development with the current global landscape .

the structural component of transformation is meant to align the agency's organization with the administration's stated goals for u.s. international development and humanitarian assistance .

this part of transformations has been subject to the most direct congressional oversight .

usaid submitted nine congressional notifications ( cn ) to the appropriate committees in july and august 2018 detailing the proposed structural changes .

upon receipt , each cn was put on "hold," signaling that committee members wanted to look into the proposed changes further .

the administrator has signaled that he will not make changes without the approval of all four congressional oversight committees .

organizationally , usaid is split into two sections—field missions , and headquarters' bureaus and independent offices—each with its own key functions and personnel .

the headquarters' bureaus and offices are divided among four categories: ( 1 ) geographic bureaus , ( 2 ) functional bureaus , ( 3 ) central bureaus , and ( 4 ) independent offices ( see figure 3 ) .

the geographic bureaus directly correspond with country field missions , while the functional bureaus manage cross - cutting sectoral issues , including education , global health , and humanitarian assistance , among others .

the central bureaus and independent offices manage day - to - day agency operations , including human resources , security , legislative affairs , and financial management .

through transformation , usaid seeks to modify its workforce management structures and processes to strengthen "the ability of its entire workforce to thrive in , and adapt to , increasingly complex and challenging situations and opportunities. .

these changes include developing and piloting a new noncareer hiring mechanism , developing and operationalizing a leadership philosophy , and establishing and implementing a knowledge management framework .

much like the rest of transformation , these pieces are described by the agency as being "employee - led," developed by working groups comprising employees from across the agency .

congress may have several ongoing areas of interest related to u.s. foreign assistance policy and usaid operations and budget .

as members of congress consider proposed and ongoing usaid reform activities , several cross - cutting issues may emerge , including the following: role of foreign assistance in broader u.s. foreign policy .

at a time when many in congress have expressed significant concern about the influence of rival powers such as china and russia in regions in which usaid is active , members may consider whether the overarching transformation goal of ending the need for foreign assistance is consistent with u.s. foreign policy and national security interests .

u.s. foreign assistance programs are driven by multiple rationales , including supporting u.s. security and diplomatic and commercial interests .

foreign assistance also is widely recognized as a tool of foreign policy , which promotes social and economic development in partner countries , while also enhancing u.s. influence and leverage in those countries .

if usaid is successful in ending the need for foreign assistance , congress and the administration may consider alternative forms of engagement with current aid partners to maintain u.s. influence and presence .

for example , a reorientation to cultural exchange programs like the fulbright program , as well as increased business ties and investment agreements , may help maintain strong relationships and u.s. influence in countries transitioning away from u.s. aid .

usaid f unding .

usaid is carrying out transformation at the same time that the administration , for a third straight year , has proposed cuts of over 20% to the agency's annual budget .

while some of the proposed reforms could reduce agency costs over time , transformation documents do not appear to specify how the proposed budget cuts , if enacted , would be reflected in program allocation .

to date , congress has not supported the proposed cuts , and appropriations for usaid have remained fairly level in recent years .

new positions from r estructuring .

the transformation proposal to add two new associate administrator positions at usaid would increase the number of political appointees at the agency , potentially raising concerns about the politicization of usaid's development decisions .

given the challenges some administrations have faced in filling existing high - level positions , some observers are concerned that the new positions could sit vacant for months or even years—possibly further hamstringing future administrations' policy crafting and implementation .

impact on existing usaid activities .

overall , transformation focuses on the new—new strategies , new indicators , and new hiring mechanisms .

there is less discussion of what , if anything , may fall away .

for example , in staffing , the agency is creating a hiring mechanism to "streamline" the workforce—it discusses plans to eventually phase out one hiring mechanism .

this means that as the new hiring mechanism is getting off the ground , the agency would still be managing more than 20 others .

congress may consider asking the agency what other strategies , structures , and processes the agency may plan to phase out or integrate as a result of transformation .

self - r eliance goals versus c ongressional p riorities .

administrator green has argued that the self - reliance roadmaps are not just to be used after taking into account congressional directives and country / technical allocations , but as a guide for congressional allocation decisions as well .

congress typically appropriates funds to support priority accounts and sectors ( such as global health , basic education , agricultural development , democracy promotion , and women's empowerment ) rather than countries .

the seeming shift under transformation to a country - specific aid agenda may conflict with congressional funding of transnational programming , such as countering trafficking and regional trade hubs .

furthermore , the self - reliance indicators themselves may warrant attention .

advising countries that lowering their tariff barriers will signal their commitment to economic prosperity may be difficult to sustain , some may argue , in light of other actions of the trump administration , for example .

congress may consult with usaid to ensure its indicator configuration is consistent with its priorities .

other initiatives in transformation .

transformation was initially launched with several other priorities that do not feature prominently in recent media on the initiative .

for example , usaid operational flexibility in nonpermissive environments and programmatic effectiveness in countering violent extremism were core features of transformation at launch .

it is unclear whether these and other priorities have fallen in prominence because they require more interagency coordination , because solutions have been fairly straightforward , because the challenges in those sectors are too intractable to address , or because of other reasons .

congress may also consider seeking additional information on how transformation would align with the administration's planned prosper africa trade and investment initiative , which is expected to focus , in part , on usaid's three trade hubs in africa and elements of its trade capacity - building programs .

alignment with state department .

the state department's office of foreign assistance resources ( f ) has maintained a comprehensive database of indicators to quantify the results of u.s. foreign assistance programs since 2006 .

it is unclear how these indicators , or those used by the millennium challenge corporation , will be used in conjunction with usaid's new self - reliance indicators , if at all .

also unclear is the extent to which the state department has been engaged with transformation at usaid , and whether these reforms are aligned with secretary pompeo's vision for the future of u.s. diplomatic engagement .

congress may consider whether certain reforms should be broadened to include state department policies and structure , or elsewhere in government .

impact on food for peace programming .

the proposed merger of the offices of u.s. foreign disaster assistance and food for peace into the bureau of humanitarian assistance has raised questions about the future of food for peace act title ii programming .

the office of food for peace is currently dual - funded , receiving approximately half of its funding through the agriculture appropriations bill and its authorization from regular farm bills .

in the proposed ha bureau , the office of food for peace would cease to exist in name and program officers would be programming food and nonfood assistance side - by - side .

congress has not adopted proposals by multiple administrations to eliminate title ii programs , and it may seek to further understand how the ha bureau would be structured to ensure it meets its mandates outlined in the farm bill , including the minimum level of nonemergency programming .

