both legislators and regulators have expressed concern about the safety and effectiveness of prescription drugs prescribed for "off - label uses"—purposes other than those for which the food and drug administration ( fda ) has approved their sale .

two recent incidents illustrate the bases for those concerns .

the first involves a drug already on the market .

safety experts raised concerns about ketamine , a drug available as an injectable anesthetic .

they noted that physicians have created outpatient clinics to administer intravenous ketamine in an off - label use to treat depression and migraines .

fda has not reviewed clinical data that could support the clinics' promotional claims of safety and effectiveness .

in august 2018 , a second incident occurred in a texas courtroom .

astra zeneca settled a case concerning its alleged promotion of seroquel for uses other than those for which it had sought and obtained fda approval for sale in the united states .

the core of the complaint by the state of texas was that the company promoted the drug's use in children , although the fda - approved labeling of the drug was for adult use .

it was one of a number of settlements since 2000 resulting in payments by drug companies for the promotion of off - label uses .

to help understand the issues involving off - label use , and how these issues might concern congress , this report addresses five questions: what is drug labeling ? .

what is off - label use ? .

how are off - label prescriptions used in medicine today ? .

what are the risks and benefits associated with off - label prescriptions ? .

what concerns , if any , does congress have about such prescriptions ? .

if congress wanted to do something about off - label prescriptions , what would be some of the options ? .

to market a prescription drug in the united states , a manufacturer needs fda approval .

to obtain that approval , the manufacturer must demonstrate the drug's safety and effectiveness according to criteria specified in law and agency regulations .

it must also ensure that its manufacturing plant passes fda inspection .

finally , it must obtain fda approval for the drug's labeling—a term that covers all written material about the drug , including , for example , packaging , prescribing information for physicians , and patient brochures .

fda , thus , approves the drug and its labeling for a specific use .

that use specifies the disease or condition , the population , and the way the drug is packaged and administered .

when a physician prescribes a drug for reasons other than those specified in the fda approval and labeling , the medical profession considers this to be off - label use .

fda regulates the drug and the manufacturer .

each state regulates clinicians and pharmacies .

a licensed physician may—except in highly restricted circumstances —prescribe the approved drug without limitation .

a prescription to an individual whose demographic or medical characteristics differ from those indicated in a drug's fda - approved labeling is accepted medical practice .

in a 2006 study of drug prescribing by office - based physicians , 21% of prescriptions were written for off - label uses .

of those off - label prescriptions , the study's authors found that 27% were backed by strong scientific support .

a 2016 canadian study of primary care clinics found an overall rate of 12% of prescriptions for off - label uses .

the percentage varied , however , by therapeutic class , ranging from 5% for ear , nose , and throat medications to 25% for central nervous system medications .

an econometric model from the national ambulatory medical care survey estimated a 38% rate of off - label use .

research has shown that more than half of oncology drug use is off - label .

a 2018 study examined 43 fda - approved cancer drugs and compared their 99 labeled uses with the acceptable uses published by a national compendium medicare relies on to make coverage decisions .

of the 451 compendium - accepted uses , 56% were off - label .

of the off - label uses , the authors deemed 91% as "well - accepted off - label use. .

why has congress given fda the authority to regulate whether a drug may be on the u.s. market ? .

two key reasons: to protect patients and to encourage research in a competitive pharmaceutical industry .

by statute and regulation , fda now approves a drug for a specific use once its sponsor ( usually the manufacturer ) has provided sufficient evidence that the drug is safe and effective for that use .

fda has developed procedures for the review of that evidence .

the fda - approved labeling , which informs the clinician about dosing and likely and unlikely adverse events , helps protect the individuals for whom the drug is prescribed .

labeling also helps protect the interests of the manufacturers who invest in the clinical trials that demonstrate safety and effectiveness .

for new drugs and new uses of already approved drugs , the sponsor receives a period of market protection , in the form of regulatory exclusivity for the sale of the drug for those uses .

payors—such as private health insurers or medicare—benefit from fda - approved labeling in their evaluation of whether to pay for a drug's use .

but use of a drug evolves as clinicians ( and the manufacturer ) share their experiences regarding off - label uses , which , by definition , were not part of the premarket clinical studies used to obtain fda approval .

off - label use can benefit patients .

in some instances , such as in the treatment of rare diseases , clinical practice may use drugs approved for other indications .

a manufacturer may choose not to invest in trials for such a small patient group .

a patient whose physician is already prescribing the drug off - label may not want to enroll in a clinical trial where there is a chance he or she may be assigned to the placebo group .

once drugs are well - established in off - label uses , manufacturers rarely design studies to determine or verify the safety and effectiveness of such uses .

individuals and groups wanting to conduct such studies may find it hard to obtain funding .

examples of adverse events ( aes ) associated with the use of drugs for specific off - label uses include heart valve damage from the use of fenfluramine and phentermine ( fen - phen ) for weight loss , and seizures from the use of tiagabine hydrochloride for depression .

using a canadian primary care database that captured all prescriptions , the reason for each prescription , and adverse events , researchers looked at the rate of aes for on - label use , off - label use associated with "strong scientific evidence," and off - label use without such evidence .

they found more aes for off - label prescriptions than for on - label prescriptions .

however , off - label use associated with strong scientific evidence had similar rates of aes as did on - label uses .

the increased risk of aes for off - label use was concentrated in those uses without strong scientific evidence .

manufacturers benefit from sales for off - label uses .

however , they risk losing that market should a competitor complete studies to obtain fda approval and labeling for those uses .

researchers who are not supported by the manufacturer who try to assess the safety and effectiveness of off - label uses are hampered by the inexact nature of secondary data sources: the standard clinical trial data collection in preparation for an fda application is not available for off - label uses .

what may begin as hopeful and intermittent off - label use may gain momentum and offer opportunities for planned studies .

drug and device companies argue that current regulations prevent them from distributing important information to physicians and payors about unapproved , off - label uses of their products .

in november 2016 , fda held a two - day public meeting to hear from various groups regarding off - label uses of approved or cleared medical products .

in june 2018 , fda issued final guidances explaining the agency's policy about medical product communications that include data and information not contained in fda - approved labeling .

one fda guidance document , in particular , described the types of information that a manufacturer could provide payors and formulary committees about unapproved uses of approved products .

fda made two points especially relevant to off - label uses .

first , fda differentiates among its audiences in its presentation of information .

the material it allows in product labeling is directed to a clinical audience .

fda staff have reviewed the information and require that it be presented in a way that is understandable by individual clinicians , who often do not have the statistical sophistication or data analysis skills or resources to fully evaluate the claims of manufacturers .

this guidance notes , though , that payors and formulary committees do have such expertise and resources .

fda also acknowledges that it is useful for payors to have information in their decisions on coverage , but it wants to ensure that the information manufacturers provide is not misleading .

second , the fda guidance describes what harm could come from allowing more sharing of information about off - label use .

some firm communications regarding unapproved products or unapproved uses of approved / cleared / licensed medical products may potentially undermine substantial government interests related to health and safety .

these interests include motivating the development of robust scientific data on safety and efficacy ; maintaining the premarket review process for safety and efficacy of each intended use in order to prevent harm , to protect against fraud , misrepresentation , and bias , and to develop appropriate instructions for use for medical products ; protecting the integrity and reliability of promotional information regarding medical product uses ; and preventing the diversion of health care resources toward ineffective treatments .

the concerns fda raised in the june 2018 final guidance documents might explain why congress may be interested in exploring the issue of off - label use further .

congress has developed a system to protect the public by ensuring that drugs sold in the united states have met clinical and manufacturing standards of safety and effectiveness .

labeling is the mechanism that bridges the regulated drug and the use of that drug in clinical practice .

the labeling establishes the uses for which the manufacturer has demonstrated safety and effectiveness to fda's satisfaction .

congress and the fda have tried several approaches , using labeling as a tool , to reduce the risk to patients .

table a - 1 includes examples of congressional and fda actions to expand the information provided in a drug's labeling .

the actions have addressed topics such as content labeling , directions for use , permissible and prohibited advertising , research incentives to support labeling specific to population subgroups ( eg , children ) , criteria for medicare coverage , required and permissible labeling changes , and balance of benefit and risk information in labeling and advertising .

manufacturers , meanwhile , want to be able to provide information to insurers and other entities ( such as the centers for medicare and medicaid services [cms] and hospital pharmacy and therapeutics committees ) that decide whether to cover a drug in a policy and whether to limit reimbursement for specific uses .

congress has provided some leeway relative to its earlier prohibition on promotional activities .

for example , in 2016 , it broadened the types of health care economic information drug and device manufacturers could provide to payors ( eg , insurance companies ) .

although the underlying ffdca section continues to exclude information related only to an off - label use , it now requires "a conspicuous and prominent statement describing any material differences between the health care economic information and the labeling approved for the drug. .

several bills concerning off - label use have been introduced that would have expanded the information that manufacturers could provide about off - label uses .

for example , the subcommittee on health of the house committee on energy and commerce marked up h.r .

2026 ( 115 th congress ) , the pharmaceutical information exchange act , in january 2018 , which would have allowed the provision of scientific information to payors , in addition to health care economic information .

then - subcommittee chair michael burgess , in commenting on the bill's effort to clarify how manufacturers can share "if it is based on competent and reliable evidence," expressed strong support for the bill .

he noted "the importance of cutting edge information in medicine and science to optimize patient care and outcomes … and [how the bill] could have the potential to save patients' lives. .

then - ranking member ( now , chair ) frank pallone , jr. , though , argued that the ability to communicate about off - label use "had great potential to undermine" fda's approval process and to "hamstring" its enforcement efforts .

h.r .

2026 passed the subcommittee , although it did not reach the floor in the 115 th congress .

off - label use presents both opportunities and risks to clinicians , patients , manufacturers , and researchers .

at times , those interests clash .

academics , public health organizations , and journals have suggested what actions congress might take based on their particular concerns regarding off - label prescriptions .

these actions include both direct legislation and oversight activities to encourage action by other entities .

the 116 th congress might consider some of these varied approaches , summarized in the issues described below .

disclosure to patients .

most individuals , unaware of the nuances of fda regulation , may not know that physicians may prescribe drugs for uses that fda has not reviewed for safety and effectiveness .

several potential opportunities for providing this information exist .

congress could require or work with the states to require that the prescriber inform the patient about the off - label use and describe the meaning of off - label use ; the prescriber note in the prescription why the drug is being prescribed ; or the pharmacist inform the patient that the use is off - label .

data collection and availability .

fda , under federal law , determines whether a drug requires a prescription .

the states , under their individual laws , determine what information the prescription order contains .

because clinicians do not need to note on the prescription order why they are prescribing a drug ( eg , simvastatin for high cholesterol or citalopram for depression ) , the information in pharmacy , administrative , and clinical databases often cannot directly identify off - label uses .

therefore , as congress and other public policy groups consider whether and how to address off - label drug prescribing , they do not have adequate information on the scope and details of the practice .

congress could require or work with the states to encourage clinicians to note on prescriptions the reason for medication use ( eg , the specific condition , disease , or symptom ) , thereby allowing that information to appear in pharmacy databases , which would enable focused analysis of off - label uses ; the establishment of confidential registries of off - label prescribing and follow - up information that fda ( or other designated scientifically appropriate agencies ) could use in its electronic surveillance systems to identify associated adverse events and other drug use problems ; or fda to increase its surveillance of available data sources , such as registries and administrative and clinical databases , to identify patterns of off - label use and evidence suggesting effectiveness and associated adverse events .

dissemination .

because some information may be valuable to clinicians and entities that influence prescribing decisions ( such as insurers and pharmacy and therapeutics committees ) , congress could allow manufacturers to disseminate information about off - label uses that they have developed or of which they are aware , perhaps subject to certain limitations or accompanying reporting requirements .

possibilities include broader sharing of clinical analyses of off - label use with coverage deciders ( eg , cms , insurers , pharmacy and therapeutics committees ) to support requests that they cover a particular use of the drug ; and dissemination of clinical analyses of off - label use at clinical and pharmaceutical conferences .

oversight .

with an estimated 12% to 38% of all prescriptions' ( and 56% of oncology prescriptions' ) being written for uses not listed on fda - approved labeling , valid information on the extent of off - label use and the effect of such use on manufacturer , insurer , and clinician behavior could potentially better inform debate on how to best protect the public's health .

congress could direct the government accountability office ( gao ) to study the extent of off - label use in government - provided care ( eg , department of veterans affairs , bureau of prisons , and indian health service ) and in government - funded care ( eg , medicare and medicaid ) ; the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) to contract with the national academy of medicine or a similar organization to assemble management or industrial policy experts to study the costs and rewards to industry of off - label prescriptions ; or fda and the federal trade commission to investigate drugs whose off - label prescriptions account for a particularly high percentage of all prescriptions or that generate a particularly high percentage or high dollar value of sales .

pricing .

the decision to use a drug off - label based solely or primarily on price introduces a new element to study .

for example , the pricing difference between avastin and lucentis , both made by the same manufacturer with the same active ingredient , is so large that many ophthalmologists use the lower priced avastin in their treatment of macular degeneration , despite its being an off - label use .

the manufacturer included the treatment of macular degeneration in its application to fda for lucentis .

to explore the ramifications of a traditionally nonclinical element in prescribing decisions , congress could require the hhs secretary to study the relationship among pricing , access , and prescribing and its effect on patient safety .

reimbursement .

although fda approval of a drug—not for each use of a drug—is a requirement for sale in the united states , the decision to reimburse a physician or patient for a drug is made by entities such as the cms and private insurers .

such decisions , therefore , influence what drugs are prescribed and , in part , for what uses drugs are prescribed .

congress could direct the hhs secretary to study such coverage decisions or to contract with the national academy of medicine or a similarly equipped entity to do so ; or hhs to form a task force to include cms and fda , along with private insurers and others involved in coverage decisions , and patient and clinician groups representing those affected by coverage decisions , to identify areas in need of action and to recommend steps in those directions .

congress also could encourage payors to require safety and effectiveness evidence before covering off - label uses .

research .

the traditional path toward adding an indication ( reason for use ) to the labeling of a drug already approved for other uses has been for the sponsor of the drug to conduct clinical trials and submit a supplemental new drug application ( nda ) to fda .

the widespread extent of off - label use suggests that relying on that model is not helping prescribers get better information .

congress could consider assigning responsibility ( and funding ) to the national institutes of health and the patient - centered outcomes research institute for safety and effectiveness evaluations of off - label uses ; or requiring , for a drug that has substantial ( to be defined ) off - label sales , that the manufacturer fund studies , such as clinical trials , to assess the safety and effectiveness of the drug for the off - label use and submit evidence to the hhs secretary .

depending on the secretary's assessment of the evidence , the secretary could request that the manufacturer amend the drug's labeling either to add the off - label use to the label as an approved use or to add a statement that clinical evidence does not support the safety and effectiveness of the drug for the off - label use .

research transparency .

fda regulations describe standards for the design and analysis of clinical trials that a sponsor uses in an nda .

studies done by or for the manufacturer or by other groups or individuals are not always made public , in which case their findings cannot be reviewed and evaluated .

because the results of such studies may be used in support of off - label uses , by providing positive and negative incentives , congress could consider requiring or encouraging prospective posting of the designs and statistical plans of studies of off - label uses ; or public reporting of studies of off - label use .

clinical guidance .

professional societies and other clinical groups often supplement the information available to prescribers from fda - approved labeling , medical journals , and information from manufacturers .

they can issue guidelines and recommend best practices .

congress could engage such groups and encourage professional societies to develop evidence - based clinical guidelines and training regarding off - label use .

precedents from other countries .

the united states is not alone in facing the health care and economic implications of off - label use .

for example , the member countries of the european union have addressed measures involving reimbursement , guidance for prescribers , professional standards , and informed consent .

congress could require hhs to contract with the national academy of medicine or a similarly equipped entity to review measures taken by the european union and other regulatory bodies and recommend legislative or administrative actions as appropriate .

concerns over off - label use overlap with questions raised by some legislators and regulators in other contexts .

in addition to clearly related issues such as what is allowable information in direct - to - consumer advertising , promotion to clinicians , and material shared with payors and insurers , off - label use also affects the entire basis of fda regulation of drugs through its authority to approve drugs .

that means it directly or indirectly affects research , clinical innovation , transparency , patents and exclusivities , pricing , and access .

changes in law or regulation in any one area may have benefits in some areas and drawbacks in others .

for example , fda's initiative to encourage research in drugs used traditionally but never reviewed and approved by fda—so - called legacy drugs—stems from its desire for evidence of safety and effectiveness .

such evidence helps protect patients from possible use of ineffective , unsafe , or misdosed drugs .

that initiative , in turn , helps enable sponsors to conduct the clinical trials , submit new drug applications , obtain regulatory exclusivity with the new drug approval—and then raise the price of the new branded product while expecting fda to honor the exclusivity and block the sale of the drug by others .

for example , clinicians had been prescribing a compounded version of progestin for use in preventing preterm delivery .

such use had never been adequately tested in clinical trials .

one company conducted those trials , and fda approved its new drug application .

the initial price for the new drug , makena , was $30,000 for a 20-week course ; patients had been paying pharmacists $200-$400 for the same course .

unanticipated price increases can also arise from the apparent following of fda procedures .

for example , a new owner of the fda - approval of an old antiparasitic generic drug raised the price from $14 per tablet to $750 , daraprim's initial price .

such sudden and large price increases become a barrier to patient access and , therefore , a potential threat to health .

in the case of off - label prescribing , actions in any direction—whether by congress , fda , or the courts—could have both intended and unanticipated effects .

actions to limit off - label prescribing could have the intended effects of reducing safety risks and the economic cost of using drugs ineffective for their prescribed purposes .

such limits , however , could also stifle informed clinical exploration .

similarly , incentives to mount clinical trials needed to add an indication to the label could help identify and disseminate information on dosing and contradictions .

such incentives , however , could also hurt .

for example , a brand drug that added a new indication to its labeling could prevent , through exclusivities , generics from similarly modifying their labeling .

patients could need to pay more .

the recent debates over the right - to - try movement regarding use of investigational drugs by terminally ill patients may preview discussion about any proposed restrictions on off - label use .

the goldwater institute , considered a key impetus to development and passage of the 2018 enactment of a right - to - try act , looks to diminish government's role in an individual's choice and has supported dissemination of off - label information .

congress has built a process in which a robust fda can regulate drugs to protect the public's health .

is there cause for concern that perhaps a third of prescriptions are for off - label uses and that , in at least one study , three - quarters of those had minimal or no accepted scientific evidence to support their use ? .

policy tension exists over the line between wanting to ensure individuals' freedom to take drugs for off - label uses and wanting to protect the public from the risk of unsafe or ineffective drugs .

where to draw that line—and how to know when it may be time to move the line—is of continuing interest to regulators and legislators .

