the u.s. government administers multiple international food assistance programs that aim to alleviate hunger and improve food security in other countries .

some of these programs provide emergency assistance to people affected by conflict or natural disaster .

other programs provide nonemergency assistance to address chronic poverty and hunger , such as providing food to people during a seasonal food shortage or training parents and community health workers in nutrition .

current international food assistance programs originated in 1954 with the passage of the food for peace act ( p.l .

83-480 ) , also referred to as p.l .

480 .

historically , the united states has provided international food assistance primarily through in - kind a id , which ships u.s. commodities to countries in need .

congress funds in - kind food aid programs through the agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies appropriations act — known as the agriculture appropriations bill .

in 2010 , congress established the emergency food security program ( efsp ) , which provides primarily cash - based food assistance .

cash - based assistance provides recipients with the means to acquire food , including through cash transfers , vouchers , or locally and regionally procured food — food purchased in the country or region where it is to be distributed rather than from the united states .

congress funds efsp through the international disaster assistance ( ida ) account in the state , foreign operations , and related programs ( sfops ) appropriations bill .

the ida account also funds nonfood emergency humanitarian assistance , such as provision of shelter and health services .

this report provides a brief overview of the international food aid - related provisions in the fy2018 and fy2019 enacted agriculture appropriations acts — division a of the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) and division b of the consolidated appropriations act , 2019 ( p.l .

116-6 ) .

it does not cover programs funded through the sfops appropriations bill .

congress funds most u.s. international food aid programs with discretionary funding provided through annual appropriations bills .

some international food aid programs receive mandatory funding financed through usda's commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) and do not require a separate appropriation .

congress authorizes discretionary and mandatory funding levels for international food aid programs in periodic farm bills , most recently the agriculture improvement act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-334 ) .

table 1 lists each international food aid program that receives funding through agriculture appropriations .

the trump administration's fy2018 budget request proposed eliminating mcgovern - dole and ffp title ii and moving funding for international food aid to the ida account within the sfops appropriations bill .

the fy2019 budget request repeated the proposed eliminations and reorganization from the fy2018 request .

it also contained a new proposal to eliminate food for progress .

congress did not adopt the administration's fy2018 or fy2019 proposals to eliminate ffp title ii , mcgovern - dole , or food for progress .

this section summarizes the fy2018 and fy2019 administration's budget requests for u.s. international food aid programs .

both the fy2018 and fy2019 agriculture appropriations acts provided funding for u.s. international food aid programs in the foreign assistance and related programs ( title v ) and general provisions ( title vii ) titles .

this included funding for ffp title ii and mcgovern - dole .

the acts also provided funding for administrative expenses to manage existing ffp title i loans that originated while the ffp title i program was active .

the fy2019 act also provided funding for the food for progress program , which typically receives only mandatory funding .

figure 1 shows funding trends for international food aid programs funded through agriculture appropriations bills for fy2013-fy2019 .

in addition to providing funding , the agriculture appropriations bill may contain policy - related provisions that direct how the executive branch should spend certain funds .

provisions included in appropriations bill text have the force of law but generally only for the duration of the fiscal year for which the bill provides appropriations .

policy - related provisions generally do not amend the u.s. code .

table 3 compares select policy - related provisions pertaining to u.s. international food aid programs from the foreign assistance and related programs ( title v ) and general provisions ( title vii ) titles of the fy2018 and fy2019 agriculture appropriations acts .

the explanatory statement that accompanies the appropriations act , as well as the committee reports that accompany the house and senate committee - reported bills , can provide statements of support for certain programs or directions to federal agencies on how to spend certain funding provided in the appropriations bill .

while these documents do not have the force of law , they can express congressional intent .

the committee reports and explanatory statement may need to be read together to capture all of the congressional intent for a given fiscal year .

table 4 compares selected policy - related provisions pertaining to u.s. international food aid programs from the fy2018 and fy2019 house and senate committee reports and explanatory statement for the fy2019 agriculture appropriations act .

the fy2018 column includes references to the house ( h ) and senate ( s ) committee reports to allow for consideration of congressional intent .

the explanatory statement for the fy2018 agriculture appropriations act did not contain policy - related provisions pertaining to u.s. international food aid programs .

