the jones act , which refers to section 27 of the merchant marine act of 1920 ( p.l .

66-261 ) , requires that vessels transporting cargo from one u.s. point to another u.s. point be u.s. - built , and owned and crewed by u.s. citizens .

the act provides a significant degree of protection from foreign competition for u.s. shipyards , domestic carriers , and american merchant sailors .

it is a subject of debate because some experts point out that it makes domestic ocean shipping relatively expensive , constrains the availability of ships , and contributes to making it much more costly to build merchant vessels in u.s. shipyards than in shipyards abroad .

the jones act has been an issue in recent congresses , coming into prominence amid debates over puerto rico's economic challenges and recovery from hurricane maria in 2017 ; in the investigation into the sinking of the 40-year - old ship el faro with 33 fatalities during a hurricane in 2015 ; and in discussions about domestic transportation of oil and natural gas .

the law's effectiveness in achieving national security goals has also been the subject of attention in conjunction with a congressional directive that the administration develop a national maritime strategy , including strategies to increase the use of short sea shipping and enhance u.s. shipbuilding capability .

in may 2018 , the office of management and budget requested public comment on federal requirements that could be modified or repealed to increase efficiency and reduce or eliminate unnecessary or unjustified regulatory burdens in the maritime sector .

the jones act of 1920 was not the first law requiring that vessels transporting cargo domestically be u.s. - built , owned , and crewed .

rather , it was a restatement of a long - standing restriction that was temporarily suspended during world war i by p.l .

65-73 , enacted october 6 , 1917 .

laws favoring a u.s. - flag fleet over a foreign fleet were initiated by the third act of the first congress ( 1 stat .

27 , enacted july 20 , 1789 ) , which assessed lesser duties on vessels built and owned domestically than on those foreign - built and - owned .

on september 1 of the same year , congress specified that only a u.s. - built vessel owned by u.s. citizens and with a u.s. citizen captain could register as a u.s. vessel ( 1 stat .

55 ) .

in 1817 , congress enacted a precursor to the jones act by disallowing any vessel wholly or partially foreign - owned from transporting domestic cargo between u.s. ports ( 3 stat .

351 ) .

in 1886 , this prohibition was extended to vessels transporting passengers domestically ( 24 stat .

81 ) .

the early united states had a comparative advantage in shipbuilding due to its ample supplies of large timber .

during the second half of the 1800s , it lost that advantage as wooden sailing ships gave way to iron steamships , with the advantage shifting to scotland and england .

congress began debating how to respond to the steep drop - off in the share of u.s. foreign trade carried by u.s. vessels .

the fall - off in domestic coastwise transport was less severe , but railroads began offering competition to coastal shipping .

proposals to allow foreign - built vessels to sail under the u.s. flag became known as the "free ship" movement .

opponents of the free ship movement argued that the higher cost of u.s. crews in and of itself would prevent a resurgence of trade carried by u.s. vessels even if foreign - built ships were allowed .

while bills that would have allowed foreign - built vessels to qualify for u.s. - flag international service were reported by house and senate committees in the late 1800s , it was in 1912 that congress enacted such a measure ( p.l .

62-33 , 37 stat .

562 ) .

thus , since 1912 , the domestic build requirement has principally applied to vessels making domestic voyages .

in the late 1800s , congress considered but did not pass bills that would have allowed foreign - built ships in domestic trade .

rather , congress tightened the language concerning coastwise transport in response to shippers' attempts to avoid high - cost u.s. vessels .

for instance , in 1891 a shipper loaded 250 kegs of nails at the port of new york with an ultimate destination of los angeles ( redondo ) .the shipper loaded the merchandise on a foreign - flag ship bound for antwerp , belgium , where the goods were transferred to another foreign - flag ship bound for los angeles .

despite the circuitous routing and extra port charges , the freight charges were apparently less than they would have been using a u.s. - built and u.s. - owned ship to carry the nails directly between new york and los angeles .

a court found that the shipper had acted legally .

similarly , shipments from seattle to alaska often were routed via vancouver , canada , so shippers could use foreign - flag ships for both legs .

congress amended the coastwise law in 1893 ( 27 stat .

455 ) and again in 1898 ( 30 stat .

248 ) to prohibit shippers from routing cargo through a foreign port so as to avoid coastwise laws .

nonetheless , u.s. shippers continued to use foreign - flag vessels in the alaska trade by moving cargo between the united states and vancouver , canada , by rail .

in the merchant marine act of 1920 , senator wesley jones of washington , chair of the commerce committee , sought to stop this practice by requiring alaska - bound cargo to move through the port of seattle by amending the coastwise language to cover shipments "by land and water" and replacing shipments between "u.s. ports" with shipments between "u.s .

points. .

these amendments remain current law .

the jones act applies only to domestic waterborne shipments .

it does not apply to the nation's international waterborne trade , which is almost entirely carried by foreign - flag ships .

the u.s. citizen crewing requirement means that the master , all of the officers , and 75% of the remaining crew must be u.s. citizens .

if the u.s. owner of a jones act ship is a corporation , 75% of the corporation's stock must be owned by u.s. citizens .

regarding u.s. territories , the u.s. virgin islands , america samoa , and the northern mariana islands are exempt from the jones act .

therefore , foreign - flag ships can transport cargo between these islands and other u.s. points .

puerto rico is exempt for passengers but not for cargo .

vessels traveling between guam and another u.s. point must be u.s. - owned and - crewed but need not be u.s. - built .

the coast guard is in charge of enforcing the u.s. - build requirement for vessels ( 46 c.f.r .

§§67.95-67.101 ) , u.s. ownership of the carriers ( 46 c.f.r .

§§67.30-67.43 ) , and u.s. crewing ( 46 c.f.r .

§10.221 ) — essentially , the licensing of jones act operators .

it enforces these requirements when an operator seeks a "coastwise endorsement" ( 46 c.f.r .

§67.19 ) from the agency .

the terms "coastwise qualified" and "jones act qualified" are synonymous .

customs and border protection ( cbp ) is primarily responsible for determining what maritime activity falls under the act , namely defining what constitutes "transportation" and whether the origin and destination of a voyage are "u.s. points" ( 19 c.f.r .

§§4.80 – 4.93 ) .

agency interpretations of domestic shipping restrictions have been consistent since the late 1800s and early 1900s , as discussed further below .

since 1920 , congress has enacted provisions that could be said to tighten jones act requirements , as well as provisions that exempt certain maritime activities from the requirements .

in 1935 , congress forbade jones act - qualified vessels sold to foreign owners or registered under a foreign - flag to subsequently requalify as jones act - eligible ( p.l .

74-191 ) , meaning that they could never again be used in u.s. domestic trade .

this provides additional protection from competition for jones act carriers if coastal shipping demand increases , because it can take two years to construct a new ship .

in 1940 , congress expanded the jones act to cover towing vessels , such as river tugs that push barge tows and harbor tugs that assist larger ships , and salvage vessels operating in u.s. waters ( p.l .

76-599 ) .

in 1988 , congress specified that waterborne transport of valueless material , such as dredge spoil or municipal solid waste , requires use of a jones act - qualified vessel ( p.l .

100-329 ) .

recent controversies over the jones act have concerned the oceangoing ship and offshore supply vessel sectors .

the jones act also covers ships on the great lakes , river barges , harbor tugs , dredging vessels , and various kinds of passenger vessels .

the jones act ship fleet , in particular , has shortcomings compared to the merchant fleet desired by the drafters of the 1920 act as they described it in the aforementioned statement of u.s. maritime policy .

as with the commercial aspirations stated in the maritime policy of the jones act , there are also perceived shortcomings with respect to the domestic fleet's ability to serve as a naval auxiliary in times of war or national emergency .

since 1920 , congress has enacted programs that designate other fleets for sealift support , but the merchant mariners crewing jones act ships are still identified as contributing to the pool of mariners available to crew the sealift fleet .

the shrinking size of the u.s. mariner pool puts in doubt its ability to sufficiently crew a reserve sealift fleet , as discussed further below .

in 2014 ( p.l .

113-76 ) , congress directed the department of transportation and the department of defense to develop a national sealift strategy .

this has yet to be issued .

the crews of jones act oceangoing ships are arguably the most salient and immediate element that could be called upon to support military sealift .

jones act mariners typically have six months of shore leave per year , and those mariners on shore leave would be expected to crew a reserve fleet of government - owned cargo ships kept on standby for military sealift purposes ( the ready reserve force , or rrf ) .

the jones act crew of oceangoing ships consists of about 3,380 merchant mariners , which is about 29% of the total mariner pool of 11,678 mariners that marad estimates would be required to crew the government - owned reserve fleet while still concurrently being able to operate the commercial fleet .

the remaining pool of mariners would come from ( 1 ) the u.s. - flag privately owned international fleet enrolled in the maritime security program ( msp ) consisting of 60 ships and 2,386 commercial mariners , and ( 2 ) the military sealift command ( msc ) fleet of government - owned ships consisting of about 120 ships and 5,576 mariners .

while marad estimates that there is a sufficient commercial mariner pool to crew the reserve sealift fleet during a surge lasting up to 180 days , a more prolonged sealift effort would start to entail crew rotations , and marad estimates a shortfall of about 1,800 mariners in that scenario .

that the mariner pool is barely sufficient to sustain an immediate surge and is insufficient for a longer sealift effort has been a consistent finding of sealift officials for decades , even in previous periods when the mariner pool was much larger than it is today .

for instance , this was the same finding by the department of defense transportation command ( transcom ) in 2004 , when the rrf consisted of 59 ships and the mariner pool was 16,900 .

and in 1991 , when the rrf consisted of 96 ships and the mariner pool was 25,000 ( more than twice the size that it is today ) , the then marad administrator testified that the mariner pool was barely sufficient to crew the reserve sealift fleet .

while the jones act's statement of maritime policy indicated a desire for a commercial fleet that also could provide sealift in times of war , since then three other fleets of ships have been established for purposes of military sealift: the rrf , msc , and msp .

these ships are predominantly foreign - built .

the rrf , a concept that originates in a 1954 act of congress ( p.l .

83-608 ) , today consists of 46 ships that can sail upon either 5 or 10 days' notice and are on standby with a skeleton crew of about 600 commercial mariners ( 13 per ship ) , but would require an additional 1,200 mariners to sustain its operation once activated .

the msc fleet is controlled by transcom and has a subset of about 50 ships that carry military cargoes in port - to - port voyages similar to those undertaken by commercial ships .

msc ships are mostly crewed by civilian mariners who are federal employees .

the msp ships , a fleet established by congress in 1996 ( p.l .

104-239 ) , receive an operating subsidy of about $5 million per vessel per year to cover the additional cost of american crews and rely heavily on government cargoes ( military and food aid ) that pursuant to "cargo preference" law are reserved for them .

as per long - standing agreements between marad , acting as advocate for the u.s. maritime industry , and the department of defense , the military is to utilize msp ships and exhaust that capacity before it utilizes msc ship capacity .

while jones act operators are required to purchase more costly u.s. - built ships , the military sealift fleet is largely composed of more economical foreign - built ships .

jones act operators are competing in the commercial marketplace while the sealift fleet is not .

instead of relying on the jones act commercial fleet to provide oceangoing shipbuilding capability , the sealift fleet could be required to be built domestically .

the higher cost of the domestically built sealift fleet would be shared nationally , as is the case with other defense assets .

lower - cost coastwise ships would be more price - competitive with railroads , pipelines , and atbs , thereby enlarging the mariner pool available for sealift support and increasing repair and maintenance work for u.s. shipyards .

the sealift ships could also be designed to military specifications rather than be in conflict with commercial needs ( see below ) .

the military seeks cargo ships with flexible capabilities: ships not so large that they could face draft restrictions in some overseas harbors , ships with ramps or onboard cranes so that they can still unload cargo at underdeveloped or damaged ports , and ships that can carry a wide variety of cargo types and sizes .

the majority of the military sealift fleet consists of product tankers for carrying fuel and roll - on / roll - off ( ro / ro ) ships that have ramps for moving tanks , trucks , and helicopters .

it also consists of container ships used for moving ammunition and other supplies .

the military's preference for versatility is in conflict with the commercial fleet's trend toward more specialized and larger ships , a trend driven by the need for ships with the lowest operating cost .

general cargo and break - bulk ships capable of carrying a wide variety of cargo types and sizes and that were typically equipped with their own onboard cranes have been largely replaced by container ships without onboard cranes .

thus , commercial mariners may no longer have experience operating cargo cranes , as might be required in foreign ports where shore - based cranes are out of service or are not available .

the largest container ships require 45 to 50 feet of water below the waterline , far more depth than many ports can provide .

ro / ro ships have been replaced by "pure car carriers" that maximize the number of passenger cars they can carry , but may be less useful for military purposes .

cost pressures have induced commercial carriers to install engines that minimize fuel costs by operating at lower speeds and cannot achieve the higher speeds desired for military sealift ships .

in addition , more stringent sulfur emission regulations recently enacted have prompted ship operators to convert to lng - fueled engines , a fuel not globally available , or to install scrubbers , equipment that takes up cargo space and has no military utility .

licensing of engine crews is specific to engine type .

thus , a growing disparity exists between the military's ideal vessel designs and those of commercial carriers , as well as in the skill sets of the crew .

besides the deep - sea ship crews , another purported jones act contribution to military sealift is preservation of a shipyard industrial base with the knowledge and skills to build and repair ships .

the merchant marine act of 1970 ( p.l .

91-469 ) added as an additional objective of u.s. maritime policy to have a merchant marine "supplemented by efficient facilities for building and repairing vessels. .

u.s. shipyards typically build only two or three oceangoing ships per year , and none for export , so they do not achieve economies of scale .

there may be gaps of several years in between orders for container ships .

in recent years , the demand has been sufficient to sustain one shipyard that builds only commercial ships .

however , this yard stated that its employment had fallen below 100 people and that it had no vessels under construction or on order as of march 31 , 2019 .

the other shipyard that builds commercial ships also relies heavily on navy orders .

a larger number of shipyards build smaller vessels such as tour boats , ferries , tugs , barges , and offshore supply vessels .

around 1,000 barges are built in a typical year .

these vessels also fall under the jones act domestic build requirement and are rarely built for export .

however , the shipyards building smaller vessels lack dry docks of sufficient size to repair large ships .

the government - owned sealift fleet is 44 years old on average , and many of the vessels are in need of repair .

according to the maritime administrator , there is an insufficient number of large dry docks to service the sealift fleet , delaying their readiness to sail .

some of the reserve fleet has failed coast guard safety inspection , and some ships have too much steel rusted from their hulls to be seaworthy .

for example , while sailing to a readiness exercise , a hole was found in the hull of one of the ships .

according to transcom , the navy's plan to recapitalize the reserve fleet includes building new vessels in domestic shipyards , repairing ships in the current fleet to extend their service life out to 60 years , and purchasing used , foreign - built ships .

the navy has found that repairing the vessels has thus far been three times more expensive and has taken twice as long as originally projected .

it therefore is contemplating the need to accelerate the purchase of used , foreign - built ships because building new ships in u.s. yards is estimated to be 26 times more expensive and thus not affordable .

in addition to the jones act , the tariff act of 1930 is intended to support u.s. shipyards by assessing a 50% duty on the price of any nonemergency repairs on u.s. flag ships done in foreign shipyards .

a 2011 marad study found that many u.s. - flag international trading ships have repairs performed in foreign yards because , even with the 50% duty , the total cost is less than if the repairs were performed in a domestic shipyard .

a u.s. - flag operator confirms that this is still the case in 2018 .

