the poverty rate among americans aged 65 and older has declined by almost 70% in the past five decades .

in 2017 , 4.7 million people aged 65 and older had income below the federal poverty thresholds .

the poverty rate ( i.e. , the percentage who were in poverty ) among the aged fell from 28.5% in 1966 to 9.2% in 2017 .

several government programs have contributed to older americans' increased incomes , including old age , survivor and disability insurance ( oasdi , commonly known as social security ) and supplemental security income ( ssi ) .

however , certain groups of older americans , such as widows , divorced women , and never married men and women , are still vulnerable to poverty .

congress may be interested in the effect of existing programs that reduce poverty , as well as potential proposals aimed at improving income among vulnerable groups of older americans .

this report presents the time trends and current status of poverty rates among americans aged 65 and older , as well as poverty rates among different demographic groups of the aged .

this report also summarizes federal programs that may provide income to the aged poor .

over the past several decades , criticisms of the official poverty measure have led to the development of an alternative research measure called the supplemental poverty measure ( spm ) , which the census bureau also computes and releases .

this report compares the official aged poverty measure with the spm and provides statistics measuring the impact of federal cash benefits ( mainly social security and ssi ) , taxes , and in - kind benefits ( such as housing , energy , and food assistance ) on aged poverty .

poverty status is determined by comparing a measure of a family's resources against a measure of its needs .

families whose resources are less than a dollar amount representing an austere level of "needs" are considered to be in poverty .

however , defining resources and needs is not straightforward .

the official poverty measure is based on 48 dollar amounts called poverty thresholds that vary by family size and composition , but not by geographic area .

these official thresholds were developed in the 1960s , were based on food consumption in 1955 and food costs in 1961 , and are updated annually for inflation .

as such , they reflect a level of deprivation based on a restrictive food budget , but are not based on a full measurement of families' and individuals' needs and their associated costs .

family resources are measured in dollars and are based on cash income before taxes .

all poverty data presented in this report are estimates based on a survey , and like all survey estimates , they are subject to sampling and nonsampling error .

the poverty research community has discussed the official poverty measure's limitations for decades .

its use of pretax income renders it unhelpful in gauging tax credits' effects on the low - income population .

it does not consider in - kind ( noncash ) benefits , such as housing subsidies as income , and as a result cannot ( on its own ) illustrate such benefits' effects on the poor population .

although the measure of need represented by the thresholds is updated every year for overall inflation , it may not accurately reflect the current costs of basic needs , because prices for goods and services related to basic needs may not rise at the same rate as prices for luxury items .

since the official measure's initial development , new data sources have offered more detail on the goods and services families consume , but developing an approach that defines basic needs and determines available resources for families to spend on those needs has taken decades of research and discussion .

the spm resulted from that research , and is described briefly in the section , " the supplemental poverty measure . .

notwithstanding the official measure's limitations , for more than 50 years , it has provided a consistent measure of poverty in the united states , with few methodological changes over that time , and it is based on empirical measures of need ( food budgets and food consumption , albeit in 1961 and 1955 , respectively ) .

for these reasons , trends for the aged population based on the official measure are discussed below .

the proportion of americans aged 65 and older who lived in poverty has declined significantly in the past 50 years .

in 1966 , 28.5% of americans aged 65 and older had family incomes below the poverty thresholds .

by 2017 , the poverty rate among older americans had dropped to 9.2% ( see figure 1 ) .

however , whereas the proportion of persons aged 65 and older who live in poverty has fallen over the past five decades , the number of aged poor has increased since the mid - 1970s as the total number of elderly people has grown .

in 1974 , 3.1 million people aged 65 and older had income below the federal poverty thresholds , whereas in 2017 , 4.7 million people aged 65 and older had income below the thresholds .

the poverty rate for americans aged 65 and older historically was higher than the rates for adults aged 18 to 64 and children under the age of 18 , but today it is the lowest among those three age groups .

in 1966 , the poverty rate among persons aged 65 and older was 28.5% , compared with 10.5% among adults aged 18 to 64 and 17.6% among children under the age of 18 .

in 1974 , the aged poverty rate fell below the rate among children under the age of 18 , and by the early 1990s , the aged poverty rate had fallen below the rate among adults aged 18 to 64 .

the elderly poverty rate has remained lower than the nonelderly adult poverty rate since that time .

the poverty rate among americans aged 65 and older was 9.2% in 2017 , which was lower than the 11.2% poverty rate among adults aged 18 to 64 and the 17.5% poverty rate among children under 18 years old ( see figure 2 ) .

poverty status among americans aged 65 and older generally varies across different demographic groups .

this section describes the aged population's poverty status for selected demographic characteristics based on age groups , gender , marital status , and race and hispanic origin .

social security and supplemental security income ( ssi ) are the two main federal programs that provide cash benefits to the aged poor .

in 2017 , social security accounted for 78.3% of total money income among aged individuals whose family incomes were below 100% of the poverty threshold and 81.3% among those with family incomes below 125% of the poverty threshold ( see table 1 ) .

in the same year , ssi and other cash public assistance accounted for 11.0% of the total money income for aged individuals whose family incomes were below 100% of the poverty threshold and 7.6% for those with family incomes below 125% of the poverty threshold .

social security is a federal social insurance program that provides benefits to insured workers and their eligible family members , provided the workers worked in jobs covered by social security for a sufficient number of years and meet certain other criteria .

social security is not designed solely for the poor , but benefits are weighted to replace a greater share of career - average earnings for low - paid workers than for high - paid workers .

one study suggests that increased social security benefits explained most of the decline in poverty among the aged that occurred during 1967 to 2000 ( see figure 1 ) .

social security benefits alone , however , would not be sufficient to eliminate poverty for a large number of older americans .

the poverty rate among social security beneficiaries aged 65 and older was 6.5% in 2017 .

although the social security program contains a special minimum benefit provision that increases benefits to workers who have many years of low earnings and meet certain other criteria , this provision has virtually no effect on the benefits paid to today's new retirees .

according to the census bureau's analysis , 30.0% of americans aged 65 and older would live in poverty without social security benefits , holding other resources and expenses constant .

ssi is a federal assistance program that provides monthly cash benefits to aged , blind , and disabled individuals who have limited income and assets .

the program is intended to provide a minimum level of income to adults who have difficulty meeting their basic living expenses due to age or disability and who have little or no social security or other income .

some studies show that the ssi program does not provide effective income protection for the oldest americans .

for example , the maximum ssi benefit in 2017 was 75% of the poverty threshold for an elderly single person and 89% of the poverty threshold for an elderly married couple .

thus , aged ssi recipients may still be impoverished .

furthermore , the maximum ssi benefit is more generous for married couples , who are less likely to need assistance than elderly single individuals .

some researchers also suggest that restructuring the social security special minimum benefit provision could be more effective in alleviating poverty than making certain reforms to the ssi program , although a combination of reforms to both programs could be useful if regular social security benefits are greatly reduced in the future .

the federal government also provides certain noncash benefits to help the elderly poor , such as housing subsidies and supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) benefits .

congress funds housing subsidy programs , ranging from public housing to government subsidies to renters , to help poor and vulnerable populations meet their housing needs .

snap is designed primarily to increase the food purchasing power of eligible low - income households to help them buy a nutritionally adequate low - cost diet .

individuals aged 65 and older may also receive a small portion of income from some other federal programs , including refundable tax credits , school meals , temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) , the low income home energy assistance program ( liheap ) , unemployment insurance , workers' compensation , and the special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants and children ( wic ) .

the official poverty measure is of limited value for analyzing various federal programs' effects on poverty status among the aged population , but the supplemental poverty measure ( spm ) , discussed in the following section , addresses some of those impacts .

the official poverty measure was developed in the 1960s and was established by the bureau of the budget ( later the office of management and budget , omb ) for measuring the official poverty rate in the united states .

under the official poverty measure , an individual is counted as poor if his or her family's pretax money income falls below the poverty threshold .

one of the main criticisms of the official poverty measure is that pretax money income excludes the value of government noncash benefits ( such as health insurance , snap , or housing assistance ) provided either privately or publicly .

it also does not consider taxes paid to federal , state , or local governments , or tax benefits ( such as the earned income tax credit ) that families might receive .

the census bureau's spm was designed to address the official poverty measure's limitations and has been published since 2011 .

the spm poverty thresholds measure a standard of living based on expenditures for food , clothing , shelter , and utilities ( fcsu ) and "a little more" for other expenses .

its thresholds—dollar amounts related to the level of need for a family—vary by whether the family rents , owns a home with a mortgage , or owns a home without a mortgage ( the latter of which is more common among the aged population than it is among younger populations ) .

it computes the amount of resources available after taxes , includes the values of noncash benefits , and subtracts some expenses ( such as work - related expenses and medical out - of - pocket expenses , the latter of which tend to be higher among the aged than among younger populations ) .

in 2017 , the most recent data available , the spm poverty rate for persons aged 65 and older was 14.1% in 2017 , compared with 9.2% using the official poverty measure .

this higher poverty rate results largely from higher medical out - of - pocket costs among the aged , in spite of lower housing expenses among the aged , who are more likely to have paid off their mortgages .

approximately 1.2 million persons in nursing homes are aged 65 or older .

poverty status is not measured for the institutionalized population , which includes persons in nursing homes , prisons , or military personnel living on base .

this exclusion is not trivial considering that the population in nursing homes is about one - fourth as large as the 4.7 million persons aged 65 or older who were in poverty in 2017 .

poverty is used as a measure of well - being , but it measures only economic well - being and does not directly include a person's health status .

health status may influence the amount and types of income a person receives ( by affecting , for example , ability to work or receive disability benefits ) and is thus considered indirectly .

however , the noneconomic aspect of well - being that comes from good health is not considered in the poverty measures discussed in this report .

furthermore , in the spm , medical out - of - pocket expenses are considered , but the overall value of health insurance programs to the individual , which may well exceed out - of - pocket costs for medical care or insurance premiums , is not .

considering that medicaid is an important vehicle for long - term care , the benefits medicaid provides to the aged population could be characterized as fulfilling needs that are not solely medical in nature , but have economic value as well .

