disclosure provisions that require commercial actors to convey specified information to consumers occupy an uneasy and shifting space in first amendment jurisprudence .

the first amendment's free speech clause protects the right to speak as well as the right not to speak , and at least outside the context of commercial speech , courts generally disfavor any government action that compels speech .

indeed , the supreme court in 1943 described the first amendment's protection against compelled speech as a "fixed star in our constitutional constellation. .

accordingly , government actions mandating speech are generally subject to strict scrutiny by courts , and will be upheld "only if the government proves that they are narrowly tailored to serve compelling state interests. .

however , the court has also long accepted a variety of laws that require commercial actors to make certain disclosures to consumers , confirming that congress can compel certain disclosures , even those involving protected speech , without running afoul of the first amendment .

commercial disclosure requirements have largely withstood constitutional scrutiny in part because , historically , commercial speech has received less protection under the first amendment than other speech .

the government's ability to more freely regulate commercial speech has been linked to its general authority "to regulate commercial transactions. .

thus , notwithstanding the fact that commercial disclosure requirements compel speech , courts generally have not analyzed such provisions under the strict scrutiny standard .

instead , courts have often employed less rigorous standards to evaluate such provisions .

the precise nature of a court's first amendment analysis , however , will depend on the character of the disclosure requirement at issue .

in a recent decision , the supreme court distilled and explained its prior cases on this subject .

first , the court said that it has upheld some commercial disclosure requirements that target conduct and only incidentally burden speech .

this rubric likely only applies if the disclosure provision is part of a larger scheme regulating commercial conduct .

if the disclosure provision instead regulates "speech as speech," it might be subject either to intermediate scrutiny , as a government regulation of commercial speech , or to something closer to rational basis review , if the disclosure provision qualifies for review under the supreme court's decision in zauderer v. office of disciplinary counsel .

some of the court's recent cases , however , have suggested that in certain circumstances , disclosure requirements may be subject to heightened scrutiny .

this report begins with a short background on how courts generally view commercial speech under the first amendment , then reviews in more detail the possible legal frameworks for analyzing the constitutionality of commercial disclosure requirements .

supreme court precedent explaining the application of the first amendment to commercial disclosure requirements is relatively recent .

the court did not squarely hold that purely commercial speech was entitled to any protection under the first amendment until 1976 in virginia state board of pharmacy v. virginia citizens consumer council .

the court has defined commercial speech alternately as speech that "does 'no more than propose a commercial transaction'" and as "expression related solely to the economic interests of the speaker and its audience. .

in virginia board of pharmacy , the court said that commercial speech was protected , but it also emphasized that the first amendment did not prohibit all regulations of such speech .

in particular , the court said that it foresaw "no obstacle" to government regulation of "false" speech , or even of commercial speech that is only "deceptive or misleading. .

in subsequent cases , the court has explained why "regulation to assure truthfulness" is more readily allowed in the context of commercial speech , as compared with other types of speech .

while the first amendment usually protects even untruthful speech , in order to better encourage uninhibited and robust debate , the court has recognized that regulating "for truthfulness" in the commercial arena is unlikely to "undesirably inhibit spontaneity" because commercial speech is generally less likely to be spontaneous .

instead , it is more calculated , motivated by a "commercial interest. .

in particular , if a particular advertisement concerns a subject in which "the public lacks sophistication" and cannot verify the claims , the court has suggested that the government may have a freer hand to address such concerns .

four years after virginia board of pharmacy , in 1980 , the supreme court set out the standard that generally governs a court's analysis of government restrictions on commercial speech in central hudson gas & electric corp. v. public service commission .

the court first explained that commercial speech enjoys "lesser protection" than "other constitutionally guaranteed expression. .

after emphasizing that first amendment protection for commercial speech "is based on the informational function of advertising," the court said that "there can be no constitutional objection to the suppression of commercial messages that do not accurately inform the public about lawful activity. .

accordingly , the court held that the government may prohibit "forms of communication more likely to deceive the public than to inform it" as well as "commercial speech related to illegal activity. .

but if the regulated "communication is neither misleading nor related to unlawful activity," the government's action is subject to intermediate scrutiny .

under central hudson 's intermediate standard , the government must prove that the government's interest is "substantial," and that the regulation "directly advances" that interest and is "not more extensive than is necessary to serve that interest. .

the central hudson test continues to govern the constitutional analysis of government acts that infringe on commercial speech .

however , in certain circumstances , commercial speech may lose its commercial character if "it is inextricably intertwined with otherwise fully protected speech. .

and more generally , some members of the supreme court have questioned whether commercial speech should categorically receive less protection under the first amendment , suggesting that in at least some circumstances , infringements on commercial speech should instead be subject to strict scrutiny .

commentators have pointed out that , as a practical matter , supreme court decisions have increasingly struck down , rather than upheld , restrictions on commercial speech .

also relevant to the discussion of disclosure requirements , judges and legal scholars have noted that the court may be adjusting the role of the content neutrality doctrine with respect to commercial speech .

as a general matter , if a law is "content - based," in the sense that it "target[s] speech based on its communicative content," it will be subject to strict scrutiny .

the supreme court stated in reed v. town of gilbert that a regulation is content - based if it "applies to particular speech because of the topic discussed or the idea or message expressed," if it "cannot be 'justified without reference to the content of the regulated speech,'" or if it was "adopted by the government 'because of disagreement with the message [the speech] conveys.' .

disclosure requirements are generally considered content - based , given that they require regulated parties to speak a certain message , and outside the commercial context , ordinarily trigger the application of strict scrutiny .

in central hudson , however , the supreme court explained that in the context of commercial speech , "regulation of its content" is permissible .

and , as commentators have pointed out , "the very category of commercial speech is a content - based category. .

nonetheless , the court has struck down certain regulations that prohibit commercial speech solely because its content is commercial , suggesting that content neutrality might be relevant in the commercial sphere .

in its 2011 decision in sorrell v. ims health , inc. , the supreme court considered the constitutionality of a state law prohibiting pharmacies from disclosing certain pharmacy records for marketing purposes .

after observing that the law included "content - and speaker - based restrictions on the sale , disclosure , and use of" covered information , the court concluded that the law was "designed to impose a specific , content - based burden on protected expression" because it applied specifically to marketing , a particular type of speech .

consequently , the law was subject to "heightened judicial scrutiny," notwithstanding the fact that the "burdened speech result[ed] from an economic motive" and was therefore commercial .

ultimately , however , the court declined to say definitively whether central hudson or "a stricter form of judicial scrutiny" should apply because , in the court's view , the law failed to pass constitutional muster even under central hudson .

as discussed in more detail below , the shifting role of content neutrality in commercial speech doctrine holds special significance for commercial disclosure requirements: these requirements are content - based because they "compel[] individuals to speak a particular message. .

at least one legal scholar has suggested that lower courts have read sorrell as an expression of the supreme court's increasing skepticism toward restrictions on commercial speech and , since that decision , have been more likely to strike down commercial disclosure requirements .

however , the court did not expressly limit the reach of central hudson in sorrell or in subsequent cases , suggesting that , at least for now , central hudson 's standard of review applies even when a challenged action would otherwise trigger strict scrutiny as a content - based regulation of speech .

indeed , lower courts analyzing commercial disclosure requirements usually ask whether zauderer or central hudson supplies the appropriate standard of review , contemplating at most only intermediate scrutiny — even in cases decided after sorrell .

in its first amendment jurisprudence , the supreme court has generally distinguished between laws that regulate conduct and laws that regulate speech .

the court has held that conduct - focused regulations will not violate the first amendment by merely incidentally burdening speech .

for instance , while the government may regulate prices , attempts to regulate "the communication of prices" implicate the first amendment .

to take another example , the court has noted that pursuant to "a ban on race - based hiring," a regulation "directed at commerce or conduct," the government "may require employers to remove 'white applicants only' signs. .

to differentiate a regulation targeting conduct from one targeting speech , the court generally looks to the purpose of the law , asking whether the law appears to target certain content or certain speakers .

as part of this inquiry , the court may also ask whether a regulation applies because of the communicative content of the regulated party's actions .

this distinction between speech and conduct is especially significant in the context of commercial speech , given that such speech "occurs in an area traditionally subject to government regulation. .

thus , in 1978 , the supreme court said: "[i]t has never been deemed an abridgment of freedom of speech or press to make a course of conduct illegal merely because the conduct was in part initiated , evidenced , or carried out by means of language , either spoken , written , or printed. .

numerous examples could be cited of communications that are regulated without offending the first amendment , such as the exchange of information about securities , corporate proxy statements , the exchange of price and production information among competitors , and employers' threats of retaliation for the labor activities of employees .

each of these examples illustrates that the state does not lose its power to regulate commercial activity deemed harmful to the public whenever speech is a component of that activity .

the court has previously "upheld regulations of professional conduct that incidentally burden speech. .

for example , the court upheld an informed consent requirement in planned parenthood of s outheastern pennsylvania v. casey .

the casey challengers argued that a law requiring doctors to inform patients seeking abortions about "the nature of the procedure , the health risks of the abortion and of childbirth , and the probable gestational age of the unborn child" compelled doctors to speak in violation of the first amendment .

the court rejected that argument , concluding that while "the physician's first amendment rights not to speak are implicated," this was "only as part of the practice of medicine , subject to reasonable licensing and regulation by the state. .

in national institute of family and life advocates ( nifla ) v. becerra , the supreme court emphasized that the informed consent requirement upheld in casey was part of the broader regulation of professional conduct: specifically , the practice of medicine .

by contrast , the court held that the disclosure requirement at issue in nifla , which required certain health facilities to provide clients with information about state - sponsored services , could not be upheld as "an informed - consent requirement or any other regulation of professional conduct" because it was not tied to any medical procedure .

instead , in the court's view , the requirement "regulate[d] speech as speech," as opposed to regulating speech only incidentally .

while the court has made clear that the first amendment does not prohibit such incidental regulation of commercial speech , it has not articulated one overarching standard for evaluating whether such provisions are constitutionally permissible .

its decisions in this area have considered a wide variety of government actions incidentally burdening speech , and it may be that the standard varies according to the nature of the particular speech restriction evaluated .

in some cases , the court has suggested that "the first amendment is not implicated by the enforcement" of a broader regulatory scheme where the regulated conduct does not have "a significant expressive element" or the statute does not inevitably single out "those engaged in expressive activity. .

in other cases where the court has upheld a regulation that it characterized as focused on conduct rather than speech , the court investigated the strength of the government's interest and asked whether the regulation advances that interest , suggesting that the court subjected the regulation to some first amendment scrutiny — albeit using a relatively relaxed standard .

the court has never explicitly held that a commercial disclosure requirement qualifies as a constitutionally permissible incidental restriction on commercial speech .

while planned parenthood of southeastern pennsylvania v. casey did involve a disclosure requirement , the court did not address whether the informed consent requirement involved commercial or noncommercial speech either in casey or when discussing that requirement in nifla .

in nifla , the court held that a state law imposing disclosure requirements on clinics providing pregnancy - related services could not be characterized as a regulation that only incidentally burdened speech because the requirement was not tied to any specific medical procedures .

however , the court never expressly stated whether it considered the disclosures to consist of commercial or noncommercial speech .

similarly , in expressions hair design v. schneiderman , the court rejected the application of this doctrine without expressly characterizing the government action as a commercial disclosure requirement .

in that case , the court considered the constitutionality of a state law prohibiting sellers from imposing surcharges on customers who use credit cards .

the supreme court rejected the argument that this law primarily "regulated conduct , not speech," concluding that the law did not merely regulate pricing , but regulated the communication of prices by prohibiting merchants from posting a cash price and an additional credit card surcharge .

the court then remanded the case to the lower courts to consider the first amendment challenges in the first instance , leaving open the question of whether the provision could be characterized as a requirement for sellers to disclose an item's credit card price , rather than as a prohibition of certain speech .

as these cases suggest , the court has seemed reluctant in recent years to uphold government actions as conduct - focused regulations that merely incidentally burden speech , especially in the context of compelled disclosure requirements .

instead , the court has distinguished the few cases upholding government acts as incidental restrictions and subjected disclosure requirements to further scrutiny .

nonetheless , the court has left open the possibility that commercial disclosure requirements might , in the future , qualify as permissible incidental speech regulation , if they are part of a broader regulatory scheme .

if the government regulates "speech as speech," its actions will implicate the first amendment's protections for freedom of speech and may trigger heightened standards of scrutiny .

however , the first amendment does not prescribe a single analysis for all government actions that potentially infringe on free speech protections .

instead , a court's review will depend on the nature of both the government action and the speech itself .

this section first introduces the three possible levels of scrutiny a court might use to analyze a speech regulation and then explains their application to compelled commercial disclosures in more detail .

congress has enacted a wide variety of disclosure requirements , many of which arguably compel commercial speech .

for example , the securities and exchange act of 1934 sets out disclosure requirements for registering securities .

federal law , among a host of other food labeling requirements , requires "bioengineered food" to bear a label disclosing that the food is bioengineered .

direct - to - consumer advertisements for prescription drugs must contain a series of disclosures , including the drug's name and side effects .

certain appliances must contain labels disclosing information about their energy efficiency .

bills in the 115 th and 116 th congresses have proposed additional disclosure requirements , including a bill that would require large online platforms to disclose any studies conducted on users for the purposes of promoting engagement , and a bill that would require public companies to disclose climate - related risks .

recent supreme court precedent suggests that the court is more closely reviewing commercial disclosure requirements , perhaps moving away from a more deferential treatment of such provisions .

in nifla , the court held that a disclosure requirement was likely unconstitutional under zauderer because the government had not presented sufficient evidence to justify the measure — even though in other cases , the court had rejected similar challenges to commercial disclosure requirements , saying that the government did not need to present more evidence because the harm it sought to remedy was "self - evident. .

further , the court has recently suggested that if a law regulating commercial speech discriminates on the basis of content — as all disclosure requirements seemingly do — then this content discrimination might subject the law to heightened scrutiny .

if the court further embraces this view , it could be a marked departure from its opinions holding that commercial speech could be regulated on the basis of its content , so long as the government's justification for the content discrimination were sufficiently related to its legitimate interests in regulating the speech .

in concurring and dissenting opinions that have been joined by other justices , justice breyer has argued that insofar as the court's recent decisions suggest that commercial disclosure requirements should be subject to heightened scrutiny , they are inconsistent with prior case law and are not a proper application of the first amendment .

the supreme court said in nifla that it was "not question[ing] the legality of health and safety warnings long considered permissible , or purely factual and uncontroversial disclosures about commercial products. .

and lower courts have frequently upheld commercial disclosure requirements , perhaps suggesting that disclosures of the kind cited by justice breyer are not in danger of wholesale invalidation under the first amendment .

however , the majority opinion in nifla did not clarify what kind of disclosures it would consider permissible , and its opinion made clear that disclosure requirements should be scrutinized in light of the speakers they cover and the burdens they pose .

moreover , although the nifla court said that it was not questioning these disclosures' "legality," it left open the possibility that these disclosure should nonetheless be subject to heightened scrutiny .

this statement may mean only that the court believes that many commercial disclosure requirements would meet a higher standard of scrutiny .

at least one federal appellate court seems to have taken nifla as a signal that lower courts should more closely scrutinize commercial disclosure requirements .

in american beverage association v. city & county of san francisco , the ninth circuit , sitting en banc , relied on nifla to reverse a prior decision that had upheld an ordinance requiring "health warnings on advertisements for certain sugar - sweetened beverages. .

while a panel of judges had previously concluded that the disclosure requirement was constitutional under zauderer , the full ninth circuit , reviewing that decision , said: " nifla requires us to reexamine how we approach a first amendment claim concerning compelled speech. .

namely , the court held that , in light of nifla , the health warnings were likely unjustified and unduly burdensome under zauderer , noting that the regulation required the warnings to "occupy at least 20% of those products' labels or advertisements" — but that the record showed that "a smaller warning — half the size — would accomplish [the government's] stated goals. .

as such , the court held that the warnings violated the first amendment "by chilling protected speech. .

accordingly , when congress and federal agencies consider adopting new commercial disclosure requirements , or reauthorizing old ones , it may be wise to develop a record with more evidence demonstrating a need for the regulation .

under any level of scrutiny , courts will examine the government's asserted purpose for the legislation , as well as how closely tailored the disclosure requirement is to achieve that purpose .

under zauderer , particularly in light of nifla , courts may ask for evidence to support the government's claim that the regulated speech is misleading or that the government has some other interest in regulating that speech , and will likely scrutinize the disclosure requirement to make sure it is not unduly burdensome .

under intermediate scrutiny or strict scrutiny , a court may also ask whether the government considered alternative policies that would be less restrictive of speech , examining more closely the government's justifications for choosing a disclosure requirement .

