the nuclear power industry is facing severe economic challenges in the united states .

high capital costs , low electricity demand growth , and competition from cheaper sources of electricity such as natural gas and renewables have dampened the demand for new nuclear power plants and accelerated the retirement of existing reactors .

as of april 2019 , seven nuclear reactors had closed in the united states since 2012 , and another 12 had announced that they would retire by 2025 .

there are currently 98 operating u.s. reactors .

as aging reactors reach the end of their operating licenses in 2030 and beyond , the number of retirements is projected to increase .

in addition , cost and schedule overruns have hindered recent efforts to build new nuclear units in the united states .

the only power reactors currently under construction in the united states — two new units at the vogtle nuclear plant in georgia — are five years behind schedule and nearly double their original estimated cost .

all nuclear power in the united states is generated by light water reactors ( lwrs ) , which were commercialized in the 1950s and early 1960s and are now used throughout most of the world .

lwrs are cooled by ordinary ( "light" ) water , which also slows ( "moderates" ) the neutrons that maintain the nuclear fission chain reaction .

conventional lwrs are large — with 1,000 megawatts electric generating capacity ( mwe ) or more — in order to spread their high construction costs among the maximum possible number of kilowatt - hours of electricity over their operating lifetime .

at the same time conventional reactors are facing an uncertain future , some in congress contend that more nuclear power plants , not fewer , are needed to help reduce u.s. greenhouse gas emissions and bring low - carbon power to the majority of the world that currently has little access to electricity .

proponents of this view argue that the key to increasing the number of nuclear power plants is investment in "advanced" nuclear technologies , which they say could overcome the economic problems , safety concerns , and other issues that have stalled the growth of conventional lwrs .

congress enacted legislation in september 2018 that defines "advanced nuclear reactor" as "a nuclear fission reactor with significant improvements over the most recent generation of nuclear fission reactors" or a reactor using nuclear fusion ( p.l .

115-248 ) .

titled the nuclear energy innovation capabilities act of 2017 ( neica ) , the law requires the department of energy ( doe ) to take several actions to support advanced reactor development , including studying the need for a versatile fast neutron test reactor that could help develop fuels and materials for advanced reactors .

congress included $65 million for r&d to support development of the versatile test reactor in the energy and water development appropriations act for fy2019 ( division a of p.l .

115-244 ) , and the trump administration has requested $100 million more for fy2020 .

a similar definition of "advanced nuclear reactor" is included in the nuclear energy innovation and modernization act ( neima , p.l .

115-439 ) , which was signed january 14 , 2019 .

neima would require the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) to develop a regulatory framework that could be used for advanced nuclear technologies .

advocates of nuclear power cite a variety of reasons in addition to greenhouse gas reduction for preserving and expanding the u.s. nuclear industry .

they contend that a robust domestic nuclear energy industry would contribute to such goals as energy security and diversification , electricity grid resilience and reliability , promotion of a domestic nuclear component manufacturing base and associated exports , clean air , and preservation and enhancement of geopolitical influence .

the u.s. navy uses nuclear energy to power submarines and aircraft carriers .

some observers have suggested that the navy and other national security organizations benefit from maintaining a strong domestic nuclear energy industry , which provides a post - military career path for many naval reactor personnel , as well as expanding the base of qualified engineers and technicians , and strengthening the infrastructure for training and knowledge transfer .

neica lists a number of potential advantages of advanced nuclear reactors over conventional lwrs , including "inherent safety features , lower waste yields , greater fuel utilization , superior reliability , resistance to proliferation , increased thermal efficiency , and the ability to integrate into electric and non - electric applications. .

advanced reactors encompass a wide range of technologies , including next - generation water - cooled reactors ( eg , small modular light water reactors , supercritical water - cooled reactors ) , non - water - cooled reactors ( eg , lead or sodium fast reactors , molten salt reactors , and high temperature gas reactors ) , and fusion reactors .

some advanced reactor concepts are relatively new , while others have been under consideration for decades .

not all observers are optimistic about the potential safety , affordability , proliferation resistance and sustainability of advanced reactors .

because many of these technologies are in the conceptual or design phases , the potential advantages of these systems have not yet been established on a commercial scale .

testing and demonstration would be required to determine the validity of advocates' claims .

many environmental advocates contend that nuclear power would not be necessary to decarbonize world energy supplies , and that public policy should instead focus on renewable energy and efficiency .

the u.s. advanced nuclear industry has expanded in recent years to encompass an array of developers , suppliers , and supporting institutions .

by one count , there were 35 u.s. companies developing advanced nuclear reactor technologies as of november 2018 .

some have projected that the first u.s. advanced reactor could be providing electricity to the grid by the mid - 2020s .

for example , the advanced reactor company nuscale predicts that its first nuclear plant will "achieve commercial operation in 2026. .

this report discusses the history of advanced reactor technologies , briefly describes major categories of advanced reactors , provides an overview of federal programs on advanced nuclear technology , and discusses current issues and legislation .

advanced or unconventional reactor designs seek to use combinations of new and existing technologies and materials to improve upon earlier generations of nuclear reactors in one or more of the following areas: cost , safety , security , waste management , and versatility .

to achieve these improvements , advanced designs may incorporate one or more of the following characteristics: inherent or passive safety features , simplified or modular designs , enhanced load - following capabilities , high chemical and physical stability , fast neutron spectrums , and "closed" fuel cycles ( see text box on fast reactors ) .

advanced reactor technologies are often referred to as "generation iv" nuclear reactors , with existing commercial reactors constituting "generation iii" or , for the most recently constructed reactors , "generation iii+. .

advanced reactor designs may be grouped into three primary categories: advanced water - cooled reactors , which provide evolutionary improvements to proven water - based fission technologies through innovations such as simplified design , smaller size , or enhanced efficiency ; non - water - cooled reactors , which are fission reactors that use materials such as liquid metals ( eg , sodium and lead ) , gases ( eg , helium and carbon dioxide ) , or molten salts as coolants instead of water ; and fusion reactors , which seek to generate energy by joining small atomic nuclei , as opposed to fission reactors , which generate energy by splitting large atomic nuclei .

a fourth , cross - cutting category of advanced reactors is the s mall m odular r eactor or smr .

doe defines smrs as reactors with electric generating capacities of no more than 300 mw , which "employ modular construction techniques , ship major components from factory fabrication locations to the plant site by rail or truck , and include designs that simplify plant site activities required for plant assembly. .

both advanced water - cooled reactors and non - water - cooled reactors may be configured as smrs .

microreactors are relatively small - capacity smrs , defined by doe as producing 1-20 megawatts of thermal energy ( mwt ) , which could be used directly as heat for industrial processes or to generate electricity .

microreactors could be transported by truck and installed at a remote location or military base within a week , according to doe .

advanced reactor concepts may be characterized along a continuum of technological maturity .

light water - cooled smrs , high - temperature gas - cooled reactors , and sodium - cooled fast reactors are considered to be among the most mature of the unconventional reactor technologies .

molten salt reactors , gas - cooled fast reactors , and fusion reactors are generally considered to be further from commercialization .

expert estimates of timeframes for commercialization of these technologies range widely , from the mid - 2020s for the first small modular lwrs to midcentury or later for some advanced reactor concepts , such as molten salt reactors and gas - cooled fast reactors .

companies developing similar reactor technologies may be at different stages of design and manufacturing readiness .

while some experts predict that molten salt reactors will not be available before 2050 , chinese research institutions and a canadian / u.s .

company , terrestrial energy , have announced plans to bring a molten salt reactor online in the next decade .

the department of energy supports the development of advanced nuclear technologies through research and development ( r&d ) programs housed in two primary offices: the office of nuclear energy and the office of science .

collectively , advanced nuclear r&d programs ( advanced fission and fusion ) within these two offices received 23% of funding for energy r&d in fiscal year ( fy ) 2019 , more than existing nuclear , renewables , or fossil energy ( see figure 7 ) .

the advanced research projects agency — energy ( arpa - e ) also provides funding for early stage r&d for advanced nuclear projects .

the international framework on nuclear energy cooperation ( ifnec ) is an international body dedicated to ensuring that the "use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes proceeds in a manner that is efficient and meets the highest standards of safety , security and non - proliferation. .

ifnec was formed in 2010 by the members of its precursor organization , the global nuclear energy partnership .

its membership includes 34 participant countries , 31 observer countries , and 4 international observer organizations .

the united states is a participating country .

ifnec working groups focus on issues related to nuclear infrastructure development , reliable fuel services and spent fuel management , and nuclear supply chains and supplier - customer relationships .

the generation iv international forum ( gif ) is a collaborative international initiative to promote the development of the next generation of nuclear energy systems through shared r&d .

gif was created in 2000 with nine original members: argentina , brazil , canada , france , japan , south korea , south africa , the united kingdom , and the united states .

switzerland , the european union , china , russia , and australia joined subsequently .

in 2002 , after reviewing 130 advanced reactor designs , the gif identified 6 nuclear energy systems for further development .

collectively , these are known as generation iv reactors .

the six generation iv reactor technologies are: gas - cooled fast reactor , lead - cooled fast reactor , molten salt reactor , sodium - cooled fast reactor , supercritical water - cooled reactor , and very high temperature reactor .

factors used in selecting the designs include safety , sustainability , economics , physical security , proliferation resistance , and waste minimization , and they represent a range of technologies .

the gif has suggested that commercialization of some of these technologies may occur as early as 2030 , with demonstration of some technologies possibly occurring within the next decade .

each of these technologies is at a different level of technical maturity .

of these , sodium - cooled fast reactors are considered to be the most mature .

gas - cooled fast reactors , lead - cooled fast reactors , and molten salt reactors are not expected to reach commercialization until 2050 under current rates of development , although some vendors and academics have put forth more optimistic timelines .

