a growing number of americans report that they use marijuana .

as more states decriminalize the use of marijuana , the question of what impact marijuana usage has on the risk of a driver being involved in a motor vehicle crash has become more pertinent .

in a survey , the majority of state highway safety offices rated drugged driving an issue at least as important as driving while impaired by alcohol .

when faced with the issue of driver impairment due to marijuana , some stakeholders tend to approach the issue using the analogy of driver impairment due to alcohol .

however , there are important differences between the two substances .

the fact that alcohol reduces a user's ability to think clearly and to perform physical tasks has been known for decades .

extensive research has established correlations between the extent of alcohol consumption and impairment , including drivers' reaction times .

much less research has been done on marijuana .

marijuana is a more complex substance than alcohol .

it is absorbed in the body differently from alcohol ; it affects the body in different ways from alcohol ; tests for its presence in the body produce more complicated results than tests for the presence of alcohol ; and correlating its effects with its levels in the body is much more complicated than for alcohol .

that marijuana usage increases a driver's risk of crashing is not clearly established .

studies of marijuana's impact on a driver's performance have thus far found that , while marijuana usage can measurably affect a driver's performance in a laboratory setting , that effect may not translate into an increased likelihood of the driver being involved in a motor vehicle crash in a real - world setting , where many other variables affect the risk of a crash .

some studies of actual crashes have estimated a small increase in the risk of crash involvement as a result of marijuana usage , while others have estimated little or no increase in the likelihood of a crash from using marijuana .

this crs report addresses various aspects of the issue of marijuana - impaired driving , including patterns of marijuana use , the relationship and detection of marijuana use and driver impairment , and related state law and law enforcement challenges .

the report also references the congressionally required july 2017 report by the department of transportation's national highway traffic safety administration ( nhtsa ) , marijuana - impaired driving: a report to congress ( hereinafter referred to as nhtsa's 2017 marijuana - impaired driving report to congress ) , as well as other studies and research .

marijuana is a variety of the cannabis sativa plant , and contains hundreds of chemical compounds .

two significant compounds found in marijuana are tetrahydrocannabinol ( thc ) , the primary psychoactive compound , and cannabidiol ( cbd ) ; cbd is being tested for medicinal purposes , and is not itself psychoactive .

marijuana use has been recorded for millennia .

in the 20 th century , the sale , possession , and use of marijuana were made illegal in most countries , including the united states .

in recent years , however , the trend appears to be moving toward acceptance of marijuana usage .

in public opinion polls , the percentage of americans favoring legalization of marijuana has increased significantly .

as of may 2019 33 states and the district of columbia have enacted laws legalizing marijuana use under certain conditions , generally for medicinal purposes .

since colorado and washington state legalized recreational marijuana in 2012 , the number of states in which recreational use of marijuana is permitted has grown to 10 , plus the district of columbia .

these jurisdictions are home to one - quarter of the u.s. population .

in addition to states that have legalized recreational marijuana use , another 23 states and puerto rico allow marijuana to be used for treating medical conditions ( "medical marijuana" ) .

several other states are considering legalizing recreational use of marijuana .

since 2002 , the substance abuse and mental health services administration in the u.s. department of health and human services has conducted an annual , nationally representative survey of substance use among individuals ages 12 and older .

the percentage of individuals age 18 and older who self - report marijuana use in the previous month has grown slowly but steadily since 2008 .

self - reported use is highest among young adults ( ages 18-25 ) compared to all other age groups ; it rose from 16.6% to 22.1% between 2008 and 2017 .

self - reported use among adults age 26 and older rose from 4.2% to 7.9% over the same period .

this study does not break out usage patterns by state , but other studies have found that reported usage has increased in virtually all states , both in those that have loosened restrictions on marijuana usage and those that have not .

thus , the impact of a state's treatment of marijuana on the extent of marijuana usage is not clear .

some observers have speculated that states' loosening of restrictions on marijuana usage might lead to increased usage .

but the fact that usage by adults appears to be increasing in both states that have and those that have not loosened restrictions suggests that other factors may also be involved .

nhtsa has sponsored a periodic roadside survey of alcohol use among drivers for decades .

the last two surveys ( 2007 and 2013-2014 ) also looked at drug use .

in the 2013-2014 survey , 12.7% of drivers in the nighttime sample tested positive for thc , up from 8.7% in the 2007 survey .

nhtsa did not report concentrations of thc and did not attempt to evaluate impairment .

the data do not permit state - level comparisons .

driving is among the most dangerous activities the average person engages in .

it involves piloting a multiton vehicle at relatively high speeds , usually surrounded by many other such vehicles , and often bicyclists and pedestrians as well .

a moment's inattention can , but usually does not , result in a crash .

crashes are usually not serious: the vast majority of crashes result only in damage to the vehicles involved .

but in a significant percentage of crashes , one or more people are injured ( 29.3% ) , and in a fraction of crashes , people die ( 0.5% ) .

because of the potential danger to the public posed by drivers , all 50 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico have laws barring driving while impaired .

impairment involves driving performance that is degraded from its "normal" level by some cause .

many things can impair a driver's performance including alcohol , other drugs , fatigue , distraction , and emotional states such as fear or anger .

some state laws against impaired driving require that the state prove that a driver's impairment was caused by the substance or behavior at issue .

other state laws , known as per se laws , provide that a driver is automatically guilty of driving while impaired if specified levels of a potentially impairing substance are found in his or her body ( eg , blood alcohol content ( bac ) of .08% or higher , or , in some states , thc in the blood ; see table 1 ) .

relatively few studies have been done of the effect of marijuana use on driver performance .

this is due , in part , to the requirements that must be met to use marijuana in studies due to its status as a controlled substance under federal law and many state laws .

another factor complicating studies of marijuana's effects on drivers is that the potency of thc in marijuana ( i.e. , the concentration of thc ) can vary from one plant to another .

the marijuana produced by the only approved source of marijuana for federally funded research is considered by some researchers to be low quality ( potency ) .

also , the way in which marijuana is processed can affect the potency of the product , and the way the user chooses to ingest marijuana may affect the level of thc in the body .

the lack of correlation between both marijuana consumption and the level of thc in a person's system and thc levels and driver impairment reduces the usefulness of rule - of - thumb guides of impairment .

in contrast , many drivers use rules - of - thumb to guide their alcohol consumption .

while emphasizing that even low levels of alcohol consumption can cause drivers to be impaired , tables published on the internet suggest that two drinks may place a 120-pound female in breach of the 0.08% bac threshold and leave a 160-pound male with "driving skills significantly affected. .

the national transportation safety board has advised that "about 2 alcoholic drinks" within an hour will cause a 160-pound male to experience decline in visual functions and in the ability to perform two tasks at the same time .

based on current knowledge and enforcement capabilities , it is not possible to articulate a similarly simple level or rate of marijuana consumption and a corresponding effect on driving ability .

an impaired driving arrest typically begins with a law enforcement officer stopping a driver for a traffic violation or observing a driver at a crash scene or a checkpoint .

if the officer suspects that the driver is impaired by alcohol , based on the driver's behavior and signs such as the odor of alcohol or other evidence of its presence , the officer may administer a field sobriety test or preliminary breath test to check for alcohol impairment .

training for the standard field sobriety test for alcohol impairment is usually included in basic police academy courses .

the test includes 1 ) a driver heel - to - toe walk and turn test , and 2 ) a driver one - leg standing test .

law enforcement officers often are not trained in recognizing impairment from marijuana or other drugs .

nhtsa , with input from law enforcement organizations , has developed two training programs for law enforcement officers to recognize drug impairment in drivers during roadside stops .

advanced roadside impaired driving enforcement ( aride ) is a 16-hour course providing basic information on drug impairment , including indications of impairment from both marijuana and other opioids .

from 2009 through 2015 , around 8% of the nation's patrol officers received aride training .

drug recognition experts ( dre ) are trained not only to identify impairment by drugs but also to differentiate between categories of drugs .

dre training consists of 72 hours of classroom training and 40 to 60 hours of fieldwork .

this represents a considerable investment of resources on the part of the trainee's organization , since it takes the officer away from regular duties for three to four weeks .

as of 2016 , around 1% of the nation's patrol officers were active dres .

in evaluating drivers suspected of impairment , dres administer a 12-step evaluation lasting around 90 minutes .

this is not a roadside test ; the dre testing protocol calls for the testing to be done in a controlled environment .

adherence to the protocol is important for the validity of the results .

there are several subjects on which better information may aid policymaking around the issue of marijuana and impairment .

these include continued research into whether a quantitative standard can be established that correlates the level of thc in a person's body and the level of impairment , and better data on the prevalence of marijuana use by drivers , especially among drivers involved in crashes and drivers arrested for impaired driving .

currently , most states do not distinguish in their records whether drivers arrested for impaired driving are impaired by alcohol or other substances .

substance - specific impaired driving data could be of particular use in analyzing prelegalization and post - legalization data within a state and differences across states with different legal treatment of marijuana use .

given that currently the most reliable means of detecting impairment among drivers who have used marijuana is by observation of physiological , cognitive , and psychomotor indicators by law enforcement officers , another policy option is additional support for training of law enforcement officers in detecting impairment .

to improve the handling of drug - impaired driving cases , the governors highway safety association has recommended that prosecutors and judges assigned to drug - impaired driving cases receive training in the issue .

among the roughly 12 million transportation workers whose safety - sensitive status subjects them to federally mandated drug testing , federal regulations provide no opportunity for legal use of marijuana , regardless of the status of marijuana under state law .

as previously discussed , regulations that apply to safety - sensitive employees do provide an avenue for an employee who has tested positive to regain a safety - sensitive position .

crs could not identify any data on how many safety - sensitive transportation employees have lost their jobs as a result of positive tests for marijuana use .

considering the length of time that marijuana is detectable in the body after usage , and the uncertainty about the impairing effect of marijuana on driving performance , congress and other federal policymakers may elect to reexamine the rationale for testing all safety - sensitive transportation workers for marijuana usage .

alternatively , congress and federal policymakers may opt to maintain the status quo until more research results become available .

