virtually all societies attempt to remember and memorialize individuals , groups , and events as part of the preservation of shared rhetoric and history .

in the united states , there are hundreds , and possibly thousands , of memorials to various individuals , groups , and events .

these commemorative works may "engage the population in maintaining memory on a daily basis" in a way that "no documents or records can. .

decisions about which people , groups , or events to memorialize are made by many different entities , including congress , federal agencies , state and local governments , and private citizens , among others .

for example , for memorials on federal land in the district of columbia , the commemorative works act ( cwa ) requires that congress provide authorization for a new memorial .

in other areas , various laws , regulations , and policies may provide for different groups and governments to decide what should be commemorated and how .

once a decision to commemorate is made , decisionmakers face issues related to the location and cost of a memorial .

the choice of a memorial's location is significant .

memorials are arguably most meaningful when they are located in a place with a relationship to the individual , group , or event being commemorated .

in 2002 , for example , a representative from the national park service ( nps ) testified before congress about the importance of place: no memorial designed for placement in washington , d.c. could capture the emotion and awe of visitors to the uss arizona memorial , lying where it was sunk in pearl harbor .

the oklahoma city national memorial would not have nearly the power it has if it had been constructed anywhere else but at the site of the murrah building .

the memorial landscapes of gettysburg or antietam national battlefields still haunt visitors who contemplate what occurred there nearly 150 years ago .

indeed , people from all over the world continue to be drawn to these hallowed grounds to reflect on the historical events that took place at the sites or , perhaps , to pay their respects to those who lost their lives there .

this report considers the extent of federal involvement in memorials located outside the district of columbia ( washington , dc ) .

a distinction is drawn between memorials located within and outside of washington , dc , because of the exclusive role the cwa gives congress to authorize new memorials on federal land in the district of columbia , and the role of federal agencies — primarily nps and the general services administration ( gsa ) — in maintaining district - based memorials once dedicated .

other crs reports provide further discussion of memorials within the district of columbia .

no systematic law or set of regulations governs the establishment of memorials outside washington , dc .

while many such works are established without federal involvement , congress also has established or recognized numerous memorials nationwide , and some have been designated by the executive branch .

for purposes of this report , federal involvement in memorials outside the district of columbia may be classified as "high," "medium," "low," or "none. .

 ( figure 1 ) .

1 .

memorials with "high" federal involvement typically are located on federal land ; receive federal funds for design , construction , and maintenance ; and are managed by federal agencies .

these include memorials established by congress as units of the national park system or under the administration of another agency .

2 .

memorials with "medium" federal involvement typically either are located on federal land but do not receive federal funding , or are located on nonfederal land but receive assistance from a federal agency .

examples include a number of memorials designated as nps affiliated areas , which remain under nonfederal management but receive assistance from nps .

3 .

memorials with "low" federal involvement are those for which congress provides statutory recognition , but which are not located on federal land or affiliated with a federal agency , and do not receive federal funds .

4 .

memorials with no federal involvement are those that receive no federal recognition , are located on nonfederal land , and for which nonfederal resources were used to design and build the memorial .

federal involvement with memorials outside of washington , dc , currently takes a wide variety of forms .

congress has established national memorials that are entirely federally funded and managed , often as units of the national park system .

congress has also provided for more limited types of federal involvement , such as funding assistance to a nonfederally located memorial or hosting of a nonfederally funded memorial on federal land .

also , congress has provided statutory recognition to numerous nonfederal memorials without any additional federal involvement .

beyond these federally endorsed memorials , a wide variety of other entities have established and maintained memorials throughout the country with no federal connection , including some titled as "national memorials. .

for certain types of commemorations , congress has taken a more systematized approach .

for example , the cwa governs the establishment of memorials on federal lands in the district of columbia , with provisions for the creation , design , construction , and maintenance of such works .

if congress wished to consider a more systematized approach to the establishment and / or funding of national memorials outside the district of columbia , there are a number of potential options .

for example , congress could establish a statutory definition of a "national memorial" to guide decisionmaking as new proposals for commemoration arise .

congress might consider applying criteria similar to those of the cwa , or to those used by individual agencies for non - cwa memorials , that relate to the types of people and events that may be commemorated , and the amount of time that must pass between an event or individual's death and the commemoration .

congress could potentially limit the number of memorial designations that would be appropriate in a given time period , similar to current limits on the number of commemorative coins the u.s. mint can issue in a year .

for commemorative coins , committee rules have also required a minimum number of cosponsors before a bill might be considered .

creating systematic limitations of this nature for national memorials outside of washington , dc , could potentially make these designations more valuable ( if fewer opportunities for recognition were available ) and might allow time to elapse for informed historical judgment before memorials are designated .

however , such requirements might also serve to limit the number of contemporary national memorial opportunities and could be seen as reducing congress's flexibility to make case - by - case decisions about memorials .

conversely , congress might wish to increase the number of memorials that are nationally recognized outside of washington , dc , such as through the establishment of a program to identify nonfederal memorials deserving of a national designation .

such a program could potentially include provisions similar to those for the u.s. civil rights network established by p.l .

115-104 , which require the secretary of the interior to review studies and take other steps to identify federal and nonfederal sites related to the african american civil rights movement for potential inclusion in the network .

congress also could potentially consider a program to provide grants to nonfederal entities for constructing and / or maintaining national memorials outside of washington , dc .

such a program could be seen as beneficial in promoting opportunities for public learning and memory , and encouraging suitable maintenance and upkeep of valued commemorative works .

alternatively , it could be opposed ( for example , some might claim it would divert federal funds from more highly prioritized uses ) .

congress might determine that current practices surrounding the creation of national memorials outside the district of columbia are effective or that the potential cost of changes outweigh the potential benefits .

congress could thus continue to evaluate requests to designate national memorials outside washington , dc , on a case - by - case basis .

