the detection of certain per - and polyfluoroalkyl substances ( pfas ) in some public water supplies has generated public concern and increased congressional attention to the u.s. environmental protection agency's ( epa ) efforts to address these substances .

over the past decade , epa has been evaluating several pfas under the safe drinking water act ( sdwa ) to determine whether national drinking water regulations may be warranted .

epa has not issued sdwa regulations for any pfas but has taken various actions to address pfas contamination .

using sdwa authorities , in 2016 , epa issued non - enforceable health advisories for two pfas—perfluorooctanoic acid ( pfoa ) and perfluorooctane sulfonate ( pfos ) —in drinking water .

the 116 th congress has held hearings on pfas and passed legislation to address pfas contamination issues through various authorities and departments and agencies .

the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 2020 ( p.l .

116-92 ) includes several pfas provisions involving the department of defense ( dod ) and other federal agencies .

of the epa provisions related to drinking water , title lxxiii , subtitle a , directs epa to require public water systems to conduct additional monitoring for pfas and establishes a grant program for public water systems to address pfas and other emerging contaminants .

on january 10 , 2020 , the house passed h.r .

535 , a broad pfas bill that would direct epa and other federal agencies to take numerous actions to address pfas .

among its provisions , h.r .

535 would amend sdwa to direct epa to regulate pfas in drinking water and would authorize grants for communities for treatment technologies .

other bills would variously direct epa to take regulatory and other actions under several environmental statutes , including sdwa .

similar to h.r .

535 , multiple sdwa bills would require epa to establish final or interim drinking water regulations for some or all pfas , require monitoring for more of these substances , or authorize grants to assist communities in treating pfas in drinking water .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

pfas are a large , diverse group of fluorinated compounds , some of which have been used for decades in a wide array of commercial , industrial , and u.s. military applications .

since the 1940s , more than 1,200 pfas compounds have been used in commerce , and about 600 are still in use today .

the chemical characteristics of pfas have led to the widespread use of these substances for beneficial purposes ( such as firefighting ) and in the processing and manufacture of many commercial products , such as nonstick cookware , food wrapper coatings , stain - resistant carpets , waterproof clothing , and food containers .

the two pfas most frequently detected in water supplies are pfoa and pfos .

since 2002 , u.s. manufacturers have phased out the production and most uses of pfos .

in coordination with epa , manufacturers completed the phase - out of pfoa production by 2015 .

epa reports that food and consumer products represent a large portion of exposure to pfoa and pfos , while drinking water can be an additional source in the small percentage of communities with contaminated water supplies .

among the thousands of different pfas , few have sufficient health effects studies for determining a threshold at which adverse effects are not expected to occur .

most studies of potential health effects of pfas have focused on pfoa and pfos because of their predominant historical use .

for those pfas for which scientific information is available , animal studies suggest that exposure to particular substances above certain levels may be linked to various health effects , including developmental effects ; changes in liver , immune , and thyroid function ; and increased risk of some cancers .

a discussion of these studies and their results is beyond the scope of this report .

in 2016 , epa reported that public water systems in 29 states had detected at least one pfas in their water supplies .

in total , 63 public water systems serving approximately 5.5 million people reported detections of pfoa and pfos ( separately or combined ) above epa's health advisory level of 70 parts per trillion ( ppt ) .

epa has reported that pfas contamination of drinking water "is typically localized and associated with a specific facility. .

according to the agency for toxic substances and disease registry , pfas may have been released to surface or ground water from manufacturing sites , industrial use , use and disposal of pfas - containing consumer products ( eg , unlined landfills ) , fire / crash training areas , wastewater treatment facilities , and the spreading of contaminated biosolids .

a discussion of pfas use , including at u.s. military installations , and pfas disposal is not included in this report .

uncertainty about potential health effects that may be associated with exposure to specific pfas above particular concentrations—combined with the absence of a federal health - based drinking water standard—has posed challenges and created uncertainty for states , water suppliers and their customers , homeowners using private wells , and others regarding treatment or other potential responses .

state drinking water regulators and others have called for greater federal leadership to address these substances through several federal laws and , specifically , have urged epa to set federal drinking water standards for one or more pfas under sdwa .

representatives of public water systems have supported epa's commitment to follow the statutory process for regulating contaminants in drinking water , which prioritizes regulating those that occur at levels and frequency of public health concern .

sdwa provides epa with several authorities to address emerging contaminants in public water supplies and drinking water sources .

these include the authority to ( 1 ) issue health advisories , ( 2 ) regulate contaminants in water provided by public water systems , and ( 3 ) issue enforcement orders in certain circumstances .

for more than a decade , epa has been using sdwa authorities to evaluate several pfas—particularly pfoa and pfos—to determine whether national drinking water regulations may be warranted .

to date , epa has not promulgated drinking water regulations for any pfas but has taken a number of related actions .

in february 2019 , epa issued a pfas action plan , which identifies and discusses the agency's current and proposed efforts to address pfas through several statutory authorities , including sdwa .

these actions range from potential regulatory actions to public outreach on pfas .

many of these actions support epa's evaluation of pfas for potential regulation under sdwa .

these include research and development of analytical methods needed to accurately measure substances in drinking water , development of additional toxicity information to increase understanding of potential health risks associated with exposures to different pfas , and research on drinking water treatment effectiveness and costs for various pfas .

epa also plans to generate occurrence data for more pfas to determine their frequencies and concentrations in public water supplies .

further , epa is working with federal , state , and tribal partners to develop risk communication materials on pfas and plans to develop an interactive map on potential pfas sources and occurrence .

table a - 1 includes epa's selected actions and associated timelines relevant to addressing pfas in drinking water .

the challenges of regulating individual substances or categories of pfas in drinking water are multifaceted and may raise several policy and scientific questions .

technical issues involve availability of data , detection methods , and treatment techniques for related but diverse contaminants .

scientific questions exist about health effects attributed to many individual pfas and whether health effects can be generalized from one or a category of pfas to others .

policy and regulatory considerations may involve setting priorities among numerous unregulated contaminants , the value of establishing uniform national drinking water standards , and the ability to demonstrate the relative risk - reduction benefits compared to compliance costs to communities associated with regulating individual or multiple pfas .

the absence of a federal health - based standard can pose challenges for states and communities with pfas contamination .

state drinking water regulators have noted that many states may face significant obstacles in setting their own standards .

this report provides an overview of epa's ongoing and proposed actions to address pfas under sdwa authorities , with particular focus on the statutory process for evaluating pfas—particularly pfoa and pfos—for potential regulation .

it also reviews pfas - related legislation introduced in the 116 th congress , with emphasis on bills that would amend sdwa .

this report does not address the status of scientific research on health effects that may be associated with exposure to one or more pfas , nor does it discuss federal actions regarding other environmental statutes , such as the toxic substances control act ( tsca ) and the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( cercla ) .

sdwa provides epa with several authorities to address emerging contaminants in drinking water supplies and sources .

the act authorizes epa to promulgate regulations that include enforceable standards and monitoring requirements for contaminants in water provided by public water systems .

for contaminants that are not regulated under the act , sdwa authorizes epa to issue contaminant - specific health advisories that include technical guidance and identify concentrations that are expected to be protective of sensitive populations .

in addition , if the appropriate state and local authorities have not acted to protect public health , sdwa authorizes epa to take actions to abate an imminent and substantial endangerment to public health from "a contaminant that is present in or is likely to enter a public water system or an underground source of drinking water. .

in the 116 th congress , more than 40 bills have been introduced to address pfas through a broad range of actions and federal agencies .

the ndaa for fy2020 ( p.l 116-92 ) and house - passed h.r .

535 include provisions to reduce exposures to pfas in drinking water and to prevent or remediate the contamination of groundwater , surface water , and drinking water supplies from releases of these substances .

this discussion focuses primarily on legislation that amends the safe drinking water act ( sdwa ) or otherwise affect public water systems .

table 1 briefly describes relevant provisions of such bills offered in the 116 th congress .

in the context of sdwa , congressional attention has focused primarily on whether epa might set drinking water standards ( mcls ) for pfoa , pfos , and / or other pfas .

sdwa directs epa to follow a regulatory development process for contaminants , which includes consideration of technical feasibility and the assessment of health risk reduction benefits and costs , among other factors .

on occasion , congress has directed epa to promulgate a regulation for a particular contaminant within a specified time frame .

congress has used this approach to prompt epa to regulate certain contaminants already under review and / or to specify a deadline for issuing regulations under development .

in the case of pfas , representatives of public water systems and others have cautioned against bypassing sdwa's science - based and risk - driven process .

as regulatory compliance costs are borne by communities , public water suppliers have urged that regulations be data - driven to better ensure risk reduction benefits .

others have urged "federal leadership" to provide more certainty to states and communities with contaminated water supplies .

state drinking water regulators have noted that some states may lack the resources to assess and / or the authority to regulate drinking water contaminants that are not federally regulated , including pfas .

as with certain other contaminants , some states have urged epa to set national standards .

a further concern is that state - by - state actions could create public confusion regarding the safety of drinking water .

enacted december 20 , 2019 , the ndaa for fy2020 ( p.l .

116-92 ) contain pfas provisions specific to dod , epa , and several other federal agencies .

some ndaa provisions involve the use of aqueous film forming foam , while others address dod remediation of pfas - contaminated drinking water , groundwater , and surface water .

among the epa provisions , the ndaa addresses drinking water as follows: section 7311 requires epa to add to ucmr 5 all pfas or categories of pfas with validated test methods .

section 7312 amends sdwa to establish a grant program within the drinking water state revolving fund to assist water systems in addressing emerging contaminants with an emphasis on pfas .

section 7312 authorizes appropriations of $100 million annually for fy2020-fy2024 for this purpose .

on january 10 , 2020 , the house passed h.r .

535 , a broad pfas bill .

h.r .

535 contains a range of provisions that would address pfas using multiple authorities , including several epa - administered laws .

regarding drinking water , the bill includes several specific provisions , some of which would amend sdwa: section 5 would amend sdwa to require epa , within two years of enactment , to promulgate a national primary drinking water regulation for pfas with standards for pfoa and pfos at a minimum .

it would establish a separate regulatory process for pfas to accelerate epa's promulgation of drinking water standards .

among other provisions , this section would require epa to propose a regulation for a pfas within 18 months ( rather than 24 months ) of making a determination to regulate it .

this section would allow epa , when developing regulations , to rely on health risk information for one pfas to make reasoned extrapolations regarding the health risks of other pfas .

it would also direct epa to issue a health advisory within a year of finalizing a toxicity value for a single pfas or class of pfas .

section 6 would prohibit epa ( but not states ) from imposing penalties for violations of pfas drinking water regulations until five years after the date of promulgation ( to allow systems time to make capital improvements as needed for compliance ) .

section 7 would add sdwa section 1459e to direct epa to establish a competitive grant program to assist community water systems with installing treatment technologies to address pfas contamination .

to support this program , section 7 would authorize annual appropriations of $125 million for fy2020 and fy2021 and $100 million for fy2022-fy2024 .

epa would be required to give funding priority to community water systems that ( 1 ) serve a "disadvantaged community or a disproportionately exposed community," ( 2 ) provide at - least a 10% cost share , or ( 3 ) demonstrate the capacity to maintain the treatment technology .

other bills introduced in the 116 th congress would variously require epa to establish an mcl for specific pfas or for pfas as a group .

these include s. 1507 ( as reported ) , s. 1473 , and h.r .

2377 .

additionally , s. 1507 and h.r .

2800 would require public water systems to conduct monitoring for more pfas in drinking water .

several bills—including s. 1507 , h.r .

2533 / h.r .

2741 ( title ii ) , and h.r .

1417 / s. 611 —would authorize grants for public water systems and / or households to treat pfas in drinking water .

in contrast , h.r .

2570 would direct epa to establish pfas manufacturing fees to support the "pfas treatment trust fund. .

amounts in the trust fund would be available to epa , without further appropriation , to make grants to community water systems and municipal wastewater treatment works for costs associated with pfas removal .

