t he antiquities act was enacted in 1906 in response to the destruction of prehistoric ruins and other archaeological sites in the western united states , often by amateur archaeologists and treasure hunters .

the act authorizes the president to declare , by public proclamation , historic landmarks , historic and prehistoric structures , and other objects of historic or scientific interest located on federal land as national monuments .

it also authorizes the president to reserve parcels of land surrounding these objects , but limits the size of such reservations to "the smallest area compatible with the proper care and management of the objects to be protected. .

though the antiquities act was enacted with the primary goal of preserving archaeological sites , it has also been frequently used to protect naturally occurring objects , such as the geological features within the grand canyon national monument .

once a national monument is established , use of the lands and resources within the monument's boundaries are subject to the limitations specified in the proclamation itself and other sources of law , without need of congressional authorization .

since its enactment , presidents have used the antiquities act to establish 158 national monuments , reserving millions of acres of land in the process , and to modify existing monuments more than 90 times .

like many laws concerning federal lands , the antiquities act operates in the midst of an ongoing , and sometimes contentious , public policy debate regarding how to best reconcile the need to preserve natural resources and other objects located on public lands with the needs of the local communities affected by the limitations on land use that follow from the creation of a national monument .

though most monument proclamations have been uncontroversial , some have precipitated corrective legislation and litigation .

in two instances , congress passed legislation placing geographic limits on the president's authority to establish national monuments .

attempts to undo proclamations through litigation have been less successful , as courts have uniformly upheld challenged proclamations through a broad interpretation of the antiquities act .

the antiquities act has received renewed attention in recent years as a result of president trump's december 2017 proclamations reducing the size of the grand staircase - escalante national monument and the bears ears national monument .

various groups have challenged those proclamations in federal district court , arguing ( among other things ) that the antiquities act does not empower the president to diminish the size of national monuments .

these cases will be the first time a court has had an opportunity to address whether the president has such authority .

this report begins by discussing the antiquities act's legislative history .

it then provides an overview of the act's provisions before reviewing past presidential proclamations as well as judicial decisions and legislation related to certain monument proclamations .

finally , the report discusses the current litigation involving president trump's proclamations diminishing the grand staircase - escalante and bears ears monuments , with a focus on the parties' arguments addressing whether the antiquities act authorizes the president to diminish a national monument .

congress passed the antiquities act in 1906 , and president theodore roosevelt signed it into law that same year .

as this section discusses , this law's enactment marked the culmination of a multiyear effort to empower the federal government to take swift action to protect archaeological sites and other objects of historical and scientific value from destruction .

in the 1880s , a growing interest emerged in the prehistoric ruins and other archaeological sites located in the western united states .

prehistoric ruins were initially discovered by ranchers and other prospectors in colorado , new mexico , and arizona .

word of these discoveries spread rapidly , leading to extensive and unregulated excavation of these sites by antiquity hunters from around the world .

amateur excavators removed large quantities of artifacts from prehistoric sites and sold them to exhibitors , museum curators , and private collectors , often causing extensive damage to the ruins during the excavation process .

these excavations continued throughout the 1880s and 1890s , leading one observer to bemoan that "[a] commercial spirit is leading to careless excavations for objects to sell , and walls are ruthlessly overthrown , buildings torn down in hope of a few dollars' gain. .

during this period , federal law did not provide general protection against the excavation or destruction of historic sites located on public lands or require a permit before excavation could commence .

nonetheless , some limited protections did apply .

first , the general land office was authorized to "withdraw specific tracts of land from sale or entry for a temporary period," a power it exercised with increasing frequency as the threat to historic sites grew .

second , through the forest reserve act of 1891 , the president had authority to "create permanent forest reserves by executive proclamation. .

however , though lands within forest reserves were "withdrawn from disposition and entry under the homestead and other laws , they were not protected from other forms of development , especially mining. .

thus , none of these laws authorized the president to make permanent and comprehensive reservations for the purpose of preservation .

with the need for federal intervention apparent , congress set out to empower the president to expeditiously protect historic sites from further destruction .

legislation to protect the nation's antiquities was first introduced in congress in 1900 , though the various proposals differed in how they defined the objects to be protected and how the objects were to be designated .

the first bill , introduced by representative jonathan p. dolliver of iowa , would have authorized the president to designate as a park or reservation "any prehistoric or primitive works , monuments , cliff dwellings , cave dwellings , cemeteries , graves , mounds , forts , or any other work of prehistoric or primitive man" in addition to "any natural formation of scientific or scenic value or interest , or natural wonder or curiosity on the public domain. .

under this bill , the president would have had authority to designate surrounding land needed for such preservation "as [the president] may deem necessary for the proper preservation or suitable enjoyment of said reservation," and the secretary of the interior would have been empowered to acquire private lands or interests within reservation areas .

a proposal supported by the department of the interior that same year would have similarly vested protective powers in the president , but it defined the objects to be preserved more generally than representative dolliver's proposal , protecting "tracts of public land" based on their "scenic beauty , natural wonders or curiosities , ancient ruins or relics , or other objects of scientific or historic interest , or springs of medicinal or other properties. .

neither of these proposals limited the amount of land the president could reserve .

in contrast to these proposals , a bill introduced that same congress by representative john shafroth of colorado and reported out of the house committee on the public lands provided much narrower authority to the executive branch .

that legislation would have authorized the secretary of the interior — rather than the president — to "reserve from sale , entry , and settlement" any public lands containing "monuments , cliff dwellings , cemeteries , graves , mounds , forts , or any other work of prehistoric , primitive , or aboriginal man," but it would have limited the secretary to creating monuments in colorado , wyoming , and the then territories of arizona and new mexico , with no monument to exceed 320 acres .

none of these proposals passed either chamber of congress .

in the following congress , the senate did pass legislation aimed at protecting antiquities .

that legislation would have authorized the secretary of the interior to make "temporary withdrawals" of land to protect "historic and prehistoric ruins , monuments , archaeological objects , and other antiquities," but only to the extent "necessary for the preservation" of those objects .

permanent withdrawals would have been authorized for "ruins and antiquities of special importance," but the amount of land reserved could not "exceed[] six hundred and forty acres in any one place. .

as these proposals were being considered , some members of congress sought to limit the total amount of land the executive could withdraw .

during a hearing before the house committee on the public lands on the senate - passed legislation , delegate bernard rodey of new mexico expressed his desire that the bill contain "some limit upon the amount of withdrawals that [the executive] could make," noting that much of the land in new mexico was already withdrawn from public use and that many archaeological sites in need of preservation were located within this territory .

delegate rodey worried that the executive could evade an acreage limitation — such as the 640-acre limitation in the senate - passed bill — by creating multiple 640-acre tracts .

other committee members and witnesses , however , concluded that the executive was "not  .

 .

 .

likely to" evade an acreage limitation in this way and that a 640-acre limitation "would prevent very extensive reservations in any one state. .

in response to delegate rodey's concerns , edgar lee hewett — a prominent archaeologist who was closely involved in developing the antiquities act — suggested that the president's discretion could be sufficiently checked by language stating "that positively no more land shall be withdrawn than is necessary for the purpose. .

the house committee on the public lands reported the senate bill to the full house , but the legislation was opposed by the smithsonian institution and ultimately did not win passage .

after more than half a decade of debate , the 59th congress passed the antiquities act in 1906 .

legislation drafted by edgar lee hewett was introduced in both chambers of congress in 1906 .

this proposal authorized the president ( rather than the secretary of the interior ) to issue "public proclamation[s]" to protect "historic landmarks , historic and prehistoric structures , and other objects of historic or scientific interest" on federal land as "national monuments. .

this proposal also limited the amount of land reserved for each monument "to the smallest area compatible with the proper care and management of the objects to be protected[.] .

the senate bill was passed by voice vote in that chamber on may 24 , 1906 .

during the house debate , representative john lacey — chairman of the house committee on the public lands — responded to an inquiry from representative john stephens of texas as to "[h]ow much land will be taken off the market in the western states by the passage of the bill ? .

representative stephens was particularly concerned that the bill provided authority similar to the forest reserve act of 1891 , under which presidents had set aside tens of millions of acres of land .

"not very much," was representative lacey's reply , pointing to the language in the proposed legislation requiring that the amount of land reserved be "the smallest area necessary" to preserve designated objects .

this assurance mirrored that found in the house report on the bill , which explained that "[t]he bill proposes to create small reservations reserving only so much land as may be absolutely necessary for the preservation of these interesting relics of prehistoric times. .

the house passed the senate bill on june 5 , unanimously and without amendment .

president theodore roosevelt signed the bill into law on june 8 , 1906 .

the president has clear authority under the antiquities act to establish national monuments .

less clear , however , is the president's authority to diminish a previously established monument or to abolish a monument altogether .

as already discussed , several presidents in the early and mid - 20th century reduced the size of existing monuments , but none of those modifications was challenged in court , thus leaving the lawfulness of that practice unresolved .

that may soon change .

on december 4 , 2017 , president trump issued two proclamations modifying the grand staircase - escalante national monument ( established by president clinton ) and the bears ears national monument ( established by president obama ) .

this was the first time since president kennedy that a president has diminished a national monument .

president trump's proclamations explained that each of the monuments contained objects that were "not  .

 .

 .

of any unique or distinctive scientific or historic significance" and were not in danger of being damaged or destroyed .

the proclamations explained that other federal laws enacted after the antiquities act's passage protected many of these objects , such as the archaeological resources protection act and the endangered species act .

on these grounds , the proclamations concluded that the lands reserved for these monuments were "greater than the smallest area compatible with the protection of the objects for which the lands were reserved. .

all said , president trump's proclamations reduced the grand staircase - escalante monument from 1.7 million acres to 1 million acres and the bears ears monument from 1.35 million acres to 228,784 million acres .

president trump's proclamations attracted significant attention , leading many scholars to take a renewed look at presidential authority under the antiquities act .

these proclamations have also been challenged in court , and those cases are now pending in the u.s. district court for the district of columbia .

as discussed below , the plaintiffs in these cases have raised multiple arguments to oppose the proclamations .

first , the plaintiffs argue that the antiquities act does not authorize the president to abolish or diminish monuments once established .

second , the plaintiffs contend that , absent statutory authorization , president trump's proclamations exceed his authority under the constitution and conflict with congress's constitutional power to regulate public lands .

third , and finally , some of the plaintiffs have brought a claim under the apa against the secretary of the interior and other federal officials , arguing that because president trump's proclamations are unauthorized , these officials will be acting unlawfully in failing to abide by the original proclamations issued by president clinton and president obama .

the united states contests the plaintiffs' standing to sue , contends that judicial review of presidential proclamations is limited in scope , and argues that the plaintiffs' arguments are meritless in any event .

the remainder of this report discusses the central arguments made by the plaintiffs and the united states in this litigation .

there are viable arguments on both sides of the debate over the president's authority to diminish monuments .

both parties purport to rely on the text of the antiquities act , and both have marshalled historical sources and practice to support their respective interpretations .

as one scholar has concluded , "[r]isk is present all around," as "the legal authorities are mixed and none are clearly controlling. .

however , though the president's authority to diminish monuments may reasonably be questioned , it appears clear that congress has authority to codify or repeal a presidential proclamation .

the property clause of the constitution gives congress the "[p]ower to dispose of and make all needful rules and regulations respecting the territory or other property belonging to the united states. .

the supreme court has long held that "the power over the public land thus entrusted to congress is without limitations. .

and congress has exercised this authority on several occasions in response to presidential proclamations issued under the antiquities act , whether by incorporating monuments ( or portions thereof ) into the national park system , transferring certain monuments to state control , or by abolishing monuments outright .

legislation was introduced in the 115th and 116th congresses in response to president trump's proclamations diminishing the grand staircase - escalante and bears ears monuments .

some proposals would have overridden president trump's proclamations and expanded the monuments to their original ( or greater ) size .

other members of congress have proposed amending the antiquities act to limit the president's authority to declare national monuments and to bar the president from diminishing existing monuments , except in specified circumstances .

at present , none of these proposals has passed either chamber of congress .

in the absence of congressional action , the president's authority to diminish national monuments will ultimately be decided by the courts .

