this report identifies selected current major trade issues for u.s. agriculture that may be of interest to the 116 th congress .

it provides background on individual trade issues and attempts to bring perspective on the significance of each for u.s. agricultural trade .

each trade issue summary concludes with an assessment of its current status .

the report begins by examining a series of overarching issues .

these issues include u.s. agricultural trade and its importance to the agricultural sector , a brief description of the trade policy being pursued by the trump administration and its ramifications for u.s. agricultural exports , the administration's actions to mitigate the economic impact on agriculture from retaliatory actions by trading partners against its trade policies , and the implications for u.s. agriculture of the u.s. withdrawal from the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) agreement .

the report then reviews a number of ongoing trade disputes and trade negotiations while also examining a series of narrower trade issues of importance to the agricultural sector .

the format for these more focused trade issues is similar , consisting of background and perspective on the issue at hand and an assessment of their current status .

u.s. agricultural exports have long been a bright spot in the u.s. balance of trade , with exports exceeding imports in every year since 1960 .

in recent years , the value of farm exports have experienced a downturn from the record level recorded in fy2014 .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) forecasts u.s. agricultural exports in fy2019 at $141.5 billion ( see figure 1 ) .

if realized , this total would represent a decline from fy2018 , when exports totaled $143 billion .

exports in fy2018 were $3 billion above the fy2017 total but almost $11 billion below the peak of $152.3 billion in fy2014 .

the decline in the value of farm exports since fy2014 initially reflected lower market prices for bulk commodities , such as soybeans and corn .

agricultural prices and u.s. exports of certain bulk commodities such as soybeans were further affected in 2018 by retaliatory tariffs imposed on selected u.s. agricultural imports by china , canada , mexico , the european union ( eu ) , and turkey .

the retaliatory tariffs were in response to the trump administration's imposition of section 301 tariffs on certain imports from china and section 232 tariffs on u.s. imports of steel and aluminum .

u.s. agricultural imports are forecast to total $128 billion in fy2019 , slightly up from $127.6 billion in fy2018 , resulting in an agricultural trade surplus of $13.5 billion .

this would be below the surplus of $15.8 billion in fy2018 and below the record high in nominal dollars of $43.1 billion in fy2014 .

agricultural exports are important both to farmers and to the u.s. economy .

during the calendar years 2017 and 2018 , the value of u.s. agricultural exports accounted for 8% and 9% of total u.s. exports , respectively , and 5% of total u.s. imports , according to the u.s. census data .

as for the contribution of u.s. agricultural exports to the overall u.s. economy , usda's economic research service ( ers ) estimates that in 2017 each dollar of u.s. agricultural exports stimulated an additional $1.30 in business activity .

moreover , that same year , u.s. agricultural exports generated an estimated 1,161,000 full - time civilian jobs , including 795,000 jobs outside the farm sector .

with the productivity of u.s. agriculture growing faster than domestic demand , farmers and agriculturally oriented firms rely on export markets to sustain prices and revenue .

within the agricultural sector itself , the importance of exports account for around 20% of total farm production by value .

export markets are a major outlet for many farm commodities , absorbing over one - half of u.s. output for cotton and about half of total u.s. production for wheat , soybeans , and some specialty crops .

within the overall mix of agricultural exports , soybeans , corn , other feed crops , and wheat continue to rank at or near the top of the list of farm exports by volume .

the high - value product ( hvp ) category — which includes such products as live animals , meat , dairy products , fruits and vegetables , nuts , fats , hides , manufactured feeds , sugar products , processed fruits and vegetables , and other processed food products — comprises the largest share of exports in value terms .

in fy2018 , the hvp share of the value of u.s. agricultural exports represented 66% of the total .

all u.s. states export agricultural commodities , but a minority of states account for a majority of farm export sales .

in calendar year 2017 , the 10 leading agricultural exporting states based on value — california , iowa , illinois , texas , minnesota , nebraska , kansas , indiana , north dakota , and missouri — accounted for 57% of the total value of u.s. agricultural exports that year .

status : in december 2018 , congress reauthorized major agricultural export promotion programs through fy2023 with the passage of the so - called 2018 farm bill ( p.l .

115-334 ) .

title iii of the farm bill includes provisions covering export credit guarantee programs , export market development programs , and international science and technical exchange programs that are designed to develop agricultural export markets in emerging economies .

in establishing policy for u.s. participation in international trade , the trump administration has placed increased emphasis on trade deficits , which it views as an indicator of "unfair" foreign trade practices , with potential implications for u.s. industry and jobs .

with the objective of reducing trade deficits , the administration's trade policy has focused on withdrawing from or renegotiating existing trade agreements that the administration views as being "unfair ; " initiating new bilateral agreements ; and responding to the trade practices of u.s. trade partners ( whether geopolitical ally or adversary ) that it views as unfair , illegal , or threatening to u.s. industry , with punitive trade actions .

the punitive actions have included the imposition of section 232 tariffs on u.s. imports of steel and aluminum and section 301 tariffs on u.s. imports of products from china .

the direction of the administration's trade policy — for example , withdrawing from the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) agreement with japan and 10 other pacific - facing nations and engaging in trade disputes with important agricultural trading partners that have resulted in retaliatory tariffs on u.s. agricultural products — has coincided with market share losses for certain u.s. agricultural exports .

the trump administration has taken the position that current trade agreements to which the united states is a party and where the u.s. has a trade deficit or where the administration perceives that the united states is being treated unfairly must be renegotiated or the united states will withdraw from them .

furthermore , the administration questions the benefits of multi - party agreements , viewing them in some instances as improper vehicles for achieving meaningful negotiations .

the administration has also threatened to withdraw from the world trade organization ( wto ) if it fails to undergo certain reforms .

in january 2017 , the trump administration withdrew from the tpp , which was subsequently concluded by the remaining tpp signatories under a modified framework renamed the comprehensive and progressive agreement for trans - pacific partnership ( cptpp ) in march 2018 .

under u.s. initiative , the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) was renegotiated as the u.s. - mexico - canada agreement ( usmca ) .

usmca was signed by the leaders of the three nations in november 2018 but requires legislative ratification to enter into force .

in contrast to the trump administration's view of regional or multilateral negotiations , the administration believes that greater potential gains can be achieved under bilateral negotiations where two countries can negotiate directly in the absence of group consensus .

the administration has sought to update some existing bilateral trade agreements and open new bilateral negotiations: the administration negotiated selected modifications to the u.s. - south korea free trade agreement .

the administration has notified congress of its intent to begin negotiations under trade promotion authority ( tpa ) with trading partners including japan , the eu , and the united kingdom ( uk ) .

the administration is currently engaged in bilateral trade negotiations with china in an attempt to resolve the current trade dispute that has resulted in retaliatory tariffs on a wide range of u.s. agricultural products .

status : the administration's trade policy actions have in some cases resulted in retaliatory tariffs against u.s. agricultural product exports , while the status of new agreements with several important agricultural trading partners , such as canada and mexico , remains uncertain .

u.s. agricultural exports continue to be subject to retaliatory tariffs imposed by trading partners in response to the administration's imposition of section 232 tariffs on steel and aluminum and section 301 tariffs on china .

the signed usmca awaits consideration by congress and ratification by canada and mexico .

numerous stakeholders have raised concerns that u.s. agriculture will lose export market shares to competitors due to u.s. withdrawal from tpp and its absence from cptpp .

some stakeholders wonder whether agriculture will be prioritized in all planned bilateral negotiations .

the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) had indicated that it may pursue negotiations with japan in stages , declaring that the automobiles sector will be a priority .

at the same time , both president trump and the secretary of agriculture have stated that u.s. - japan negotiations would occur in stages with a "very quick" deal on agriculture .

however , the japanese economy minister has stated that the united states and japan would not reach an agreement in any one sector before other sectors .

elsewhere , the eu negotiating mandate for conducting trade negotiations with the united states articulates that a key eu goal is "a trade agreement limited to the elimination of tariffs for industrial goods only , excluding agricultural products. .

as for the uk , it cannot formally negotiate or conclude a new trade agreement with the united states until it exits the eu .

since 2002 , canada has been the united states' top agricultural export market , with u.s. agricultural exports averaging over $20 billion between fy2016 and fy2018 .

in fy2018 , canada accounted for 14% of the total value of u.s. agricultural exports to all destinations .

mexico has been the third - largest market for u.s. agricultural exports since fy2010 .

u.s. agricultural exports to mexico averaged over $18 billion between fy2016 and fy2018 , accounting for 13% of the total value of u.s. agricultural exports to all destinations in fy2018 .

several other trade issues may be of interest to congress .

a key objective of u.s. trade negotiations has been to establish a common framework for approval , trade , and marketing of the products of agricultural biotechnology .

among other high - profile issues , geographical indications are increasingly becoming an agricultural trade issue .

in addition , u.s. farm and food interests continue to see potential market expansion opportunities in cuba , but interested exporters regard a prohibition on private u.s. financing as a major obstacle to this end .

on the import side of the trade ledger , in march 2019 , the united states initiated its review of the generalized system of preference ( gsp ) , which provides duty - free tariff treatment for certain products imported from developing countries .

the eu has historically been one of the top u.s. agricultural export markets , currently ranking as the fourth - largest buyer of u.s. agricultural products .

u.s. agricultural exports to the eu totaled $12.7 billion in fy2018 and for fy2019 is forecast to reach $13.4 billion .

tree nuts , soybeans , and alcoholic beverages are among the top u.s. exports to the eu based on value .

the eu is also a major supplier of u.s. agricultural products .

the united states imported $23.7 billion worth of agricultural products in fy2018 , and usda forecasts imports of $24 billion in fy2019 .

processed agricultural products such as wine and beer , essential oils , cheese , and other consumer - oriented food products are the top u.s. purchases from the eu .

based on the value of agricultural trade , the u.s. agricultural trade deficit with the eu was $11 billion in fy2018 and is projected to be $10.6 billion in fy2019 .

in 2018 , exports of u.s. livestock and products totaled $29.6 billion , while imports totaled $16.5 billion .

foreign demand for u.s. animals and products supports prices of domestic livestock , poultry , and dairy products , while imports help to meet u.s. consumer demand for a variety of livestock and dairy products .

u.s. producers in the livestock sector look to the u.s. government to negotiate market access agreements , monitor international trading policies , and settle trade disputes , including restrictions that certain countries impose on u.s. exports in response to animal disease concerns .

the 164-member wto oversees and administers multilateral trade rules , serves as a forum for trade liberalization negotiations , and resolves trade disputes through its dispute settlement understanding ( dsu ) .

as a signatory member of the wto , the united states has committed to abide by wto rules and disciplines , including those that govern domestic farm policy .

the wto's general rules concerning subsidy disciplines , trade behavior , and market access concessions apply to all members .

two developments in 2018 have created some uncertainty about whether the united states will remain in compliance with rules and spending limits for domestic support programs that it has agreed to in the wto .

these developments are farm program changes under both the 2018 farm bill ( p.l .

115-334 ) and a new usda direct payment program — the mfp — implemented in 2018 under other statutory authorities in response to foreign trade retaliation targeting u.s. agricultural products .

the outcome will depend on market conditions , but the potential for non - compliance would be heightened if market prices for major commodity crops were to weaken and lower prices were to generate farm program payments above current usda projections .

in general , the farm program changes enacted in the 2018 farm bill incrementally shift farm safety net outlays away from decoupled programs that do not tie crop support payments to production and toward coupled programs that are potentially more market distorting .

this resulted from the addition of a new , albeit temporary , coupled support program ( the mfp ) and , in the 2018 farm bill , from raising support levels for existing coupled programs and from removing several of the coupled programs from individual farm payment limit requirements .

direct farm support payments may occur under: one of the revenue - support programs authorized by the farm bill — the market assistance loan ( mal ) , agricultural risk coverage ( arc ) , price loss coverage ( plc ) , and dairy margin coverage ( dmc ) programs ; a program authorized by the secretary of agriculture using authority under the ccc charter to make payments in support of u.s. agriculture — two such programs are the cotton ginning cost share ( cgcs ) program and the mfp ; or one of the four disaster assistance programs — the livestock forage disaster program ( lfp ) , livestock indemnity program ( lip ) , tree assistance program ( tap ) , and emergency assistance for livestock , honeybees , and farm - raised fish program ( elap ) .

in a change from previous policy , the 2018 farm bill excluded payments made under mal , lip , tap , and elap from annual individual payment limits .

dmc , like its predecessor — the margin protection program — operates without any farm payment limit .

the absence of a limit on benefits received by an individual farmer under these programs represents the potential for unlimited , fully coupled usda farm support outlays that would count against u.s. domestic support limits agreed to under u.s. wto commitments .

mal payments are coupled directly to actual production ( subject to a producer's participation choice ) .

dmc payments are made on a producer - selected share of a historical production base that is adjusted upward for annual growth in national average milk production .

milk producers must participate in the program to receive the annual base adjustment .

thus dmc payments are treated as coupled .

the 2018 farm bill raised support levels for both dairy producers under the dmc and for several program crops under mal , including barley , corn , grain sorghum , oats , extra - long - staple cotton , rice , soybeans , dry peas , lentils , and small and large chickpeas .

higher support levels increase the potential for higher payments during a market downturn .

such payments count against the market - distorting spending limit .

furthermore , coupled payments can influence producer production choices in favor of those farm activities expected to receive larger support payments .

if such payments are noticeably large relative to the commodity's farm value and result in surplus production that moves into international markets , then they could attract the attention of competitor nations .

such spillovers , if measurably harmful to foreign export competitors or producers , could lead to challenges under the wto's dispute settlement process .

of the direct payment programs , arc and plc are partially decoupled from producer behavior: payments are made to a portion ( 85% ) of historical base acres irrespective of actual plantings .

because of this they are notified as non - product specific and have been excluded from counting against wto spending limits under a special "de minimis" exclusion , which allows minimum amounts of domestic support even if they are market distorting .

most of the other direct support programs — mal , dmc , lfp , lip , tap , and elap — count against the united states' annual market - distorting "amber box" payment limit of $19.1 billion .

cgcs and mfp are special cases .

the united states has yet to notify spending under either of these programs to the wto , so their exact wto spending classification is currently unknown .

however , because their payments are coupled directly to specific commodities , they could well be included with other market - distorting payments subject to the spending limit .

to the extent that producers expect payments under these programs to recur , they can become market distorting and subject to potential wto challenge .

secretary perdue has , however , stated that mfp was a one - time assistance and would not be extended beyond the package announced in july 2018 .

cgcs outlays were $326 million in 2016 and $216 million in 2018 .

actual outlays under mfp are estimated at $5.2 billion in 2018 and $3.5 billion in 2019 .

the u.s. sugar program does not rely on direct payments from usda .

instead , usda provides indirect price support via mal loans to processors at statutorily fixed prices ( which were raised slightly by the 2018 farm bill ) while limiting the amount of sugar supplied for food use in the u.s. market .

in its 2015 notification of domestic support to the wto ( the most recent notification year ) , usda notified the implicit cost of the sugar program at $1.5 billion .

the federally subsidized crop insurance program was largely unchanged by the 2018 farm bill .

annual usda premium subsidies — which have averaged $6.4 billion per year since 2011 — count against the u.s. trade - distorting spending limit of $19.1 billion .

payments under u.s. conservation programs are deemed generally non - market distorting and are notified as "green box" payments , which are not subject to any spending limit .

status: most recent studies suggest that , for u.s. program spending to exceed the $19.1 billion cumulative spending limit , even with the addition of large mfp payments and higher mal and dmc support levels , a combination of events would have to occur that would broadly depress commodity prices .

perhaps more relevant to u.s. agricultural trade is the concern that , because the united states plays such a prominent role in most international markets for agricultural products , any distortion resulting from u.s. policy would be both visible and potentially vulnerable to challenge under wto rules .

the united states was a major force behind the establishment of the wto in 1995 and the rules and procedures governing its dsu .

the united states has frequently used dsu , often successfully .

since the summer of 2017 , the united states has blocked the appointment of new dsu appellate body ( ab ) jurists , which has limited the ability of the system to hear dispute cases .

the ab currently has three jurists ( the minimum number to hear a case ) out of a total of seven positions .

in december 2019 , the terms of two of the three will expire , potentially leaving the ab unable to function if no new jurists are appointed .

status: since the inception of the wto in 1995 , the united states has brought to it 46 cases on agriculture .

of these cases , 34 were fully or partially decided in favor of the united states by the wto panel hearing the case .

most recently , the wto ruled in favor of the united states against china over chinese domestic support policies for its agricultural sector and over china's administration of its market access policies .

the united states has notified the wto on a similar domestic support case against india .

however , if no new members are appointed to the wto ab , then pending u.s. cases may be unable to move forward toward a ruling .

in september 2016 , ustr filed a dispute settlement case ( ds511 ) at the wto over chinese domestic support policies for its agricultural sector that ustr alleged were inconsistent with wto rules and commitments .

furthermore , ustr contended that china's policies had distorted international trade in wheat , rice , and corn and that government support payments were in excess of china's wto spending limits .

in december 2016 , ustr requested that wto establish a dispute settlement panel to examine china's domestic support levels for these crops , a request that was fulfilled in january 2017 .

in its challenge , ustr contended that the level of support that china provided for rice , wheat , and corn had exceeded — by nearly $100 million from 2012 through 2015 — the level to which china had committed to when it joined the wto .

ustr also asserted that china's price support for domestic production had been above the world market prices since 2012 , thereby creating an incentive for chinese farmers to increase production of the subsidized crops , which in turn displaced imports from the united states and elsewhere .

when china acceded to the wto in 2001 , some of its domestic support policies — including market price support and certain producer payments and input subsidies linked to production — became subject to an annual spending limit of 8.5% of each product's value based on china's domestic prices .

since all of china's domestic production was potentially eligible for the above - market support prices — and on the assumption that all domestic producers had incorporated the high support levels into their production decisions — ustr stated that the correct measure of total support should be based on the total production of wheat , rice , and corn in the provinces and regions where the support programs operated .

however , ustr asserted that china reported the subsidies only on the smaller quantities purchased by the government .

ustr also argued that china's fixed external reference price for wheat , rice , and corn should be based on the three - year averages of 1986-1988 world prices , as specified in the wto agreement on agriculture .

in contrast , china had used the much higher 1996-1998 prices , which had resulted in smaller price gap calculations .

finally , the united states and china disagreed on whether to measure the level of market price support for milled or unmilled rice and the appropriate conversion factor between the two .

status: on february 28 , 2019 , the wto dispute settlement body ( dsb ) found that china had exceeded its domestic support limits for wheat and rice in each year between 2012 and 2015 and therefore was not in compliance with its wto commitment .

the panel agreed with china's reference price calculations based on 1996-1998 prices because these years had been used in china's wto accession documentation .

the panel disagreed with china's methodology of calculating domestic support taking into consideration only the purchases made by the government .

the dsb panel made recommendations for calculation of reference prices and domestic support for china in order to comply with its wto commitments .

the dsb panel did not make a ruling on corn because , following the 2015 harvest , china made changes to its calculations of corn prices that were found to be less market distorting than the method used prior to 2015 .

if neither the united states nor china appeals the report , the findings and recommendations in the report would be adopted within 60 days of public circulation .

china recently stated that it will not appeal the wto ruling .

on december 15 , 2016 , ustr filed another wto dispute settlement case ( ds517 ) against china , alleging that china's administration of its trqs for wheat , rice , and corn are unclear and that china had failed to fill the within - quota commitments , thus undermining u.s. exports .

while china announced on an annual basis the opening of trqs , ustr stated that china's application criteria and procedures were unclear and that china did not provide meaningful information on how it actually administered the trqs .

when china joined the wto in 2001 , it agreed to create trqs to allow imports of wheat , rice , and corn .

imports within the set quota volume would be levied a lower within - quota tariff rate , while imports beyond the set quota amount would be levied at a higher tariff rate .

under china's wto commitments , by 2004 , the wheat trq would reach 9.6 million metric tons , rice 5.4 million metric tons , and corn 7.2 million metric tons .

the in - quota tariffs for all three commodities are 1% , while the over - quota tariffs are set at 65% .

despite the low within - quota tariff , china's trqs for wheat , rice , and corn have never been filled even when imported grains were priced lower and were more competitive than domestic grains .

according to prices reported by china's ministry of agriculture , during 2014-2016 , the import prices were lower by about 30-40% for wheat , 25-35% for rice , and 15-35% for corn .

ustr states that china's trq administration appears to restrict imports and fails to provide sufficient information to permit the processing of quota application and importation .

status: on september 22 , 2017 , a wto dsb panel was established on "china — tariff rate quotas for certain agricultural products" ( ds517 ) .

on april 18 , 2019 , the wto ruled in favor of the united states , stating that "china's administration of its trqs for wheat , rice and corn were inconsistent with its obligations under the wto to administer trqs on a transparent , predictable and fair basis. .

the wto recommends that china make changes to make its trq administration to conform with its wto obligations .

in may 2018 , the united states challenged india's domestic agricultural support notifications at the wto , charging that india had under - notified spending on its market price support for rice and wheat for the marketing years 2010 / 11 through 2013 / 14 .

the united states alleged that india's market price support for wheat and rice exceeded its allowable levels of trade distorting domestic support under the wto .

in november 2018 , the united states also challenged india's domestic support for cotton , stating that it exceeded its allowable level under its wto commitments .

at about the same time , australia , brazil , and guatemala challenged india's level of domestic support for sugar , charging that india had violated its wto commitment levels .

in february 2019 , the united states further challenged india stating that it had substantially underreported its market price support for chickpeas , pigeon peas , black matpe ( a type of black lentil ) , mung beans , and lentils .

according to ustr , when calculated using the wto agreement on agriculture methodology , india's market price support for each of these pulses has exceeded the allowable levels of trade - distorting domestic support under india's wto commitments .

status: the united states' challenge to india's domestic support for rice and wheat was raised at the may 2018 wto committee on agriculture ( coa ) meeting .

ustr raised the issue concerning india's cotton price support during the november 2018 coa meeting , and the challenge against india's domestic support for pulses was raised at the february 2019 coa meeting .

ustr raised these issues at the coa to alert india and other wto members that the united states is aware and concerned about india's underreporting of its domestic agricultural subsidies .

ustr intends to continue challenging india's domestic support for agriculture at upcoming coa meetings and , if necessary , could pursue these concerns through wto's dispute settlement mechanism .

