the remnants of the vietnam war ( 1963-1975 ) and other regional conflicts have left mainland southeast asia as a region heavily contaminated with unexploded ordnance , or uxo .

more than 45 years after the united states ceased its extensive bombing of cambodia , laos , and vietnam , hundreds of civilians are still injured or killed each year by uxo from those bombing missions or by landmines laid in conflicts be tween cambodia and vietnam ( 1975-1978 ) , china and vietnam ( 1979-1990 ) and during the cambodian civil war ( 1978-1991 ) .

while comprehensive surveys are incomplete , it is estimated that more than 20% of the land in cambodia , laos , and vietnam are contaminated by uxo .

over more than 25 years , congress has appropriated more than $400 million to assist cambodia , laos , and vietnam in clearing their land of uxo .

more than 77% of the assistance has been provided via programs funded by the department of state .

in addition , the united states has provided treatment to those individuals maimed by uxo through u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) programs and the leahy war victims fund .

despite ongoing efforts by the three countries , the united states , and other international donors , it reportedly could take 100 years or more , at the current pace , to clear cambodia , laos , and vietnam of uxo .

during that time period , more people will likely be killed or injured by uxo .

in addition , extensive areas of the three nations will continue to be unavailable for agriculture , industry , or habitation , hindering the economic development of those three nations .

in 2016 , president obama pledged $90 million over a three - year period for uxo decontamination programs in laos—an amount nearly equal to the total of u.s. uxo assistance to that nation over the previous 20 years .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2019 ( p.l .

116-6 ) provides $196.5 million globally for "conventional weapons destruction," including $159.0 million for "humanitarian demining," under the department of state's international security assistance programs .

of the humanitarian demining funds , $3.85 million is appropriated for cambodia , $30.0 million for laos , and $15.0 million for vietnam .

the act also provides $13.5 million for global health and rehabilitation programs under the leahy war victims fund .

moving forward , the 116 th congress will have an opportunity to consider what additional efforts , if any , the u.s. government should undertake to address the war legacy issue of uxo in mainland southeast asia in terms of the decontamination of the region and the provision of medical support or assistance to uxo victims .

beyond the immediate assistance such uxo - related programs would provide to cambodia , laos , and vietnam , u.s. aid on this war legacy issue may also foster better bilateral ties to those nations .

for example , some observers view u.s. assistance to vietnam for the war legacy issue of agent orange / dioxin contamination as playing an important role in improving bilateral relations .

since 1993 , the united states has provided uxo and related assistance to southeast asia via several different channels , including the center for disease control ( cdc ) , the department of defense ( dod ) , the department of state ( dos ) , and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) ( see table 1 ) .

for all three countries covered by this report , most of the assistance has been provided by dos through its nonproliferation , anti - terrorism , demining and related programs / conventional weapons destruction ( nadr - cwd ) account .

usaid assistance to cambodia , laos , and vietnam has consisted primarily of leahy war victims fund programs for prostheses , physical rehabilitation , training , and employment .

laos , cambodia , and vietnam have been the largest recipients of u.s. conventional weapons destruction ( cwd ) funding in east asia .

in december 2013 , the united states and vietnam signed a memorandum of understanding on cooperation to overcome the effects of "wartime bomb , mine , and unexploded ordnance" in vietnam .

in their november 2017 joint statement , president trump and president tran dai quang "committed to cooperation in the removal of remnants of explosives from the war. .

the u.s. government has been providing uxo - related assistance to southeast asia for over 25 years , with contributions amounting to over $400 million .

despite this sustained level of support , as well as the efforts of the governments of cambodia , laos , and vietnam , it may take decades to clear these three nations of the known uxo contamination .

these estimates , however , are based on incomplete information , as systematic nationwide uxo surveys have not been completed in either cambodia or laos .

the legacies of war recognition and unexploded ordnance removal act ( h.r .

2097 ) would authorize $50 million each year for fiscal years 2020 to 2024 for address the uxo issue in cambodia , laos , and vietnam .

the legislation also would authorize the president to provide humanitarian assistance for developing national uxo surveys , uxo clearance , and support for capacity building , risk education and uxo victims assistance in each nation .

it would require the president to provide an annual briefing on related activities to the house committee on appropriations , the house committee on foreign affairs , the senate committee on appropriations , and the senate committee on foreign relations .

southeast asia's ongoing uxo challenge may present a number of issues for congress to consider and evaluate .

among those issues are f undin g levels —it is uncertain how much money it would take to decontaminate all three nations or provide adequate assistance to their uxo victims .

given this uncertainty , is the level of u.s. assistance being provided to cambodia , laos , and vietnam to conduct humanitarian demining projects adequate to significantly reduce the uxo casualty risk in a reasonable time period ? .

in addition , is the recent distribution of funding across the three nations equitable given their relative degrees of uxo contamination and their internal ability to finance demining projects ? .

coordination across agencies —is there appropriate coordination across the u.s. agencies—the department of defense , the department of state , and usaid—in providing demining assistance in southeast asia ? .

are these agencies utilizing the appropriated funds efficiently and effectively ? .

focus on clearance —most of the appropriated funds have been for humanitarian demining projects and technical support , with less funding for assistance to uxo victims .

the focus on clearance , rather than assistance on uxo victims , may in part be due to a concern about possible post - conflict liability issues .

in light of past practices , should the u.s. government increase its support for uxo victims in cambodia , laos , and vietnam beyond those being currently provided via the leahy war victims fund ? .

implications for bilateral relations —has the amount and types of u.s. uxo assistance to cambodia , laos , and vietnam been a significant factor in bilateral relations with each of those nations ? .

in vietnam , work on war legacy issues formed an early part of building normalized relations in the post - war period—ties that have broadened into closer strategic and economic linkages .

in cambodia and laos , uxo - related assistance has been one of the broadest areas for substantive cooperation between the united states and two countries with which the united states has had relatively cool relations .

would a change in the amount or type of assistance provided be beneficial to u.s. relations with cambodia , laos , or vietnam ? .

should the u.s. government use uxo assistance to pressure other entities , such as vietnam's mnd , to be more cooperative in the uxo decontamination effort ? .

uxo p revention —the department of defense has implemented a policy that is to eventually replace all cluster munitions with ones whose failure rate is below 1% .

should the u.s. government undertake additional efforts to reduce the amount of post - conflict uxo from u.s. munitions , including prohibiting the use of u.s. funding for certain types of submunitions that may leave uxo ? .

given dod's current views and policies on cluster munitions and landmines , does this preclude the united states from joining the 2010 convention on cluster munitions or 1999 ottawa convention on landmines ? .

precedents and lessons for other parts of the world —are there lessons that can be drawn from u.s. assistance for uxo clearance and victim relief in southeast asia that may be applicable to programs elsewhere in the world , including afghanistan and iraq ? .

have the levels of assistance the united states has offered in southeast asia signaled a precedent for other parts of the world ? .

during the 115 th congress , legislation was introduced that would have addressed some of these general issues associated with uxo , though none directly addressed the current situation in southeast asia .

the unexploded ordnance removal act ( h.r .

5883 ) would have required the secretary of defense , in concurrence with the secretary of state , to develop and implement a strategy for removing uxo from iraq and syria .

the cluster munitions civilian protection act of 2017 ( h.r .

1975 and s. 897 ) would have prohibited the obligation or expenditure of u.s. funds for cluster munitions if , after arming , the unexploded ordnance rate for the submunitions was more than 1% .

