the 116 th congress continues its interest in u.s. research and development ( r&d ) and in evaluating support for federal r&d activities .

the federal government has played an important role in supporting r&d efforts that have led to scientific breakthroughs and new technologies , from jet aircraft and the internet to communications satellites , shale gas extraction , and defenses against disease .

in recent years , widespread concerns about the federal debt , recent and projected federal budget deficits , and federal budget caps have driven difficult decisions about the prioritization of r&d , both in the context of the entire federal budget and among competing needs within the federal r&d portfolio .

increases in the budget caps for fy2018 and fy2019 reduced some of the pressure affecting these decisions , but the concerns remain and the caps for fy2020 have not been increased .

the u.s. government supports a broad range of scientific and engineering r&d .

its purposes include specific concerns such as addressing national defense , health , safety , the environment , and energy security ; advancing knowledge generally ; developing the scientific and engineering workforce ; and strengthening u.s. innovation and competitiveness in the global economy .

most of the r&d funded by the federal government is performed in support of the unique missions of individual funding agencies .

the federal r&d budget is an aggregation of the r&d activities of these agencies .

there is no single , centralized source of r&d funds .

agency r&d budgets are developed internally as part of each agency's overall budget development process .

r&d funding may be included either in accounts that are entirely devoted to r&d or in accounts that include funding for non - r&d activities .

agency budgets are subjected to review , revision , and approval by the office of management and budget ( omb ) and become part of the president's annual budget submission to congress .

the federal r&d budget is then calculated by aggregating the r&d activities of each federal agency .

congress plays a central role in defining the nation's r&d priorities as it makes decisions about the level and allocation of r&d funding — overall , within agencies , and for specific programs .

in recent years , some members of congress have expressed concerns about the level of federal spending ( for r&d and for other purposes ) in light of the federal deficit and debt .

other members of congress have expressed support for increased federal spending for r&d as an investment in the nation's future competitiveness .

as congress acts to complete the fy2020 appropriations process , it faces two overarching issues: the amount of the federal budget to be spent on federal r&d and the prioritization and allocation of the available funding .

this report begins with a discussion of the overall level of r&d in president trump's fy2020 budget request , followed by analyses of r&d funding in the request from a variety of perspectives and for selected multiagency r&d initiatives .

the remainder of the report discusses and analyzes the r&d budget requests of selected federal departments and agencies that , collectively , account for approximately 99% of total federal r&d funding .

selected terms associated with federal r&d funding are defined in the text box on the next page .

appendix a provides a list of acronyms and abbreviations .

on march 11 , 2019 , president trump released his proposed fy2020 budget .

he provided additional details the following week .

completion of the fy2019 budget process on february 15 , 2019 , more than four months after the start of fy2019 , as well as a government shutdown , led to both a delay in the scheduled release of the president's fy2020 budget request , and the use by the office of management and budget of a mix of estimated continuing appropriations act fy2019 funding levels ( generally , for agencies whose fy2019 appropriations were enacted after the start of fy2019 ) and enacted fy2019 funding levels ( generally , for agencies whose appropriations were enacted prior to the start of fy2019 ) .

as a result , the aggregate ( total ) fy2019 r&d funding levels for all agencies in the analytical perspectives addendum to the president's fy2020 budget are estimated "using fy 2019 enacted appropriations where available and annualized continuing resolution [levels] for agencies without enacted appropriations prior to feb. 15 , 2019. .

with enactment of the remaining fy2019 appropriations acts in the consolidated appropriations act , 2019 ( p.l .

116-6 ) , the administration's estimated aggregate r&d funding level no longer accurately reflects total enacted fy2019 r&d funding .

omb has not issued a document with comprehensive r&d figures for each agency or in aggregate .

therefore , the analysis of government - wide r&d funding in this report , as well as of some of the individual agency analyses , compares the president's request for fy2020 to the fy2018 actual level .

as information about the agencies' fy2019 r&d levels becomes available , the agency sections of this report will be updated to reflect that information and to make comparisons to the president's fy2020 request .

president trump is proposing approximately $134.1 billion for r&d for fy2020 , a decrease of $1.7 billion ( 1.2% ) below the fy2018 level of $135.8 billion .

adjusted for inflation , the president's fy2020 r&d request represents a constant - dollar decrease of 5.2% from the fy2018 actual level .

the president's request includes continued r&d funding for existing single - agency and multiagency programs and activities , as well as new initiatives .

this report provides government - wide , multiagency , and individual agency analyses of the president's fy2020 request as it relates to r&d and related activities .

additional information and analysis will be included as the house and senate act on the president's budget request through appropriations bills .

federal r&d funding can be analyzed from a variety of perspectives that provide different insights .

the following sections examine the data by agency , by the character of the work supported , and by a combination of these two perspectives .

for many years , presidential budgets have reported on multiagency r&d initiatives .

often , they have also provided details of agency funding for these initiatives .

some of these efforts have a statutory basis — for example , the networking and information technology research and development ( nitrd ) program , the national nanotechnology initiative ( nni ) , and the u.s .

global change research program ( usgcrp ) .

these programs generally produce annual budget supplements identifying objectives , activities , funding levels , and other information , usually published shortly after the presidential budget release .

other multiagency r&d initiatives have operated at the discretion of the president without such a basis and may be eliminated at the discretion of the president .

president trump's fy2020 budget is largely silent on funding levels for these efforts and whether any or all of the nonstatutory initiatives will continue .

some activities related to these initiatives are discussed in agency budget justifications and may be addressed in the agency analyses later in this report .

this section provides available multiagency information on these initiatives and will be updated as additional information becomes available .

the remainder of this report provides a more in - depth analysis of r&d in 12 federal departments and agencies that , in aggregate , receive nearly 99% of total federal r&d funding .

agencies are presented in order of the size of their fy2020 r&d budget requests , with the largest presented first .

annual appropriations for these agencies are provided through 9 of the 12 regular appropriations bills .

for each agency covered in this report , table 7 shows the corresponding regular appropriations bill that provides primary funding for the agency , including its r&d activities .

because of the way that agencies report budget data to congress , it can be difficult to identify the portion that is r&d .

consequently , r&d data presented in the agency analyses in this report may differ from r&d data in the president's budget or otherwise provided by omb .

funding for r&d is often included in appropriations line items that also include non - r&d activities ; therefore , in such cases , it may not be possible to identify precisely how much of the funding provided in appropriations laws is allocated to r&d specifically .

in general , r&d funding levels are known only after departments and agencies allocate their appropriations to specific activities and report those figures .

as of the date of this report , the house had completed action on none of the 12 regular appropriations bills for fy2020 ; the senate had completed action on none of the bills .

none of the 12 had been enacted as law .

this report will be updated as congress takes additional actions to complete the fy2020 appropriations process .

in addition to this report , crs produces individual reports on each of the appropriations bills .

these reports can be accessed via the crs website at http: / / www.crs.gov / iap / appropriations .

also , the status of each appropriations bill is available on the crs web page , status table of appropriations , available at http: / / www.crs.gov / appropriationsstatustable / index .

the mission of the department of defense is to provide "the military forces needed to deter war and ensure our nation's security. .

congress supports research and development activities at dod primarily through the department's research , development , test , and evaluation ( rdt&e ) funding .

these funds support the development of the nation's future military hardware and software and the science and technology base upon which those products rely .

most of what dod spends on rdt&e is appropriated in title iv of the annual defense appropriations bill .

 ( see table 8 . ) .

however , rdt&e funds are also appropriated in other parts of the bill .

for example , rdt&e funds are appropriated as part of the defense health program , the chemical agents and munitions destruction program , and the national defense sealift fund .

the defense health program ( dhp ) supports the delivery of health care to dod personnel and their families .

dhp funds ( including the rdt&e funds ) are requested through the defense - wide operations and maintenance appropriations request .

the program's rdt&e funds support congressionally directed research on breast , prostate , and ovarian cancer ; traumatic brain injuries ; orthotics and prosthetics ; and other medical conditions .

congress appropriates funds for this program in title vi ( other department of defense programs ) of the defense appropriations bill .

the chemical agents and munitions destruction program supports activities to destroy the u.s. inventory of lethal chemical agents and munitions to avoid future risks and costs associated with storage .

funds for this program are requested through the defense - wide procurement appropriations request .

congress appropriates funds for this program also in title vi .

the national defense sealift fund supports the procurement , operation and maintenance , and research and development associated with the nation's naval reserve fleet and supports a u.s. flagged merchant fleet that can serve in time of need .

in some fiscal years , rdt&e funding for this effort is requested in the navy's procurement request and appropriated in title v ( revolving and management funds ) of the appropriations bill .

rdt&e funds also have been requested and appropriated as part of dod's separate funding to support efforts in what the george w. bush administration termed the global war on terror ( gwot ) and what the obama and trump administrations have referred to as overseas contingency operations ( oco ) .

in appropriations bills , the term overseas contingency operations / global war on terror ( oco / gwot ) has been used ; president trump's fy2020 budget uses the term overseas contingency operations .

typically , the rdt&e funds appropriated for oco activities go to specified program elements ( pes ) in title iv .

according to the comptroller of the department of defense , the fy2020 oco request is divided into three requirement categories — direct war , enduring , and oco for base .

for purposes of this report , these categories of oco funding requests will be reported collectively .

in addition , oco / gwot - related requests / appropriations have included money for a number of transfer funds .

in the past , these have included the iraqi freedom fund ( iff ) , the iraqi security forces fund , the afghanistan security forces fund , and the pakistan counterinsurgency capability fund .

congress typically has made a single appropriation into each such fund and authorized the secretary to make transfers to other accounts , including rdt&e , at his discretion .

these transfers are eventually reflected in title iv prior - year funding figures .

for fy2020 , the trump administration is requesting $104.294 billion for dod's title iv rdt&e pes ( base plus oco ) , $8.334 billion ( 8.7% ) above the enacted fy2019 level .

 ( see table 8 . ) .

in addition , the request includes $732.3 million in rdt&e through the defense health program ( dhp ; down $1.447 billion , 66.4% from fy2019 ) , $875.9 million in rdt&e through the chemical agents and munitions destruction program ( down $10.8 million , 1.2% from fy2019 ) , and $3.0 million for the inspector general for rdt&e - related activities ( down $1.0 million , 25.4% from fy2019 ) .

the fy2020 budget included no rdt&e funding via the national defense sealift fund , the same as the fy2019 enacted level .

rdt&e funding can be analyzed in different ways .

rdt&e funding can be characterized organizationally .

each of military department requests and receives its own rdt&e funding .

so , too , do various dod agencies ( eg , the missile defense agency and the defense advanced research projects agency ) , collectively aggregated within the defense - wide account .

rdt&e funding also can be characterized by budget activity ( i.e. , the type of rdt&e supported ) .

those budget activities designated as 6.1 , 6.2 , and 6.3 ( basic research , applied research , and advanced technology development , respectively ) constitute what is called dod's science and technology program ( s&t ) and represent the more research - oriented part of the rdt&e program .

budget activities 6.4 and 6.5 focus on the development of specific weapon systems or components for which an operational need has been determined and an acquisition program established .

budget activity 6.6 provides management support , including support for test and evaluation facilities .

budget activity 6.7 supports the development of system improvements in existing operational systems .

many congressional policymakers are particularly interested in dod s&t program funding since these funds support the development of new technologies and the underlying science .

some in the defense community see ensuring adequate support for s&t activities as imperative to maintaining u.s. military superiority into the future .

the knowledge generated at this stage of development may also contribute to advances in commercial technologies .

the fy2020 request for title iv s&t funding ( base plus oco ) is $14.135 billion , $1.524 billion ( 9.7% ) below the fy2019 enacted level .

within the s&t program , basic research ( 6.1 ) receives special attention , particularly by the nation's universities .

dod is not a large supporter of basic research when compared to nih or nsf .

however , over half of dod's basic research budget is spent at universities .

the trump administration is requesting $2.320 billion for dod basic research for fy2020 , $208.4 million ( 8.2% ) below the fy2019 enacted level .

dod is a substantial source of federal funds for university r&d in certain fields , such as aerospace , aeronautical , and astronautical engineering ( 40% ) ; electrical , electronic , and communications engineering ( 39% ) ; mechanical engineering ( 28% ) ; computer and information sciences ( 28% ) ; and materials science ( 25% ) .

the mission of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) is "to enhance and protect the health and well - being of all americans ... by providing for effective health and human services and fostering advances in medicine , public health , and social services. .

this section focuses on hhs research and development funded through the national institutes of health , an hhs agency that accounts for nearly 97% of total hhs r&d funding .

other hhs agencies that provide funding for r&d include the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) , food and drug administration ( fda ) , agency for healthcare research and quality ( ahrq ) , health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) , and administration for children and families ( acf ) ; additional r&d funding is attributed to departmental management .

the department of energy ( doe ) was established in 1977 by the department of energy organization act ( p.l .

95-91 ) , which combined energy - related programs from a variety of agencies with defense - related nuclear programs that dated back to the manhattan project .

today , doe conducts basic scientific research in fields ranging from nuclear physics to the biological and environmental sciences ; basic and applied r&d relating to energy production and use ; and r&d on nuclear weapons , nuclear nonproliferation , and defense nuclear reactors .

the department has a system of 17 national laboratories around the country , mostly operated by contractors , that together account for about 40% of all doe expenditures .

the administration's fy2020 budget request for doe includes about $12.783 billion for r&d and related activities , including programs in three broad categories: science , national security , and energy .

this request is 18.6% less than the enacted fy2019 amount of $15.712 billion .

 ( see table 10 for details. ) .

the request for the doe office of science is $5.546 billion , a decrease of 15.8% from the fy2019 appropriation of $6.585 billion .

funding would decrease for each of the office's six major research programs .

in basic energy sciences , almost half the proposed decrease would result from the approaching end of construction on the linac coherent light source ii ( no funding requested for fy2020 , down from $129 million in fy2019 ) .

funding for biological and environmental research would decrease by $211 million ( 29.9% ) , with reductions concentrated in the earth and environmental systems sciences subprogram .

in advanced scientific computing research , the office of science exascale computing project would receive $189 million , down 18.9% from $233 million in fy2019 .

funding for fusion energy sciences would decrease by $161 million ( 28.6% ) , including a $25 million ( 18.9% ) decrease in the u.s. contribution to construction of the international thermonuclear experimental reactor ( iter ) , a fusion energy demonstration and research facility in france .

the request for doe national security r&d is $4.925 billion , an increase of 11.8% from $4.406 billion in fy2019 .

funding for weapons activities rdt&e would increase 37.9% , including an increase of $123 million for advanced simulation and computing and an increase of $95 million ( 190.3% ) for enhanced capabilities for subcritical experiments .

in defense nuclear nonproliferation r&d , reactor conversion activities would transfer to a non - r&d account ; excluding this accounting change , funding for the remaining program would increase by 3.8% .

funding for the naval reactors program would decrease by 7.8% overall , with increases for operations , infrastructure , and technology development offset by previously planned decreases in funding for construction and two major multiyear projects .

the request for doe energy r&d is $2.313 billion , a decrease of 51.0% from $4.721 billion in fy2019 .

many of the proposed reductions in this category are similar to the administration's fy2019 budget proposals .

funding for energy efficiency and renewable energy r&d would decrease by 66.3% , with reductions in all major research areas and a shift in emphasis toward early - stage r&d rather than later - stage development and deployment .

funding for fossil energy r&d would decrease by 24.1% , with reductions focused particularly on coal carbon capture and storage ( $69 million , down from $199 million in fy2019 ) and natural gas technologies ( $11 million , down from $51 million in fy2019 ) .

the request for fuel cycle r&d is $90 million ( down from $264 million in fy2019 ) , and nuclear energy would decrease by 37.9% , with no funding requested for the integrated university program ( $5 million in fy2019 ) or the supercritical transformational electric power ( step ) r&d initiative ( $5 million in fy2019 ) .

the advanced research projects agency - energy ( arpa - e ) , which is intended to advance high - impact energy technologies that have too much technical and financial uncertainty to attract near - term private - sector investment , would be terminated .

the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) was created in 1958 by the national aeronautics and space act ( p.l .

85-568 ) to conduct civilian space and aeronautics activities .

nasa has research programs in planetary science , earth science , heliophysics , astrophysics , and aeronautics , as well as development programs for future human spacecraft and for multipurpose space technology such as advanced propulsion systems .

in addition , nasa operates the international space station ( iss ) as a facility for r&d and other purposes .

the administration is requesting about $17.845 billion for nasa r&d in fy2020 .

this is 0.1% less than fy2019 funding of about $17.865 billion .

for a breakdown of these amounts , see table 11 .

nasa r&d funding comes through five accounts: science ; aeronautics ; space technology ( called exploration technology in the administration's budget request ) ; exploration ( deep space exploration systems in the request ) ; and the iss , commercial crew , and commercial low earth orbit ( leo ) development portions of space operations ( called leo and spaceflight operations in the request ) .

the fy2020 request for science is $6.304 billion , a decrease of 8.7% from fy2019 .

within this total , funding for earth science would decrease by $151 million ( 7.8% ) ; funding for planetary science would decrease by $136 million ( 4.9% ) ; and funding for astrophysics would decrease by $347 million ( 29.1% ) .

the request for earth science includes no funding for the pre - aerosol , clouds , and ocean ecosystem ( pace ) mission or the climate absolute radiance and refractivity observatory ( clarreo ) pathfinder mission .

pace and clarreo pathfinder were also proposed for termination in the fy2018 and fy2019 budgets but were funded by congress .

the request for planetary science includes $593 million for a mission to jupiter's moon europa , but in contrast to prior congressional direction , the mission would launch on a commercial rocket and would not include a lander .

the planetary science request also includes $210 million for the lunar discovery and exploration program , initiated in fy2019 , to fund public - private partnerships for research using commercial lunar landers .

the request for astrophysics does not include funding for the wide field infrared space telescope ( wfirst , $312 million in fy2019 ) .

the proposed increase of $48 million for the james webb space telescope ( jwst ) would provide $155 million more for jwst in fy2020 than was projected in the fy2019 budget ; this change reflects previously announced cost increases and schedule delays .

the fy2020 request for aeronautics is $667 million , a decrease of 8.0% from fy2019 .

the request includes $104 million for the low boom flight demonstrator program , intended to demonstrate quiet supersonic flight .

the fy2020 request for exploration technology ( currently space technology ) is $1.014 billion , an increase of 9.4% from fy2019 .

the request proposes $119 million for a mostly new lunar surface innovation initiative .

it proposes $45 million for a restructured in - space robotic servicing program , down from $180 million for the restore - l robotic servicing mission in fy2019 .

the fy2020 request for deep space exploration systems ( currently exploration ) is $5.022 billion , a decrease of 0.6% from fy2019 .

this account funds development of the orion multipurpose crew vehicle and the space launch system ( sls ) heavy - lift rocket , the capsule and launch vehicle mandated by the nasa authorization act of 2010 for future human exploration beyond earth orbit .

the first test flight of sls carrying orion but no crew ( known as em - 1 ) is now expected no earlier than june 2020 .

the first flight of orion and the sls with a crew on board ( known as em - 2 ) is expected by april 2023 .

funding for orion , the sls , and related ground systems ( collectively known as exploration systems development ) would decrease by $651 million ( 15.9% ) .

the account also funds exploration r&d , which would increase by $622 million ( 64.9% ) .

the request for exploration r&d includes $821 million for a platform in lunar orbit ( known as the gateway ) to serve as a test bed for deep space human exploration capabilities .

in the leo and spaceflight operations account ( currently space operations ) , the request for commercial crew is $102 million , a decrease of 41.1% from fy2019 ; the request for the iss is $1.458 billion ; and the request for commercial leo development , a new program in fy2019 , is $150 million ( an increase of 275.0% ) .

the reduction in commercial crew funding reflects the expected transition of commercial crew activities from development to operations: the first post - certification crewed flight to the iss is planned for late fy2019 .

the commercial leo development program is intended to stimulate a commercial space economy in low earth orbit , including the commercial provision of nasa's requirements for research and technology demonstration after the proposed end of direct iss funding in 2025 .

the national science foundation supports basic research and education in the nonmedical sciences and engineering .

congress established the foundation as an independent federal agency in 1950 and directed it to "promote the progress of science ; to advance the national health , prosperity , and welfare ; to secure the national defense ; and for other purposes. .

the nsf is a primary source of federal support for u.s. university research , especially in mathematics and computer science .

it is also responsible for significant shares of the federal science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) education program portfolio and federal stem student aid and support .

nsf has six appropriations accounts: research and related activities ( rra , the main research account ) , education and human resources ( ehr , the main education account ) , major research equipment and facilities construction ( mrefc ) , agency operations and award management ( aoam ) , the national science board ( nsb ) , and the office of inspector general ( oig ) .

appropriations are generally provided at the account level , while program - specific direction may be included in appropriations acts , or accompanying conference reports or explanatory statements .

because final fy2019 funding was not available at the time the fy2020 budget request was prepared , requested r&d funding is compared to the fy2018 actual funding .

fy2019 funding levels , enacted february 15 , 2019 , are included for reference .

these amounts are available only at the account level ; fy2019 r&d breakouts and subaccount funding amounts are not yet available for comparison .

funding for r&d is included in the rra , ehr , and mrefc accounts .

 ( the rra and ehr accounts also include non - r&d funding. ) .

together , these three accounts comprise 95% of the total requested funding for nsf .

actual r&d obligations for each account are known after nsf allocates funding appropriations to specific activities and reports those figures .

the budget request specifies r&d funding for the conduct of research , including basic and applied research , and for physical assets , including r&d facilities and major equipment .

funding amounts for fy2018 actual and fy2020 requested levels are reported by account , including amounts for r&d conduct and physical assets where applicable , in table 12 .

overall .

the administration is requesting $7.07 billion for the nsf in fy2020 , $1.01 billion ( 12.5% ) less than the fy2019 enacted amount , and $752 million ( 9.6% ) less than the fy2018 actual amount .

the request would decrease budget authority in three accounts relative to the fy2018 enacted level: rra by $717.4 million ( 11.2% ) , ehr by $80.4 million ( 8.9% ) , and nsb by $200,000 ( 4.7% ) .

the request would increase budget authority for the mrefc account by $36.9 million ( 19.8% ) and provide slight increases to the aoam ( 2.6% , $8.4 million ) and oig ( 1.7% , $260,000 ) accounts .

overall , nsf estimates that , under the fy2020 request , agency - wide funding rates ( i.e. , the percentage of submitted proposals that are successfully awarded funding ) would decrease slightly from 24% to 23% , with 1,317 fewer new competitive awards , compared to fy2018 .

as a proportion of nsf's total funding , r&d activities account for approximately 81% .

for fy2020 , $5.72 billion is requested for r&d activities , a 10% decrease from fy2018 actual funding for r&d of $6.36 billion .

the total request includes $5.22 billion ( 91% ) for the conduct of r&d , and $506 million ( 9% ) for r&d facilities and major equipment .

of funding requested for the conduct of r&d , 87% is requested for basic research , and 13% for applied research .

overall funding for r&d facilities and major equipment supports not only the construction and acquisition phases , funded through mrefc ( $223 million requested ) , but also the planning , design , and postconstruction operations and maintenance , funded through rra ( $282 million requested ) .

research .

the administration seeks $5.66 billion for rra in fy2020 , an $857 million ( 13.1% ) decrease compared to the fy2019 enacted funding , and a $717 million ( 11.2% ) decrease compared to fy2018 actual funding .

compared to the fy2018 actual levels , the fy2020 request includes decreases for 8 of the 10 rra subaccounts .

the largest percentage decrease would go to the office of polar programs ( 19.6% , $98.3 million decrease ) .

the largest percentage increase would go to the u.s. arctic research commission account ( 6.3% , $90,000 increase ) .

the fy2020 request also includes $151 million for the rra established program to stimulate competitive research ( epscor ) program , a $19.4 million ( 11.3% ) decrease compared to fy2018 actual funding .

within the rra account , the fy2020 request includes $5.08 billion for r&d , a decrease of $634 million ( 11.1% ) compared to the fy2018 actual amount .

of this amount , the majority ( $4.80 billion , 94% ) is requested for the conduct of research , including $4.38 billion for basic research and $417 million for applied research .

education .

the fy2020 request for the ehr account is $86.5 million ( 9.5% ) less than the fy2019 enacted amount and $80.4 million ( 8.9% ) less than the fy2018 actual level .

by program division , the division of human resource development would receive an increase of $15.6 million ( 9.6% ) over the fy2018 actual level .

the divisions of research on learning in formal and informal settings , graduate education , and undergraduate education would receive decreases of 20.4% ( $182 million requested ) , 5.5% ( $244 million requested ) , and 13.8% ( $219 million requested ) , respectively .

ehr programs of particular interest to congressional policymakers include the graduate research fellowship program ( grfp ) and national research traineeship ( nrt ) programs .

the fy2020 request for grfp is $257 million , a reduction of $27.9 million ( 9.8% ) from the fy2018 actual level .

the fy2020 request for nrt is $49.5 million , a $4.3 million ( 8.0% ) decrease from fy2018 .

within ehr , requested funding for r&d is $420 million , which is $37.7 million ( 8.2% ) less than the fy2018 actual funding amount and accounts for approximately 7.3% of the agency's total r&d request .

all of the requested funding would support the conduct of r&d , including $150 million for basic research and $270 million for applied research .

construction .

the mrefc account supports large construction projects and scientific instruments , with all of the funding supporting r&d facilities .

the administration is seeking $223 million for mrefc in fy2020 , $36.9 million ( 19.8% ) more than the fy2018 enacted amount , and $72.5 million ( 24.5% ) less than the fy2018 actual amount .

requested mrefc funding would support continued construction of the large synoptic survey telescope ( lsst , $46.3 million requested , 5.1% decrease from fy2019 enacted ) and antarctic infrastructure modernization for science ( aims , $97.9 million requested , 5.6% decrease from fy2019 enacted ) .

the request includes $33.0 million for upgrades to the large hadron collider in switzerland , which would represent the first year of a five - year project .

additionally , $45.0 million is requested for mid - scale research infrastructure projects in the $20 million to $70 million range ; this is a new funding line - item in the mrefc account meant to manage support for upgrades to major facilities and stand - alone projects in this range as a portfolio .

other initiatives .

the fy2019 nsf budget request includes funding for three multiagency initiatives .

this funding is included in multiple nsf appropriations accounts , and r&d amounts are not separately provided .

the national nanotechnology initiative would receive $389 million , $179 million ( 31.4% ) less than in fy2018 .

the networking and information technology research and development program would receive $1.20 billion , a decrease of $98.2 million ( 7.6% ) .

the u.s .

global change research program would receive $224 million , $30.0 million ( 11.8% ) less than in fy2018 .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) was created in 1862 , in part to support agricultural research in an expanding , agriculturally dependent country .

today , usda conducts intramural research at federal facilities with federally employed scientists and supports external research at universities and other facilities through competitive grants and formula - based funding .

the breadth of contemporary usda research spans traditional agricultural production techniques , organic and sustainable agriculture , bioenergy , nutrition needs and food composition , food safety , animal and plant health , pest and disease management , economic decisionmaking , and other social sciences affecting consumers , farmers , and rural communities .

four agencies carry out usda's intramural research and education activities , grouped together into the research , education , and economics ( ree ) mission area .

the agencies involved are the agricultural research service ( ars ) , national institute of food and agriculture ( nifa ) , national agricultural statistics service ( nass ) , and economic research service ( ers ) .

the fy2019 enacted appropriation ( p.l .

116-6 ) provides a total of $3,424.1 million in discretionary spending for the four agencies .

the administration is requesting a total of $2,868.7 million for the four agencies in fy2020 , a 16.2% reduction ( $555.4 million ) .

most of that year - over - year reduction ( 78% ) is attributable to the reduced request for ars salaries and expenses and the ars buildings and facilities account ( see table 13 ) .

the remainder of the year - over - year reduction comes from decreases in certain research and education , extension , and integrated activities in nifa , as well as in nass and ers .

in addition to discretionary appropriations , agricultural research is funded by state matching contributions and private donations or grants , as well as certain mandatory funding authorized by the farm bill .

usda's fy2019 enacted discretionary appropriations and the administration's fy2020 request for the four research agencies are discussed below .

two agencies of the department of commerce have major r&d programs: the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) and the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) .

the department of the interior ( doi ) was created to conserve and manage the nation's natural resources and cultural heritage , to provide scientific and other information about those resources , and to uphold "the nation's trust responsibilities or special commitments to american indians , alaska natives , and affiliated island communities to help them prosper. .

doi has a wide range of responsibilities including , among other things , mapping , geological , hydrological , and biological science ; migratory bird , wildlife , and endangered species conservation ; surface - mined lands protection and restoration ; and historic preservation .

because final fy2019 funding was not available at the time the fy2020 budget was prepared , requested r&d funding is compared to the fy2018 actual funding .

the administration is requesting $12.6 billion in net discretionary funding for doi in fy2020 .

of that amount , $757 million is requested for r&d funding , $148 million ( 16.3% ) below the fy2018 actual level of $905 million .

of the president's fy2020 doi r&d funding request , 8.9% is for basic research , 73.3% is for applied research , and 17.8% is for development .

the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) is the only doi component that conducts basic research .

funding for doi r&d is generally included in appropriations line items that also include non - r&d activities .

how much of the funding provided in appropriations legislation is allocated to r&d specifically is unclear unless funding is provided at the precise level of the request .

in general , r&d funding levels are known only after doi components allocate their appropriations to specific activities and report those figures .

the department of veterans affairs ( va ) operates and maintains a national health care delivery system to provide eligible veterans with medical care , benefits , and social support .

as part of the agency's mission , it seeks to advance medical r&d in areas most relevant to the diseases and conditions that affect the health care needs of veterans .

the president is proposing $1.4 billion for va r&d in fy2020 , an increase of $12 million ( 1% ) from fy2019 .

 ( see table 17 . ) .

va r&d is funded through two accounts — the medical and prosthetic research account and the medical care support account .

the medical care support account also includes non - r&d funding , and the amount of funding that will be allocated to support r&d through appropriations legislation is unclear unless funding is provided at the precise level of the request .

in general , r&d funding levels from the medical care support account are only known after the va allocates its appropriations to specific activities and reports those figures .

the medical care support account provides administrative and other support for va researchers and r&d projects , including infrastructure maintenance .

the fy2020 request includes $762 million for va's medical and prosthetic research account , a decrease of $17 million ( 2% ) , and $648 million in funding for research supported by the agency's medical care support account , an increase of $29 million ( 5% ) .

according to the president's request , fy2020 strategic priorities for va r&d include increasing the access of veterans to clinical trials ; increasing the transfer and translation of va r&d ; and "transforming va data into a national resource" by reducing the time and effort needed to appropriately access , properly understand , and effectively use va data for research .

clinical priorities for va r&d in fy2020 include efforts to treat veterans at risk of suicide and research to address chronic pain and opioid addiction , posttraumatic stress disorder , traumatic brain injury , and gulf war illness .

the medical and prosthetics r&d program is an intramural program managed by the veteran health administration's office of research and development ( ord ) and conducted at va medical centers and va - approved sites nationwide .

according to ord , the mission of va r&d is "to improve veterans' health and well - being via basic , translational , clinical , health services , and rehabilitative research and to apply scientific knowledge to develop effective individualized care solutions for veterans. .

ord consists of four main research services each headed by a director: biomedical laboratory r&d conducts preclinical research to understand life processes at the molecular , genomic , and physiological levels .

clinical science r&d supports clinical trials and other human subjects research to determine the feasibility and effectiveness of new treatments such as drugs , therapies , or devices , compare existing therapies , and improve clinical care and practice .

health services r&d conducts studies to identify and promote effective and efficient strategies to improve the quality and accessibility of the va health system and patient outcomes , and to minimize health care costs .

rehabilitation r&d conducts research and develops novel approaches to improving the quality of life of impaired and disabled veterans .

in addition to intramural support , va researchers are eligible to obtain funding for their research from extramural sources , including other federal agencies , private foundations and health organizations , and commercial entities .

according to the president's fy2020 budget request , these additional r&d resources are estimated at $570 million in fy2020 .

however , unlike other federal agencies , such as the national institutes of health and the department of defense , va does not have the authority to support extramural r&d by providing research grants to colleges , universities , or other non - va entities .

table 17 summarizes r&d program funding for va in the medical and prosthetic research and the medical care support accounts .

table 18 details amounts to be spent in designated research areas ( dras ) , which va describes as "areas of importance to our veteran patient population. .

funding for research projects that span multiple areas may be included in several dras ; thus , the amounts in table 18 total to more than the appropriation or request for va r&d .

the department of transportation ( dot ) was established by the department of transportation act ( p.l .

89-670 ) on october 15 , 1966 .

the primary purposes of dot research and development activities as defined by section 6019 of the fixing america's surface transportation act ( p.l .

114-94 ) are improving mobility of people and goods ; reducing congestion ; promoting safety ; improving the durability and extending the life of transportation infrastructure ; preserving the environment ; and preserving the existing transportation system .

funding for dot r&d is generally included in appropriations line items that also include non - r&d activities .

the amount of the funding provided by appropriations legislation that is allocated to r&d is unclear unless funding is provided at the precise level of the request .

in general , r&d funding levels are known only after dot agencies allocate their final appropriations to specific activities and report those figures .

the administration is requesting $1.089 billion for dot r&d activities and facilities in fy2020 , a decrease of $5.8 million ( 0.5% ) from fy2019 .

 ( see table 19 . ) .

three dot agencies — the federal aviation administration ( faa ) , the federal highway administration ( fhwa ) , and the national highway traffic safety administration ( nhtsa ) — would account for over 90% of dot r&d under the fy2020 request .

the department of homeland security ( dhs ) has identified five core missions: to prevent terrorism and enhance security , to secure and manage the borders , to enforce and administer immigration laws , to safeguard and secure cyberspace , and to ensure resilience to disasters .

new technology resulting from research and development can contribute to achieving all these goals .

the directorate of science and technology ( s&t ) has primary responsibility for establishing , administering , and coordinating dhs r&d activities .

other components , such as the countering weapons of mass destruction office , the u.s. coast guard , and the transportation security administration , conduct r&d relating to their specific missions .

the president's fy2020 budget request for dhs includes $438 million for activities identified as r&d .

this would be a reduction of 31.6% from $640 million in fy2019 .

the total includes $303 million for the s&t directorate and smaller amounts for six other dhs components .

see table 20 .

the s&t directorate performs r&d in several laboratories of its own and funds r&d performed by the doe national laboratories , industry , universities , and others .

it also conducts testing and other technology - related activities in support of acquisitions by other dhs components .

the administration's fy2020 request of $303 million for the s&t directorate r&d account is a decrease of 40.7% from $511 million in fy2019 .

the request includes no funding for cybersecurity r&d ( $89.1 million in fy2019 ) , which would instead be conducted in the cybersecurity infrastructure security agency ( $31 million for r&d in the fy2020 request , up from $13 million in fy2019 ) .

the remaining thrust areas in the s&t directorate's research , development , and innovation budget line would all decrease , by amounts ranging from 12.1% ( counter terrorist ) to 40.4% ( border security ) .

funding for university centers of excellence would decrease from $37 million in fy2019 to $18 million in fy2020 .

in addition to its r&d account , the s&t directorate receives funding for laboratory facilities and other r&d - related expenses through its operations and support account ( not shown in the table ) .

in this account , the fy2020 request for laboratory facilities is $116 million , down 4.9% from $122 million in fy2019 .

the laboratory facilities request includes no funding for the national urban security technology laboratory , which the administration proposes to close , or for the national bio and agro - defense facility ( nbaf ) , which the s&t directorate is building using previously appropriated funds but will transfer to the usda once it becomes operational .

requested funding in laboratory facilities for the national biodefense analysis and countermeasures center ( nbacc ) is $29 million , the same as in fy2019 .

the request for r&d in the countering weapons of mass destruction office is $68 million , down from $83 million in fy2019 .

the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) , the federal regulatory agency responsible for administering a number of environmental pollution control laws , funds a broad range of r&d activities to provide scientific tools and knowledge that support decisions relating to preventing , regulating , and abating environmental pollution .

since fy2006 , congress has funded epa through the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations acts .

appropriations for epa r&d are generally included in line - items that also include non - r&d activities .

annual appropriations bills and the accompanying committee reports do not identify precisely how much funding provided in appropriations bills is allocated to epa r&d alone .

epa determines its r&d funding levels in operation through allocating its appropriations to specific activities and reporting those amounts .

the agency's science and technology ( s&t ) appropriations account funds much of epa's scientific research activities , which include r&d conducted by the agency at its own laboratories and facilities , and r&d and related scientific research conducted by universities , foundations , and other nonfederal entities that receive epa grants .

the s&t account receives a base appropriation and a transfer from the hazardous substance superfund ( superfund ) account for research on more effective methods remediating contaminated sites .

epa's office of research and development ( ord ) is the primary manager of r&d at epa headquarters and laboratories around the country , as well as external r&d .

a large portion of the s&t account funds epa r&d activities managed by ord , including research grants .

programs implemented by other offices within epa also may have a research component , but the research component is not necessarily the primary focus of the program .

as with the president's fy2019 budget request , the fy2020 request proposes reductions and eliminations of funding for fy2020 across a number of epa programs and activities .

the president's fy2020 request includes a total of $6.07 billion for epa , $2.78 billion ( 31% ) less than the total $8.85 billion fy2019 enacted appropriations for epa ( after rescissions ) provided in titles ii and iv of division e of the consolidated appropriations act , fy2019 ( p.l .

116-6 ) , and $123.4 million ( 2% ) less than the fy2019 request of $6.19 billion for epa .

the reductions proposed in the fy2020 request are distributed across epa operational functions and activities as well as grants for states , tribes , and local governments .

with the exception of the building and facilities account , the president's fy2020 request proposes funding reductions below fy2019 enacted levels for the nine other epa appropriations accounts , although funding for some program areas within the accounts would remain constant or increase .

some members of congress expressed concerns regarding proposed reductions of funding for epa scientific research programs during hearings on the president's fy2020 budget request .

including a $17.8 million transfer from the superfund account , the president's fy2020 budget request proposes $480.8 million for epa's s&t account , $241.1 million ( 33.4% ) less than the fy2019 enacted $722.0 million which includes a $15.5 million transfer and $11.3 million account specific rescissions .

the fy2020 request would provide an increase ( 3.1% ) compared to the fy2019 request of $466.4 million , which includes a $17.4 million transfer .

the president's fy2020 request proposes a rescission for epa but does not specify a rescission within the s&t or other appropriations accounts .

this accounting difference does not allow for direct comparisons of funding within epa's s&t account including specific rescissions .

table 21 at the end of this section includes the president's fy2020 request for program areas and activities within epa's s&t account as presented in epa's fy20 20 congressional budget justification compared to the fy2019 enacted appropriations as reported in the conference report ( h.rept .

116-9 ) accompanying the fy2019 consolidated appropriations that includes the department of interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations .

consistent with other recent house and senate appropriations committee reports and explanatory statements , the conference report h.rept .

116-9 accompanying the fy2019 enacted appropriations did not specify funding for all subprogram areas reported in epa's budget justification .

s&t subprogram areas not reported in congressional reports and statements are noted in the table 21 as "nr" ( not reported ) .

additionally , the president's fy2018 , fy2019 , and fy2020 requests and epa's congressional budget justifications have modified the titles for some of the program areas relative to previous administrations' budget requests and congressional committee reports' presentations .

the house and senate appropriations committees have generally adopted the modified program area titles as presented in the recent budget requests .

during house and senate committee hearings regarding the president's fy2020 budget request for epa , members generally did not support a number of the proposed reductions and eliminations of funding for epa , including proposed reductions in funding for scientific research programs .

reductions proposed in the fy2020 budget request below the fy2019 enacted levels were distributed across epa operational functions and activities as well as grants for states , tribes , and local governments .

as shown in table 21 , with few exceptions the requested fy2020 amount for the s&t account for individual epa program area and activity line items would be less than the fy2019 enacted appropriations .

the fy2020 request did not propose to completely eliminate funding for the broader program areas ; however , eliminations ( no funding is requested for fy2020 ) are proposed for line - item activities below the program areas as indicated in table 21 .

these program areas include atmospheric protection program ( formerly ghg [greenhouse gas] reporting program and climate protection program ) , indoor air radon program , and reduce risks from indoor air .

for other program areas , proposed reductions in funding included eliminations of certain programs .

for example , the proposed reduction in funding for research: air and energy , research: safe and sustainable water resources , research: sustainable and healthy communities , and research: chemical safety and sustainability program areas for fy2020 included the proposed elimination of funding for the science to achieve results ( star ) program .

p.l .

116-6 included $5.0 million for research: national priorities within the s&t account for fy2019 , an increase compared to $4.1 million included for fy2018 .

as in the previous administration's fiscal year requests , the president's fy2020 budget request did not include funding for research: national priorities .

in addition to clarifying certain funding allocations within the s&t account and consistent with the prior fiscal year appropriations committee reports and explanatory statements , h.rept .

116-9 provided additional guidance for certain program areas and activities within the s&t account for fy2019 .

topics expressly referenced included alternative testing ; computational toxicology ; enhanced aquifer use ; integrated risk information system ( iris ) ; nanomaterials research ; innovative research partnerships ; intramural animal testing ; science to achieve results ( star ) grants ; harmful algal blooms ; water distribution systems ; and water security test beds .

the size and structure of the agency's workforce , as was the case during consideration for the fy2018 and fy2019 appropriations , has been a topic of debate during congressional committee hearings regarding epa's fy2020 appropriations .

workforce reshaping was introduced in the fy2018 request and described as agency - wide organizational restructuring , "reprioritization of agency activities," and reallocation of resources .

the fy2020 request for the operations and administration program area within the s&t account includes $6.0 million for agency workforce reshaping and efforts to improve the management of epa's laboratories .

as with the fy2018 enacted appropriations , p.l .

116-6 did not fund the president's fy2019 request for epa workforce reshaping for fy2019 .

epa's reported proposed reorganizing strategies , potentially impacting certain aspects of epa's office of research development ( ord ) and the operations of the epa office of the science advisor ( osa ) , as well as current epa laboratories including the national exposure research laboratory ( nerl ) , the national health and environmental effects research laboratory ( nheerl ) , and the national risk management research laboratory ( nrmrl ) , have also been of interest to some members of congress .

appendix a .

acronyms and abbreviations appendix b. crs contacts for agency r&d the following table lists the primary crs experts on r&d funding for the agencies covered in this report .

