t he budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) , which was signed into law on august 2 , 2011 , includes statutory limits on discretionary spending for fy2012-fy2021 , often referred to as "spending caps. .

there are currently separate annual limits for defense discretionary and nondefense discretionary spending .

 ( the defense category consists only of discretionary spending in budget function 050 , "national defense. .

the nondefense category includes discretionary spending in all other budget functions. ) .

each discretionary spending limit is enforced separately through sequestration .

discretionary spending that is provided for certain purposes is effectively exempt from the spending limits .

this means that when compliance with the discretionary spending limits is evaluated , these special types of spending are treated differently: adjustments .

the law specifies that spending for certain activities , such as responding to a national emergency or fighting terrorism , will receive special budgetary treatment .

this spending is most easily thought of as being exempt from , or an exception to , the spending limits .

formally , however , the bca states that the enactment of such spending allows for a subsequent upward adjustment of the discretionary limits to accommodate the spending .

as a result , these types of spending are referred to as "adjustments. .

 ( the reference here to "adjustments to the limits" should be distinguished from statutory changes that have been enacted since 2011 increasing the spending limits. ) .

these adjustments are not formally made until after the spending legislation has been enacted .

therefore , references to the discretionary spending limits typically refer to the spending limit level before the permitted adjustments have been included .

21 st century cures act spending exempt from the limits .

in addition to the adjustments specified in the bca , the 21 st century cures act ( division a of p.l .

114-255 ) , enacted on december 13 , 2016 , provided that a limited amount of appropriations for specified purposes ( at the national institutes for health and the food and drug administration and for certain grants to respond to the opioid crisis ) are to be subtracted from any cost estimate provided for the purpose of enforcing the discretionary spending limits .

as of the date of this report , the cures act is unique in providing a statutory exemption of this kind .

these adjustments and the cures act exemptions complicate conversations and information related to overall discretionary spending amounts .

when references are made to total discretionary spending , those figures may include spending that is provided under the adjustments authority as well as the cures act exemptions .

however , when references are made to the discretionary spending limits , typically they do not include the spending that occurs as part of the adjustments or the cures act exemptions .

more information is provided below on each adjustment and the cures act .

while the categories of spending described below are often thought of as being exempt from the spending limits , in fact the enactment of such spending allows for a subsequent upward adjustment of the discretionary limits to accommodate the spending .

for this reason , we refer to these categories of spending as "adjustments. .

permissible adjustments to the discretionary spending limits are specified in section 251 ( b ) of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 ( title ii of p.l .

99-177 ( 2 ) ) , unless otherwise noted .

the office of management and budget ( omb ) is responsible for evaluating compliance with the discretionary spending limits .

to provide transparency to the process of evaluating such compliance , omb is required to submit sequestration reports to congress .

in these reports , and in the president's annual budget submission , omb is required to calculate the permissible adjustments and to specify the discretionary spending limits for the fiscal year and each succeeding year .

the sections below provide more detailed information on the adjustments .

these adjustments vary greatly .

two adjustments—overseas contingency operations ( oco ) and emergency spending—have made up the vast majority of the spending .

these adjustments are uncapped and can be used for broad purposes .

five other adjustments are capped and can be used for specific programs or purposes .

two additional adjustments address potential technical issues that can arise in enforcing the spending limits .

title i in division a of the 21 st century cures act ( p.l .

114-255 ) , enacted in december 2016 , authorized appropriations for programs and activities related to health care , research , and opioid abuse .

the act also established a distinctive budgetary mechanism related to certain authorizations that is different from the adjustments described above but has a similar effect .

specifically , the act established three accounts: the national institutes of health ( nih ) innovation account , the food and drug administration ( fda ) innovation account , and the account for the state response to the opioid crisis .

the act then transferred funds from the general fund of the treasury to these accounts and authorized those funds to be appropriated for specific dollar amounts in specific fiscal years .

those funds were not to be available for obligation until they were appropriated in appropriations acts each fiscal year .

the act further stated that when appropriations are enacted for such authorized activities—up to the authorized amount each fiscal year—those appropriations are to be subtracted from any cost estimate provided for the purpose of enforcing the discretionary spending limits .

this effectively exempts any spending provided for these activities between fy2017 and fy2026 from the spending caps .

specifically , the bill provides such exceptions for the accounts and amounts shown in below .

in each case , the exemptions apply only to the years included in the respective table .

