t he consolidated appropriations act , 2019 ( p.l .

116-6 ) was enacted on february 15 , 2019.this omnibus bill included appropriations for the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , of which usda's domestic food assistance is a part .

prior to its enactment , the government had continued to operate for the first six months of the fiscal year under continuing resolutions ( crs ) .

usda experienced a 35-day lapse in fy2019 funding and partial government shutdown prior to the enactment of the further additional continuing appropriations act , 2019 ( p.l .

116-5 ) , a continuing resolution enacted prior to the omnibus bill .

 ( see the appendix . ) .

this report focuses on usda's domestic food assistance programs ; their funding ; and , in some instances , policy changes provided by the enacted fy2018 appropriations law .

usda's domestic food assistance programs include the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , formerly the food stamp program ) , special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children ( wic ) , and the child nutrition programs ( such as the national school lunch program ) .

the domestic food assistance funding is , for the most part , administered by usda's food and nutrition service ( fns ) .

crs report r45230 , agriculture and related agencies: fy2019 appropriations provides an overview of the entire fy2019 agriculture and related agencies appropriations law as well as a review of the reported bills and crs preceding its enactment .

with its focus on appropriations , this report discusses programs' eligibility requirements and operations minimally .

see crs report r42353 , domestic food assistance: summary of programs for more background .

domestic food assistance — snap and child nutrition programs in the mandatory spending accounts , and wic and other programs in the discretionary spending accounts — represents over two - thirds of the fy2018 agriculture appropriations act ( figure 1 ) .

the federal budget process treats discretionary and mandatory spending differently .

discretionary spending is controlled by annual appropriations acts and receives most of the attention during the appropriations process .

the annual budget resolution process sets spending limits for discretionary appropriations .

agency operations ( salaries and expenses ) and many grant programs are discretionary .

mandatory spending — though carried in the appropriation — is controlled by budget rules during the authorization process .

appropriations acts then provide funding to match the parameters required by the mandatory programs' authorizing laws .

for the domestic food assistance programs , these laws are typically reauthorized in farm bill and child nutrition reauthorizations .

domestic food assistance funding ( table 1 ) largely consists of open - ended , appropriated mandatory programs — that is , it varies with program participation ( and in some cases inflation ) under the terms of the underlying authorization law .

the largest mandatory programs include snap and the child nutrition programs ( including the national school lunch program and school breakfast program ) .

though their funding levels are dictated by the authorizing law , in most cases appropriations are needed to make funds available .

the three largest discretionary budget items are wic , the commodity supplemental food program ( csfp ) , and federal nutrition program administration .

the enacted fy2019 appropriation would provide over $103 billion for domestic food assistance ( table 1 ) .

this is a decrease of approximately $1.7 billion from fy2018 .

declining participation in snap is responsible for most of the difference .

over 95% of the fy2019 appropriations are for mandatory spending .

table 1 summarizes funding for the domestic food assistance programs , comparing fy2019 levels to those of prior years .

in addition to the accounts' appropriations language , the enacted appropriation's general provisions include additional funding , rescissions , and / or policy changes .

these are summarized in this report .

domestic food assistance programs also receive funds from sources other than appropriations: in addition to appropriated funds from the child nutrition account for commodity foods ( which provides over $1.4 billion ) , usda purchases commodity foods for the child nutrition programs using "section 32" funds — a permanent appropriation .

for fy2019 , the enacted appropriation specifies that up to $485 million from section 32 is to be available for child nutrition entitlement commodities , compared to $465 million in fy2018 .

the fresh fruit and vegetable program ( ffvp ) for selected elementary schools nationwide is financed with permanent , mandatory funding from section 32 .

the underlying law ( section 19 of the richard b. russell national school lunch act ) provides funds at the beginning of every school year ( july ) .

for fy2019 , there is $171.5 million available for ffvp , which is consistent with the fy2018 base amount adjusted for inflation .

the food service management institute ( technical assistance to child nutrition providers , also known as the institute of child nutrition ) is funded through a permanent annual appropriation of $5 million .

the senior farmers' market nutrition program receives nearly $21 million of mandatory funding per year ( fy2002-fy2023 ) outside of the regular appropriations process .

usda was one of the departments affected by a lapse in fy2019 funding and the resulting 35-day partial government shutdown ( during parts of december 2018 and january 2019 ) .

most of usda's food and nutrition service ( fns ) programs , whether mandatory or discretionary , rely on funding provided in appropriations acts .

as a result , the lapse in fy2019 appropriations required the execution of contingency plans , including staff furloughs , and at times the operating status of programs was in flux .

fns program operations during a government shutdown vary based on the different programs' available resources , determined by factors such as contingency or carryover funds and terms of the expired appropriations acts as well as usda's decisionmaking .

beginning in late december 2018 , fns released program - specific memoranda to states and program operators describing the status of different nutrition assistance programs during the funding lapse .

in addition to the impact on programs' funding discussed below , furloughs of fns staff during this time period may have affected program operations ( for example , the availability of technical assistance ) on a case - by - case basis .

this appendix summarizes some of the key issues and impacts on the snap , child nutrition , and wic programs during this partial government shutdown .

further detail can be found in the fns documents referenced above .

it is important to note that because circumstances during a lapse in appropriations and executive - branch decisionmaking can vary , operations during this partial shutdown are not necessarily how a future shutdown would proceed .

snap benefits states issue snap benefits on a monthly basis .

as in the fy2019 appropriations law , the fy2018 appropriations law ( p.l .

115-141 ) provided one year of snap funding as well as a contingency fund of $3 billion that can be spent in fy2018 or fy2019 .

the $3 billion is less than the cost of one month of snap benefits , so the contingency fund alone would not fund a month of snap benefits in the case of a lapse of funding .

at the start of the partial shutdown , when a continuing resolution ( p.l .

115-298 ) expired after december 21 , 2018 , december 2018 benefits had already been provided .

in addition , during the shutdown period , a provision of the continuing resolution allowed for payments to be made 30 days after the continuing resolution's expiration ; this allowed states to issue january 2019 benefits .

on january 8 , 2019 , usda interpreted the provision to authorize issuance of february 2019 benefits as well , so long as states conducted early issuance — before january 20 , 2019 .

by the end of the partial shutdown , recipients had received their december 2018 , january 2019 , and february 2019 benefits .

however , at the beginning of the shutdown , it was not clear that benefits would be provided for these months .

usda - fns provided a series of memoranda to states during the shutdown that included answers to frequently asked questions .

child nutrition and wic unlike snap , the appropriations language for the child nutrition programs ( national school lunch program and others ) and wic accounts provides funding that can be obligated over a two - year period .

wic also has a contingency fund .

in addition , the child nutrition programs may have more flexibility to continue operating during a shutdown because federal funds are generally provided retroactively ( on a reimbursement basis ) .

during the fy2019 lapse in funding , the administration had carryover and contingency funds to maintain program operations .

this includes fy2018 appropriations that are available for spending through fy2019 and contingency funds ( in the case of wic ) .

programs with this source of funding potentially available are those with two - year funding from the child nutrition programs account and the wic account .

how long these operations could continue would depend on ( 1 ) the funding lapse's duration and ( 2 ) the amount of carryover or contingency funding available .

ultimately , for child nutrition and wic programs , usda continued operating the child nutrition programs "with funding provided under the terms and conditions of the prior continuing resolution [p.l .

115-245]" ; usda stated that the programs had enough funding to continue operating at least through march 2019 if the shutdown were to continue ; and usda continued wic and wic fmnp operations using funding that had already been allocated to states and , for wic , prior - year carryover funding .

