t he federal government has two major tools for affecting the macroeconomy: fiscal policy and monetary policy .

these policy interventions are generally used to either increase or decrease economic activity to counter the business cycle's impact on unemployment , income , and inflation .

this report focuses on fiscal policy ; for more information related to monetary policy , refer to crs report rl30354 , monetary policy and the federal reserve: current policy and conditions , by marc labonte .

fiscal policy is the means by which the government adjusts its budget balance through spending and revenue changes to influence broader economic conditions .

according to mainstream economics , the government can impact the level of economic activity , generally measured by gross domestic product ( gdp ) , in the short term by changing its level of spending and tax revenue .

expansionary fiscal policy — an increase in government spending , a decrease in tax revenue , or a combination of the two — is expected to spur economic activity , whereas contractionary fiscal policy — a decrease in government spending , an increase in tax revenue , or a combination of the two — is expected to slow economic activity .

when the government's budget is running a deficit , fiscal policy is said to be expansionary: when it is running a surplus , fiscal policy is said to be contractionary .

from a policymaker's perspective , expansionary fiscal policy is generally used to boost gdp growth and the economic indicators that tend to move with gdp , such as employment and individual incomes .

however , expansionary fiscal policy also tends to affect interest rates and investment , exchange rates and the trade balance , and the inflation rate in undesirable ways , limiting the long - term effectiveness of persistent fiscal stimulus .

contractionary fiscal policy can be used to slow economic activity if policymakers are concerned that the economy may be overheating , which can cause a recession .

the magnitude of fiscal policy's effect on gdp will also differ based on where the economy is within the business cycle — whether it is in a recession or an expansion .

during a recession , aggregate demand ( overall spending ) in the economy falls , which generally results in slower wage growth , decreased employment , lower business revenue , and lower business investment .

recessions occur for a number of reasons , but as seen during the most recent recession from 2007 to 2009 , they can result in serious negative consequences for both individuals and businesses .

however , the government can replace some of the lost aggregate demand and limit the negative impacts of a recession on individuals and businesses with the use of fiscal stimulus by increasing government spending , decreasing tax revenue , or a combination of the two .

government spending takes the form of both purchases of goods and services by the government , which directly increase economic activity , and transfers to individuals , which indirectly increase economic activity as individuals spend those funds .

decreased tax revenue via tax cuts indirectly increases aggregate demand in the economy .

for example , an individual income tax cut increases the amount of disposable income available to individuals , enabling them to purchase more goods and services .

standard economic theory suggests that in the short term , fiscal stimulus can lessen the negative impacts of a recession or hasten a recovery .

however , the ability of fiscal stimulus to boost aggregate demand may be limited due to its interaction with other economic processes , including interest rates and investment , exchange rates and the trade balance , and the rate of inflation .

as the economy shifts from a recession and into an expansion , broader economic conditions will generally improve , whereby unemployment falls and wages and private spending increase .

with improving economic conditions , policymakers may choose to begin withdrawing fiscal stimulus by decreasing the size of the deficit or potentially by applying contractionary fiscal policy and running a budget surplus .

as discussed in the previous section , policymakers may choose to withdraw fiscal stimulus for a number of reasons .

first , persistent fiscal stimulus when the economy is near full capacity can exacerbate the negative consequences of fiscal stimulus , such as decreasing investment , rising trade deficits , and accelerating inflation .

second , decreasing the size of the budget deficit slows the accumulation of public debt .

the government can withdraw fiscal stimulus by increasing taxes , decreasing spending , or a combination of the two .

when the government raises individual income taxes , for example , individuals have less disposable income and decrease their spending on goods and services in response .

the decrease in spending reduces aggregate demand for goods and services , slowing economic growth temporarily .

alternatively , when the government reduces spending , it reduces aggregate demand in the economy , which again temporarily slows economic growth .

as such , when the government reduces the deficit , regardless of the mix of fiscal policy choices used to do so , aggregate demand is expected to decrease in the near term .

however , withdrawing fiscal stimulus is expected to result in lower interest rates and more investment ; a depreciation of the u.s. dollar and a shrinking trade deficit ; and a slowing inflation rate .

these effects tend to spur additional economic activity , partly offsetting the decline resulting from withdrawing fiscal stimulus .

whether the decrease in aggregate demand is problematic for overall economic performance depends on the state of the overall economy at that time .

as shown in figure 1 , the federal government has generally been running a budget deficit for much of the past 30 years — save for two short periods in the 1960s and 1990s .

this suggests that the federal government has been applying some level of fiscal stimulus to the economy for much of the past three decades , although the level of stimulus has increased and decreased over time .

however , simply examining the overall budget deficit to judge the level of fiscal stimulus can be misleading , as the levels of federal spending and revenue differ over time automatically due to changes in the state of the economy , rather than deliberate choices made each year by congress .

during economic expansions , tax revenue tends to increase and spending tends to decrease automatically , as rising incomes and employment result in higher average incomes and therefore greater individual and corporate income tax revenues .

federal spending on income support programs , such as food stamps and unemployment insurance , tends to fall as fewer people need financial assistance and unemployment claims fall during economic expansions .

the combination of rising tax revenue and falling federal spending tends to improve the government's budget deficit .

the opposite is true during recessions , when federal spending rises and revenue shrinks .

these cyclical fluctuations in revenue and spending are often referred to as automatic stabilizers .

therefore , when examining fiscal policy , it is often beneficial to estimate the budget deficit excluding these automatic stabilizers , referred to as the structural deficit , to get a sense of the affirmative fiscal policy decisions made each year by congress .

as shown in figure 1 , budget deficits tend to increase during and shortly after recessions ( denoted by grey bars ) as policymakers attempt to buoy the economy by applying fiscal stimulus .

this can be seen explicitly by viewing the structural deficit / surplus , as this only shows affirmative changes in fiscal policy made by congress .

the budget deficit then tends to shrink as the economy enters into recovery and fiscal stimulus is less necessary to support economic growth .

however , in recent years , the federal budget has bucked this trend .

after the structural deficit peaked in 2009 at roughly 7.5% of gdp , it began to decline through 2014 , falling to about 2.0% of gdp .

beginning in 2016 , in spite of relatively strong economic conditions , the structural deficit has started to rise again , nearing 4.0% of gdp in 2018 .

given that the economy is arguably at or exceeding full employment currently , the increase in fiscal stimulus since 2016 is notable .

as discussed earlier , expanding fiscal stimulus when the economy is not depressed can result in rising interest rates , a growing trade deficit , and higher inflation .

as of publication of this report , interest rates and inflation do not appear to have been affected by the additional fiscal stimulus ; interest rates are at historic lows and inflation shows no signs of acceleration .

the trade deficit has been growing in recent years ; however , it is not clear that this growth in the trade deficit is a result of increased fiscal stimulus .

