the rules of the house of representatives have included provisions related to preserving order and decorum in the chamber since the 1 st congress ( 1789-1790 ) .

under current house rules , members may violate decorum if they engage in certain behaviors , such as using disorderly language .

members may be called to order by colleagues for the use of allegedly disorderly , or unparliamentary , language , which may include a formal demand that their words be taken down .

this demand initiates a series of procedures to determine whether the words are , in fact , unparliamentary and to decide whether a member who uses such language should be allowed to proceed in debate .

this report covers these procedures , which are provided for in the standing rules of the house as a mechanism to maintain decorum in debate .

the sections below present details about how and when a member might invoke the demand that words be taken down , the procedural steps that may follow the demand , and an overview of the rule's history in the house .

the report concludes with information about the practice of invoking this rule in the house in recent decades .

the standing rules of the house establish a parliamentary mechanism—referred to as "words taken down"—whereby a member may call another member to order for the use of disorderly language .

members may invoke this mechanism during debate on the house floor or in the committee of the whole .

it may also be invoked in the standing and select committees of the house .

a member initiates the call to order by demanding that a colleague's "words be taken down. .

the phrase taken down , as described in the rule , refers to the writing down of the words objected to so they may be read back to the house by the clerk .

in current practice , all deba te in the house and in standing and select committees is transcribed by the official reporters of debate .

therefore , when a member demands that the words of a colleague be taken down , the clerk will consult with the transcriber to identify the words objected to , which the clerk will then read out loud .

following the reading of the allegedly unparliamentary remarks , the speaker of the house ( or , if the words are spoken in a committee , the chair of the committee ) will determine whether the words are in order .

the standing rules of the house do not state explicitly what language is considered to be disorderly , although clause 1 ( b ) of rule xvii prohibits members from engaging in "personalities" in debate .

house precedents catalog words and phrases previously deemed to be in order and those that were ruled out of order , or unparliamentary .

when ruling on the words objected to , the presiding officer considers the words themselves , as well as the context in which they were used , and bases the ruling on these precedents .

on the floor , the parliamentarian advises the speaker based on recorded precedents .

the office of the parliamentarian is not responsible for providing procedural assistance during committee meetings , although the chair could attempt to consult with the parliamentarian in advance of or during such meetings .

rule xvii , clause 4 , details the procedure for demanding that words be taken down: ( a ) if a member , delegate , or resident commissioner , in speaking or otherwise , transgresses the rules of the house , the speaker shall , or a member , delegate , or resident commissioner may , call to order the offending member , delegate , or resident commissioner , who shall immediately sit down unless permitted on motion of another member , delegate , or the resident commissioner to explain .

if a member , delegate , or resident commissioner is called to order , the member , delegate , or resident commissioner making the call to order shall indicate the words excepted to , which shall be taken down in writing at the clerk's desk and read aloud to the house .

 ( b ) the speaker shall decide the validity of a call to order .

the house , if appealed to , shall decide the question without debate .

if the decision is in favor of the member , delegate , or resident commissioner called to order , the member , delegate , or resident commissioner shall be at liberty to proceed , but not otherwise .

if the case requires it , an offending member , delegate , or resident commissioner shall be liable to censure or such other punishment as the house may consider proper .

a member , delegate , or resident commissioner may not be held to answer a call to order , and may not be subject to the censure of the house therefor , if further debate or other business has intervened .

according to clause 4 ( b ) of rule xvii , the demand for words to be taken down must be timely: it must generally occur before intervening business or debate .

therefore , immediately after the allegedly offensive words are spoken , the member would state: mr. / madam speaker ( or chair ) , i demand that the gentleman's / gentlewoman's words be taken down .

debate is not in order at this point , but the member demanding that the words be taken down may briefly state the reason for objecting to the language ( eg , the words include an improper personal reference to the president ) .

a member will be allowed to explain the remarks only if prompted by the presiding officer or if another member makes a motion to allow an explanation and the motion is agreed to by the house .

usually , the presiding officer orders the member who spoke the allegedly disorderly words to suspend and asks the clerk to report the words .

 ( on the house floor , the member whose words were objected to may be asked by the speaker to sit down. ) .

the gentleman / gentlewoman from [state] will suspend .

the clerk will report the words .

it may take several minutes for the clerk to review the transcript and read the words out loud .

during this pause in proceedings , the member who spoke the allegedly offensive words may ask unanimous consent to withdraw the words: mr. / madam speaker ( or chair ) , i ask unanimous consent to withdraw my words .

alternatively , the member who demanded that the words be taken down may withdraw the request , which does not require unanimous consent: mr. / madam speaker ( or chair ) , i withdraw my demand that the gentleman's / gentlewoman's words be taken down .

if neither occurs , then the clerk will read the words to the house , and the presiding officer will make a ruling on the remarks: in the opinion of the chair , the words in question [were / were not] in order .

the presiding officer's ruling is subject to appeal , and that appeal is subject to a motion to table .

if the presiding officer rules that the words are not unparliamentary ( and if this ruling is sustained following any appeal ) , then the house continues with the business pending prior to the demand that words be taken down .

if the presiding officer rules that the words are out of order ( and if this ruling is sustained following any appeal ) , the words are usually stricken from the congressional record by unanimous consent .

the presiding officer might initiate this by stating: without objection , the words are stricken from the record .

alternatively , a member ( although not the member whose words were taken down ) may make a motion to remove the disorderly language from the record , on which the house will vote: i move that the words of the gentleman / gentlewoman from [state] be stricken from the record .

in the event that a member's words are ruled out of order , that member may not be recognized to speak for the rest of the day ( even on yielded time ) or insert undelivered remarks into the record unless the member is allowed to proceed in order by the house .

the member may be permitted to proceed in order by unanimous consent , which is often initiated by the presiding officer: without objection , the gentleman / gentlewoman from [state] will proceed in order .

a member may also make a motion to allow the member whose words were ruled out of order to proceed in order , and the house will vote on the motion .

i move that the gentleman / gentlewoman from [state] be allowed to proceed in order .

if a member is not allowed to proceed in order , the member may vote and demand the yeas and the nays .

the concept of taking disorderly words down in writing is provided for in the principles of general parliamentary law .

although the rules of the house have , since its inception , included provisions related to preserving order and decorum in the chamber , the formal call for a member's words to be taken down was not adopted as part of the standing rules of the house in the 1 st congress ( 1789-1790 ) .

the rules of the house initially provided for the speaker to call a member to order for disorderly remarks or for a member to make a point of order against a member's language , on which the speaker would rule .

 ( these parliamentary mechanisms are still available today under clause 4 of rule xvii. ) .

the practice of taking down words began in 1808 when a member called a colleague to order for disorderly language and the speaker asked that member to put the words objected to down in writing .

this practice was formally adopted as part of the standing rules of the house in 1837 .

the original rule , which introduced the need for the demand to be timely , stated: if a member be called to order for words spoken in debate , the person calling him to order shall repeat the words excepted to , and they shall be taken down in writing at the clerk's table ; and no member shall be held to answer , or be subject to the censure of the house , for words spoken in debate , if any other member has spoken , or other business has intervened , after the words spoken , and before exception to them shall have been taken .

an amendment to the rule in 1880 modified the procedure by which a member demanded that words be taken down .

the amended rule removed the provision that the member calling another to order should repeat the objectionable words .

this version , which is similar to the corresponding sentences of the rule in effect today , provided for the words to be taken down in writing and repeated by the clerk .

the 1880 version of the rule states: if a member is called to order for words spoken in debate , the member calling him to order shall indicate the words excepted to , and they shall be taken down in writing at the clerk's desk and read aloud to the house ; but he shall not be held to answer , nor be subject to the censure of the house therefor , if further debate or other business has intervened .

the rule took its current form when the house comprehensively recodified its rules in the 106 th congress , although the changes were largely technical .

during the recodification , the previously separate clauses in the house rules for addressing unparliamentary language—one providing for a member to make a point of order against a colleague's remarks and the other providing for a demand that a member's words be taken down—were combined .

the text of the rule was also amended to clarify that the rule applies to a "member , delegate , or resident commissioner" ( both for calling someone to order and for being called to order ) .

crs conducted full - text searches of the congressional record to identify instances in which a member demanded that another member's words be taken down on the house floor ( or in the committee of the whole ) since january 1 , 1971 .

throughout this nearly 50-year period , the formal demand that words be taken down was invoked 170 times .

these calls to order took place in the committee of the whole , as well as in the house proper , including during periods of time arranged for members to speak on topics of their choice rather than on legislation , such as one - minute speeches and special order speeches .

in contemporary practice , it is uncommon that the full procedure presented above—in which the speaker rules whether or not the words are in order—occurs in the house .

of the 170 demands that words be taken down , 107 , or more than half , were settled before the speaker made a ruling , usually before the clerk reported the words .

in 75 of these instances , the member whose words were taken down asked to withdraw or revise the words , and in another 32 cases , the member who demanded that the words be taken down withdrew the request .

there were an additional 13 occasions on which the speaker ruled that a member's call for words to be taken down was untimely .

throughout this time period the speaker ruled on the words taken down 50 times .

twenty - seven , or more than half , of these rulings took place in the 1990s , with only nine rulings by the speaker since 2000 .

in 25 of the 50 rulings following a demand that words be taken down , the speaker ruled that the words were not disorderly .

these occurrences are identified in table 1 in reverse chronological order .

when the speaker provided a reason for the ruling , it was often that the member's remarks did not constitute an improper personal reference toward another member .

for example , after words were taken down during debate on february 5 , 1992 , the speaker , when ruling on the words , stated: "the chair will rule that since the gentleman from louisiana is generically speaking and not specifically alleging improper conduct by any individual member , the words are in order. .

the speaker ruled that the words were out of order 25 times during this time period .

these 25 occurrences are presented in table 2 in reverse chronological order .

as the fourth column of the table indicates , in nearly every instance in which a rationale was given for the ruling , the speaker stated that the member was engaging in personalities toward an identifiable individual , often another member .

following the determination that the remarks were out of order , the words were usually stricken from the record by unanimous consent at the initiative of the speaker .

this happened in all but five instances presented in table 2 .

the words were ultimately stricken , either by unanimous consent or motion , in 17 of the 25 cases .

it is also common for the member whose words were ruled out of order to be allowed to proceed in order , usually by unanimous consent initiated by the speaker .

indeed , the speaker initiated such a request in 14 of the cases presented in table 2 .

members whose words were ruled out of order were given permission to proceed in 17 of the 25 instances , either by unanimous consent or motion .

