on may 23 , 2019 , secretary of agriculture sonny perdue announced that usda would undertake a second round of trade aid in 2019 to assist farmers in response to trade damage from continued tariff retaliation and trade disruptions .

partial details of the new initiative were announced on july 25 , 2019 .

final program details—such as calculation of the individual commodity - specific payment rates used in the formulation of the county - level payment rates for non - specialty crops—were released on august 23 , 2019 .

the 2019 trade aid package builds on the 2018 trade aid package in that it is based on the same legislative authority: section 5 of the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) charter act of 1948 ( p.l .

80-806 ; 15 u.s.c .

714 et seq .

 ) , as amended .

specifically , the president has authorized usda to provide up to $16 billion in new funding for the 2019 initiative .

this new funding authority is in addition to the $12 billion in funding authority that was announced for the previous 2018 trade aid package .

the 2019 trade aid package is to be implemented using the same three trade assistance programs that were used under the 2018 trade aid package—a market facilitation program ( mfp ) , a food purchase and distribution program ( fpdp ) , and an agricultural trade promotion ( atp ) program—but at generally higher funding levels ( table 1 ) , except for atp .

also similar to the 2018 initiative , the 2019 trade aid package funding authority corresponds with usda's estimate of the trade damage to the u.s. agricultural sector from retaliatory tariffs—imposed on u.s. agricultural goods in response to previous u.s. trade actions—and other trade disruptions in 2019 .

the 2019 programs are intended to assist agricultural producers while the administration works to resolve the ongoing trade disputes with certain foreign nations , most notably china .

this report describes the new trade aid package authorized for 2019 , including its constituent parts , and identifies distinguishing differences from the 2018 trade aid package .

an appendix provides additional details on usda's implementation of the fpdp and atp programs and on the evolution of usda's formulation of the mfp payment rates under the 2018 and 2019 mfp programs .

under the 2019 trade aid package , usda is to use up to $16 billion to fund three programs to assist producers of affected commodities in 2019: 1 .

a market facilitation program , administered by usda's farm service agency ( fsa ) , to provide up to $14.5 billion in direct payments to producers of usda - specified eligible commodities ( described below ) .

2 .

a food purchase and distribution program , administered through usda's agricultural marketing service ( ams ) , to use $1.4 billion to purchase surplus commodities affected by trade retaliation , such as fruits , vegetables , some processed foods , beef , pork , lamb , poultry , and milk for distribution by the food and nutrition service to food banks , schools , and other outlets serving low - income individuals .

3 .

an agricultural trade promotion program , administered by usda's foreign agriculture service ( fas ) , to use $100 million to assist in developing new export markets on behalf of u.s. agricultural producers .

some important differences between the 2018 and 2019 trade aid packages include the following: the 2019 package includes an expanded funding commitment of up to $16 billion versus $12 billion under the previous package .

the 2019 package includes an expanded list of eligible commodities ( 41 eligible commodities in 2019 versus 9 in 2018 ) .

the mfp payment formula for 2019 is modified for non - specialty crops ( field crops ) to be a single county payment rate rather than commodity - specific rates .

this is done to minimize influencing producer crop choices and avoid large payment - rate discrepancies across commodities .

mfp payments for non - specialty crops in 2019 are to be based on planted acres , not harvested production as in 2018 .

this change would avoid having mfp payments reduced by the lower yields that are expected across major growing regions due to the widespread wet spring and delayed plantings .

the 2019 package includes 1. expanded payment limits per individual per commodity group ( $250,000 versus $125,000 for 2018 mfp payments ) ; 2. an expanded maximum combined payment limit across commodity groups ( $500,000 versus $375,000 ) ; and 3. adjusted gross income ( agi ) eligibility criteria based on the average agi for 2015 , 2016 , and 2017 .

agi criteria used to assess eligibility for 2018 mfp payments were based on agi for 2013 , 2014 , and 2015 .

initially , 2018 mfp payment recipients were subject to an agi limit of $900,000 for eligibility .

however , the 2019 supplemental appropriations for disaster relief act ( p.l .

116-20 ) included a provision that retroactively eliminated the agi threshold if at least 75% of a farm's agi came from farming operations .

this expanded agi interpretation is retained for 2019 mfp payments but based on the different three - year period described above .

the broad discretionary authority granted to the secretary under the ccc charter act to implement the trade aid package also allows the secretary to determine how the aid is to be calculated and distributed .

in 2018 , when the first trade aid package was announced with funding of $12 billion , usda officials declared that it would be a temporary , one - time response to foreign tariffs imposed on selected u.s. commodities .

however , on may 23 , 2019 , secretary perdue announced a second round of trade aid package valued at $16 billion in 2019 .

usda's use of ccc authority to initiate and fund agricultural support programs without congressional involvement is not without precedent , but the scope and scale of its use for the two trade aid packages—at $28 billion—has increased congressional and public interest .

some have suggested that the effects of tariffs and retaliatory tariffs could be long - lasting because they have created uncertainty about u.s. trade policy behavior and have called into question u.s. reliability as a trading partner .

furthermore , the use of ccc authority to mitigate tariff - related losses may establish a precedent for future situations .

some trade economists and market watchers have suggested that annual trade aid packages might continue as long as the trade disputes remain unresolved .

most farm commodity and advocacy groups have been supportive of the trade aid package even as they have called for solutions that restore export activity .

however , some stakeholders have questioned the equity of the distribution of 2018 mfp payments and the rationale for determining payments based on "trade damage" rather than a broader "market loss" measure .

some economists have suggested that , even under the 2019 formulation , usda is overpaying farmers for trade losses and that usda's calculations failed to fully incorporate last year's record soybean harvest or new trade patterns that have emerged following china's reluctance to buy u.s. soybeans .

due to their price tag ( $12 billion in 2018 and $16 billion in 2019 ) and the coupled nature of the mfp payments to planted acres , there is considerable interest from policymakers , market observers , and trading partners about whether these payments will be fully compliant with world trade organization ( wto ) commitments .

in particular , there is some interest in whether large mfp payments might cause the united states to breach its $19.1 billion annual wto spending limit on trade - distorting farm subsidies .

appendix a. mfp payment formula on august 23 , 2019 , usda published the details on the calculation of mfp payment rates for usda - designated eligible commodities under the 2019 trade aid package—including county - level mfp rates for non - specialty crops and national mfp rates for hogs , dairy , and specialty crops .

for both the 2018 and the 2019 trade aid packages , usda defined economic losses due to foreign retaliatory trade actions narrowly in terms of gross trade damages rather than broadly as lost market value .

gross trade damages is defined as the total amount of expected export sales lost to the retaliating trade partner due to the additional tariffs .

gross trade damages were estimated for each of the major farm commodities affected by the retaliatory tariffs .

the estimated trade damages were then used to derive both commodity - specific mfp payment rates and fpdp purchase targets for pork ( hogs ) and milk ( dairy ) .

both the 2018 and 2019 trade aid packages used the same methodology to estimate gross trade damages for usda - designated commodities .

however , the two estimates used different time frames to calculate the trade damages , thus producing different commodity - specific mfp payment rates ( table a - 1 ) .

the 2018 calculations of gross trade damages compared trade data from 2017 ( pre - retaliatory tariffs ) with 2018 data ( post - retaliatory tariffs ) .

the 2019 calculations used a longer historical time series , extending the "look - back" over a 10-year period from 2009 through 2018 compared with 2019 trade .

in a further change from the 2018 methodology , the 2019 mfp payment rates for non - specialty crops combined commodity - specific mfp payments rates at the county level in a formula ( weighted by historical county planted acres and yields ) to derive a single county - level mfp payment rate rather than separate national commodity - specific rates .

hogs , dairy , and specialty crops retained their national mfp payment rates but at different values due to the longer "look - back" period used to estimate gross trade damages .

this appendix section briefly reviews the methodology used to derive the 2018 mfp commodity - specific payment rates .

then it discusses the adaptations made by usda for 2019 to derive both the county - level payments for non - specialty crops and the national - level payment rates for specialty crops , hogs , and dairy .

2018 mfp payment - rate and payment methodology usda calculated a unique national mfp payment rate for each affected commodity ( as determined by usda ) .

a producer's mfp payment calculation involved three steps: first , usda estimated the level of direct trade - related damage caused by 2018 retaliatory tariffs—imposed by canada , china , the european union , mexico , and turkey—to u.s. exports for each affected commodity .

direct trade loss is the difference in expected trade value for each affected commodity with and without the retaliatory tariffs .

to measure this , usda compared u.s. exports for 2017 ( the year prior to the imposition of retaliatory tariffs ) with 2018 export levels when trade was subject to the retaliatory tariffs .

much of the affected 2018 agricultural production had yet to be harvested and sold at the time the mfp payment rates were calculated .

in addition , the final trade effect , with or without retaliatory tariffs , was not observable , and markets had yet to fully adjust to whatever new trade patterns would emerge from the trade dispute .

as a result , usda estimated both export values ( with and without retaliatory tariffs ) using a global trade model that accounted for the availability of both substitute supplies from export competitors and demand for u.s. agricultural exports from alternate importers .

indirect effects—such as any decline in market prices due to record 2018 soybean production and the build - up of domestic stocks , or resultant economy - wide "lost value" for non - producer owners of the affected commodities—were not included in the payment calculation .

second , the estimated trade damage for each affected commodity was divided by the crop's production in 2017 to calculate a national commodity - specific , per - unit damage rate .

this per - unit damage rate is the commodity - specific mfp payment rate .

in the case of both pork and milk , fpdp purchases were subtracted from the estimated trade damage before the per - unit mfp payment rates for hogs and milk were calculated .

finally , a producer's 2018 mfp payment was equal to the commodity - specific mfp payment rate multiplied by the producer's 2018 production for corn , cotton , sorghum , soybeans , wheat , fresh sweet cherries , and shelled almonds .

for hog producers , the mfp payment rate was multiplied by a producer - selected hog inventory from july 15 to august 15 , 2018 .

for milk producers , the mfp payment rate was multiplied by the farm's production history as reported for the margin protection program of the 2014 farm bill .

2019 mfp payment - rate and payment methodology to calculate the 2019 mfp payment rates , usda made several adaptations to the 2018 methodology .

as a result , a producer's mfp payment calculation in 2019 involved an additional fourth step .

first , usda again calculated the level of direct trade - related damage caused by retaliatory tariffs to u.s. exports for each commodity .

however , usda used 2019 retaliatory tariffs ( not 2018 ) that were being imposed by china , the european union , and turkey .

canada and mexico were removed from the calculations , as they were no longer imposing retaliatory tariffs on u.s. agricultural exports .

in addition , usda adjusted the calculation of direct trade damage by using 10 years of historical u.s. export data ( 2009-2018 ) rather than a single year .

this larger period captured trade losses for certain commodities that experienced fluctuating trade patterns in recent years and where trade levels during the 2017 data period were unrepresentative of historical trade volumes .

second , the estimated trade damage for each affected commodity was divided by the crop's average production during the three - year period 2015-2017 to calculate a national commodity - specific , per - unit damage rate .

in the case of both pork and milk , fpdp purchases were subtracted from the estimated trade damage before the per - unit mfp payment rates for hogs and milk were calculated .

third , the commodity - specific damage rates were then used to establish county - level , per - acre payment rates based on historical county data for average planted area and yields of the affected commodities .

for each county , usda multiplied three terms together to estimate the county - level trade damage for each mfp - eligible crop: ( 1 ) the three - year ( 2015-2017 ) average yield for each crop—taken from usda's risk management agency's ( rma ) crop insurance data , ( 2 ) the four - year ( 2015-2018 ) average planted acres of each crop in the county—taken from fsa's database of crop acreage reports—and ( 3 ) the commodity - specific , per - unit damage rate for each crop ( from step two above ) .

then , for each county , the crop damage estimates were added across all mfp - eligible crops produced in the county to generate an estimate of the county's total trade damages .

the county's total trade damage estimate was then divided by total planted acres of mfp - eligible crops within the county .

the result is a unique county - level mfp payment rate .

under this formulation , mfp county - level rates will vary across counties based on the average crop mix , the average planted acres per crop , and average crop yields .

finally , a producer's 2019 mfp non - specialty - crop payment is equal to the county - level mfp non - specialty - crop payment rate ( for the county where production occurs ) multiplied by the total acreage of all non - specialty crops planted in that county by that producer .

thus , the 2019 mfp non - specialty - crop payment is independent of an individual farmer's crop mix ( from among mfp - eligible non - specialty crops ) .

in 2019 , many producers were prevented from planting acreage due to wet , cool conditions .

these acres were not eligible for mfp non - specialty crop payments .

however , if a usda - approved cover crop was planted on the "prevent - plant" acres with the potential to be harvested , then those producers qualified for a $15-per - acre payment on "prevent - plant" acres .

usda suggests that this independence from individual crop choices prevents the county - level mfp payment from distorting producer planting decisions that were ongoing at the time of the initial trade aid package announcement on may 23 , 2019 .

however , planting of an mfp - eligible crop was a requirement for mfp eligibility .

thus , the 2019 mfp payments may be non - commodity - specific outlays , but they are coupled to the planting of an mfp - eligible crop .

these distinctions , although subtle , are important considerations for how the resultant outlays may be notified under wto domestic - support program disciplines .

appendix b. fpdp implementation the administration is allocating about $1.4 billion of its 2019 trade aid package to usda's ams for purchasing various agricultural commodities and distributing them through domestic nutrition assistance programs ( table b - 1 ) .

under the 2019 fpdp program , ams is to buy affected products in four phases , starting after october 1 , 2019 , with deliveries beginning in january 2020 .

the products purchased can be adjusted between phases to accommodate changes due to growing conditions , product availability , market conditions , trade negotiation status , and program capacity .

ams maintains purchase specifications for a variety of commodities based on recipient needs .

the products discussed in this plan are to be distributed to states for use in the network of food banks and food pantries that participate in the emergency feeding assistance program , elderly feeding programs such as the commodity supplemental foods program , and tribes that operate the food distribution program on indian reservations .

these outlets are in addition to child nutrition programs such as the national school lunch program , which may also benefit from these purchases .

appendix c. atp program implementation usda announced funding allocations under the atp program for both the 2018 and 2019 trade aid packages in 2019 ( table c - 1 ) .

a total of 59 organizations have received $300 million in awards under the two atp programs , including 57 organization receiving $200 million under the 2018 atp program and 48 organizations sharing $100 million under the 2019 program .

