congress passed the uranium mill tailings radiation control act of 1978 ( umtrca , p.l .

95-604 ) in the wake of environmental and public health concerns about exposures to radiological and non - radiological waste material originating from cold war–era uranium mill tailing sites .

title i of umtrca authorized a remedial action program for uranium mill tailing sites that were inactive prior to the law's enactment in 1978 .

under title i of umtrca , the federal government was mostly responsible for financing the remediation and decommissioning of title i sites , most of which produced uranium for nuclear weapons and other defense purposes .

title ii of umtrca authorized federal agencies to regulate uranium mill tailings produced at commercially licensed facilities still operating on or after 1978 .

for title ii sites , congress intended that commercial uranium mill operators , not the federal government , pay for site decommissioning and tailings stabilization activities .

the federal government assumes responsibility for both title i and title ii uranium mill sites transferred to long - term federal management after site decommissioning has been completed .

as of fy2019 , the department of energy office of legacy management ( doe - lm ) administers long - term federal management at 31 title i sites and six title ii sites .

doe - lm manages surface tailings and groundwater monitoring programs at sites under long - term federal management in an effort to minimize any unintended release of potentially radiological or non - radiological material .

long - term monitoring and maintenance activities may include stabilization of the engineered repository of uranium mill tailings and groundwater remediation or monitoring , if necessary .

as of fy2019 , 23 title ii sites remain owned by commercial operators , who are permitted to operate under the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) or an nrc agreement state license .

when the title ii site operator has completed all site decommissioning requirements , the license is to be transferred to doe for long - term federal management .

this report presents the historical context for the law , the status of implementation since enactment , and selected issues for congress .

umtrca does not authorize the regulation of uranium mining—the process of physically removing uranium ore from the earth—or the disposal of waste material produced by uranium mining .

the regulation of uranium mining and the remediation of abandoned uranium mines are not discussed in this report .

during the 1950s and 1960s , the u.s. atomic energy commission , a predecessor federal agency to doe and nrc , procured uranium concentrate by funding domestic uranium ore mining exploration and development , entering into private purchasing contracts with domestic milling companies , and purchasing foreign produced uranium concentrate .

the majority of domestic uranium concentrate production prior to 1971 primarily supported the development of nuclear weapons and naval reactors .

from 1947 to 1971 , annual domestic uranium concentrate production ranged from 20 million pounds to 35 million pounds ( figure 2 ) .

after 1971 , uranium mill operators produced uranium concentrate primarily for the production of civilian nuclear power .

the 1970s were a period of growth for the u.s. nuclear power industry , as 59 nuclear reactors were first connected to the electricity grid between 1970 and 1979 .

nrc estimated in 1978 that over 109 uranium mills would be required by the year 2000 to support the fuel requirements of the growing reactor fleet .

however , domestic uranium concentrate production in the united states decreased by roughly 92% from 1978 to 1993 ( figure 2 ) .

by 2000 , one active u.s. uranium mill , two partially active u.s. uranium mills , and three in - situ recovery ( isr ) facilities combined to produce 4 million pounds of uranium concentrate .

continued growth by the domestic civilian nuclear power industry did not materialize as anticipated in 1978 .

numerous factors led to decrease of domestic uranium production .

in particular , u.s. nuclear power growth was far less than envisioned by congress and federal agencies in 1978 , as u.s. nuclear plant orders virtually halted after that year and dozens of previous orders were canceled .

while the number of operational uranium mills was less than originally envisioned , potential risks from the uranium mills that did operate continue to present technical and regulatory challenges .

the awareness of the technical and economic challenges posed during the decommissioning and long - term management of uranium mill tailings have increased since 1978 .

as of the second quarter of 2018 , the u.s. uranium concentrate facilities consisted of one uranium mill and six isr facilities in operation .

the uranium mill tailings radiation control act of 1978 ( umtrca ; p.l .

95-604 ) includes three titles: title i authorized the remediation of uranium mill tailings inactive prior to the law's enactment in 1978 .

title ii authorized the regulation of commercial uranium mills operating on or after 1978 .

title iii directed the nrc to consult with the state of new mexico to study and designate two mill tailings sites in new mexico .

by 1998 , doe completed site decommissioning for all title i sites , with the exception of the site located at moab , ut .

legislation to authorize cleanup at moab was enacted subsequent to umtrca .

title i provisions do not authorize remedial actions for sites in operation on or after 1978 , which are addressed under title ii .

provisions under title iii have been resolved .

the legislative history suggests that public health and environmental concerns at the time were generally focused on preventing exposure to radiological emissions released into the air , such as radon gas .

many in congress also expressed concern about potential exposure risks associated with the unrestricted use of radioactive tailings material used as fill material for buildings and other construction projects .

less understood at the time of umtrca's original enactment was the dispersion and migration of radiological and non - radiological contaminants in groundwater , which has been an issue at some umtrca sites .

doe's surface remedial authority expired in 1998 for title i sites .

doe continues to administer groundwater remediation and monitoring programs at title i sites under long - term federal management .

the moab processing site in utah is the only title i site that has not transferred to long - term federal management .

site remediation costs and time frames have exceeded amounts originally envisioned by congress , the agencies , and the licensees due to an evolving understanding of the complexities and risks posed by unintended releases of contaminants from uranium mill tailings .

in 1995 , the gao reported that doe's total surface remediation costs were $2.3 billion , exceeding original 1982 estimates by $621 million .

additionally , long - term federal costs to manage disposal sites and persistent groundwater contamination remain uncertain due to unforeseen challenges and site - specific monitoring and maintenance needs .

for title ii sites , six sites have been transferred to doe - lm as of fy2019 .

licensees of remaining title ii sites continue to decommission and transfer their sites to doe - lm .

prior to long - term federal management , umtrca directs federal and state regulatory agencies to apply the stringency of decommissioning requirements on a licensee so that the degree of long - term monitoring and maintenance requirements are minimized .

doe - lm manages a title ii site once the nrc or the state transfers the license from the licensee following decommissioning .

in certain instances , nrc , doe - lm , state agencies , and licensees have disagreed about the adequacy of decommissioning , the degree of long - term monitoring , and the amount of funding needed to perform long - term federal management requirements .

in some instances , differences in views among the agencies have affected the timing of decommissioning and license transfers to doe - lm .

in other instances , licensees have lacked adequate funding to complete decommissioning .

the following sections describe selected issues regarding proposed legislation , site - specific issues decommissioning , and long - term financial assurance .

doe and residents continue to discover and excavate contaminated material at vicinity properties ( i.e. , buildings , roads , and sidewalks ) around grand junction , co , where uranium mill tailings were used as construction material prior to the enactment of umtrca .

discovered byproduct material from vicinity properties is disposed in the cheney disposal cell , located 15 miles southeast of the grand junction processing site .

doe constructed the cheney disposal cell in 1990 to accept residual radioactive material from the title i grand junction processing site and vicinity properties contaminated by the use of uranium tailings as building materials .

under section 112 of umtrca , doe's authority to accept byproduct material at the cheney disposal cell is scheduled to expire at the end fy2023 or until the cell reaches capacity , whichever comes first .

doe would be prohibited to operate the cheney disposal cell after fy2023 absent the enactment of reauthorizing legislation .

in the 116 th congress , the house passed h.r .

347 authorizing doe to dispose of residual radioactive material from processing sites and byproduct material from vicinity sites in the cheney disposal cell through fy2031 .

similar versions of this legislation were introduced in the 115 th congress .

thirteen title ii uranium mills produced uranium concentrate under both federal procurement contracts and commercial civilian nuclear power production .

title x of the energy policy act of 1992 ( p.l .

102-486 ) authorized reimbursements to pay title ii licensees for remedial costs proportional to the quantity of byproduct material produced under federal procurement contracts .

reimbursement payments under title x do not absolve the licensees from completing site decommissioning .

doe - em administers reimbursement payments to eligible title ii sites with funds appropriated from the uranium enrichment decontamination and decommissioning fund , established under title xi of the energy policy act of 1992 , to support remediation of federal uranium enrichment facilities .

title x reimbursements are subject to annual appropriations in the energy and water development and related agencies appropriations bill .

in 2000 , eight years after the authorization of title x reimbursements , the 106 th congress recognized that the implementation of decommissioning by licensees was more costly and taking longer than originally envisioned .

as of 2019 , title ii licensees eligible for title x continue to face similar decommissioning challenges .

for example , committee report language in the fy2019 energy and water development and related agencies appropriations bill directs doe to use funds to "reimburse licensees for approved claim balances in a timely manner and to avoid accumulating balances and liabilities. .

from fy1994 to fy2018 , doe reported that $355 million was reimbursed to 13 licensees .

according to doe , there were $26 million in approved but unpaid claims as of fy2018 , and estimated remaining program liability was $99 million for the remaining sites eligible for reimbursements .

various technical , financial , and regulatory issues have affected the timing of the transfer of title ii sites to long - term federal management .

nrc's statutory responsibility is to regulate uranium mills and tailings for title ii sites in a manner that allows a licensee to complete site decommissioning in manner so stringent that little long - term maintenance and monitoring would be required .

congress intended nrc to mitigate financial burdens to the licensees while requiring that all decommissioning requirements be fully met .

the transfer of the remaining title ii sites to doe - lm for long - term federal management would remain pending until nrc determines that the licensee has completed all decommissioning requirements .

nrc estimates specific dates for some title ii sites , while others are listed as "to be determined. .

table a - 1 identifies title i and title ii sites that have transferred to long - term federal management , and table a - 2 identifies title i and title ii sites that have not yet transferred to long - term federal management .

doe - lm would become responsible for long - term federal management of title ii sites currently licensed by nrc or an nrc agreement state upon the completion of decommissioning and site transfer .

for some title ii sites , doe - lm and nrc have reached differing conclusions regarding the adequacy of decommissioning , the degree and type of long - term monitoring requirements , and the funds needed to pay for long - term monitoring and maintenance costs .

section 203 of umtrca authorized nrc to collect a bond or other financial arrangement to pay for the costs in the event that a licensee was unable to fulfill all of their decommissioning requirements .

umtrca does not authorize the use of federal funding to pay for the decommissioning of title ii sites .

in the event that the bond were insufficient to pay for the full decommissioning costs , umtrca provides no additional mechanism for funding to complete decommissioning .

in some instances , title ii licensees have lacked adequate financial resources to complete nrc's decommissioning requirements .

if left unreclaimed , exposure risks from releases of radiological and non - radiological contaminants may present issues to affected communities .

the magnitude of public health and environmental risks posed by unreclaimed tailings may vary among individual sites .

for sites that have transferred to long - term federal management , doe - lm administers title i and title ii sites under an nrc general license .

umtrca authorized long - term monitoring and maintenance costs at title i sites to be paid by the federal government .

for title ii sites , congress intended that the licensee would pay for any necessary long - term monitoring and maintenance costs using a one - time long - time surveillance charge ( ltsc ) .

annual costs are largely dependent on the extent of site - specific groundwater monitoring and intermittent maintenance activities on the repository .

under current federal law there are different statutory authorities for doe - lm to perform remediation at title i sites and title ii sites under long - term federal management .

for title i sites , congress authorized doe - lm to implement groundwater remediation indefinitely , recognizing the ongoing remediation challenges at some title i sites after decommissioning .

umtrca does not provide doe - lm remedial authority for title ii sites under long - term federal management .

at title ii sites under long - term federal management , doe - lm is authorized to perform monitoring , maintenance , and emergency measures .

emergency measures is not explicitly defined by statute , potentially raising issues of interpretation in the event of future remedial action needs .

selected issues with title i and title ii long - term financial assurance are discussed in the following sections .

congress provides funding for the long - term federal management of title i sites through doe annual appropriations .

for title i sites under long - term federal management , program funding for doe - lm is funded under environmental and other defense activities account in the energy and water development and related agencies appropriations bill .

doe - em continues to administer remediation at the moab site in utah .

funding for the moab site is appropriated annually in the energy and water development and related agencies appropriations bill under the non - defense environmental cleanup account .

doe annual expenditures can vary from site to site depending on costs related to many factors , including the degree of groundwater remediation or monitoring and disposal site maintenance .

for example , from 2008 and 2012 , an interagency report from january 2013 noted that total doe expenditures at the tuba city disposal site were $13.96 million ( approximately $2.8 million per year ) , while total expenditures at the mexican hat disposal site were $110,000 ( approximately $22,000 per year ) .

neither doe - lm annual budget justifications nor annual appropriations bills specify funding for annual long - term federal management costs by site or for the site inventory as a whole .

annual funding for doe - lm is presented in annual budget requests and appropriations as a single line - item .

in all , doe - lm oversees over 100 sites contaminated by radiological , chemical , and hazardous wastes associated with the legacy of nuclear weapons production during world war ii and the cold war .

umtrca processing and disposal sites constitute 37 of those sites .

congress appropriated $159 million to doe - lm in the energy and water development and related agencies appropriations act , 2019 ( p.l .

115-244 ) , the same amount as requested .

for title ii sites , congress intended that commercial uranium mill operators will pay for site decommissioning and the costs for a federal agency to perform long - term federal management .

to cover these long - term federal management costs , nrc requires licensees to pay an ltsc upon the transfer of the site to doe .

section 203 of umtrca provides nrc authority to collect this ltsc from the licensee to pay for doe's costs to perform long - term maintenance , monitoring , and emergency measures .

this one - time ltsc fee is deposited as a miscellaneous receipt into the general fund of the u.s. treasury when each site license is transferred to doe .

in the 1980 final generic environmental impact statement for uranium milling , nrc described the justification for the minimum ltsc fee based on the assumption that average long - term monitoring at umtrca title ii sites would cost $2,500 per year .

nrc assumed an average annual real rate of return , and each licensee is required to pay the minimum one - time l tsc of $ 250,000 ( in 1978 dollars , adjusted for inflation ) .

nrc has not revised the minimum ltsc since regulations were promulgated in 1985 .

nrc allows for the minimum ltsc fee to be increased based on expected site - specific surveillance or controls requirements if needed .

umtrca does not authorize a mechanism to recover additional fees from licensees once the license has been transferred to doe - lm .

the adequacy of the ltsc to cover doe's costs to perform long - term maintenance and monitoring has been an issue .

in 1995 , the gao recommended that nrc improve "the accuracy of the one - time charge made to owner / operators to ensure that this charge fully covers future costs at their sites. .

in 2014 , the doe office of inspector general ( ig ) found that doe - lm had spent $4.25 million at six title ii sites under long - term management .

during the same three - year period , the ig report found that the available funds from the ltsc fees were $0.148 million .

to the extent that the ltsc fees are insufficient to cover annual monitoring and maintenance costs , doe - lm would be responsible to carry out long - term management responsibilities , subject to availability of annual appropriations .

doe - lm has discretion to allocate appropriated funding among eligible sites under long - term federal management .

if the current minimum ltsc do not fully cover annual long - term federal management costs for the remaining title ii sites when they transfer to doe - lm , the ig report states "the total cost to the american taxpayers could be significant. .

yet , there is a limited availability of information by site and by year for doe - lm's monitoring and maintenance costs at umtrca sites under long - term management .

doe - em has provided life - cycle cost ranges and completion date estimates for environmental management sites , including the moab site , in annual budget justifications .

crs was unable to identify doe cost estimates for any other umtrca site .

the federal government will be responsible for the long - term management costs for all umtrca sites once transferred to doe - lm .

potential issues for congress may include the decommissioning and transfer status of the remaining title ii sites , the adequacy of funding to complete decommissioning at certain sites if the licensee is unable to fulfill its obligations , and the adequacy of the long - term surveillance charges to meet future long - term management needs .

