congress uses an annual appropriations process to fund the routine activities of most federal agencies .

this process anticipates the enactment of 12 regular appropriations bills to fund these activities before the beginning of the fiscal year .

when this process has not been completed before the start of the fiscal year , one or more continuing appropriations acts ( commonly known as continuing resolutions or crs ) can be used to provide interim funding pending action on the regular appropriations .

dod has started the fiscal year under a cr for 13 of the past 18 years ( fy2002-fy2019 ) and every year since fy2010 excluding fy2019 .

dod has operated under a cr for an average of 119 days per year during the period fy2010-fy2019 compared to an average of 32 days per year during the period fy2002-fy2009 ( see figure 1 ) .

all told , since 2010 , dod has spent 1,186 days—more than 39 months—operating under a cr , compared to 259 days—less than 9 months—during the 8 years preceding 2010 .

to preserve congressional prerogatives to shape federal spending in the regular appropriations bills , the eventual enactment of which is expected , crs typically contain limitations intended to allow execution of funds in a manner that provides for continuation of projects and activities with relatively few departures from the way funds were allocated in the previous fiscal year .

however , dod funding needs typically change from year to year across the agency's dozens of appropriations accounts for a variety of reasons , including emerging , increasing , or decreasing threats to national security .

if accounts—and activities within accounts—are funded by a cr at a lower level than was requested in the pending administration budget , then dod cannot obligate funds at the anticipated rate .

this can restrict planned personnel actions , maintenance and training activities , and a variety of contracted support actions .

delaying or deferring such actions can also cause a ripple effect , generating personnel shortages , equipment maintenance backlogs , oversubscribed training courses , and a surge in end - of - year contract spending .

given the frequency of crs in recent years , many dod program managers and senior leaders work well in advance of the outcome of annual decisions on appropriations to minimize contracting actions planned for the first quarter of the coming fiscal year .

the defense acquisition university , dod's education service for acquisition program management , advises students that , "[m]embers of the [office of the secretary of defense] , the services and the acquisition community must consider late enactment to be the norm [emphasis in original] rather than the exception and , therefore , plan their acquisition strategy and obligation plans accordingly. .

in anticipation of such a delay in the availability of full funding for programs , dod managers can build program schedules in which planned contracting actions are pushed to later in the fiscal year when it is more likely that a full appropriation will have been enacted .

additionally , managers can take steps to defer hiring actions , restrict travel policies , or cancel nonessential education and training events for personnel to keep their spending within the confines of a cr .

on their face , crs are disruptive to routine agency operations and many of the procedures used by agencies to deal with limitations imposed by a cr entail costs .

however , even though these disruptions have been routine for more than a decade , there has been little systematic analysis of the extent to which theses disruptions have led to measurable and significantly adverse impacts on u.s. military preparedness over the long run .

all federal agencies face management challenges under a cr , but dod faces unique challenges in providing the military forces needed to deter war and defend the country .

in a letter to the leaders of the armed services committees dated september 8 , 2017 , then - secretary of defense james mattis asserted that "longer term crs impact the readiness of our forces and their equipment at a time when security threats are extraordinarily high .

the longer the cr , the greater the consequences for our force. .

dod officials argue that the department depends heavily on stable but flexible funding patterns and new start activities to maintain a modernized force ready to meet future threats .

former defense secretary ashton carter posited that crs put commanders in a "straitjacket" that limits their ability to adapt , or keep pace with complex national security challenges around the world while responding to rapidly evolving threats like the islamic state .

published reports on the effect of crs on agency operations typically provide anecdotal assertions that such funding measures increase costs and reduce efficiencies .

however , these accounts typically do not provide data that would permit a systematic analysis of cr effects .

nor do they address the impact of cr - caused near - term bureaucratic disruption on the combat capability and readiness of u.s. forces over the longer - term .

one exception to this general rule—discussed below—is a 2019 study by the rand corporation of the effect of crs on a limited number of dod procurement programs .

that analysis , "did not find strong evidence … indicating that crs are generally associated with delays in procurement awards or increased costs," although the authors of the study emphasized that , because of its limited scope , the study , "does not imply that the widely expressed concerns regarding cr effects are invalid. .

one widely publicized estimate of the cost of recent crs stands apart in the level of detail available on how the figure was calculated .

in a december 4 , 2017 , speech at a defense symposium , secretary of the navy richard spencer said that crs had cost the navy , "about $4 billion since 2011. .

crs asked the navy for the source of the $4 billion figure and for details on how it was calculated .

in response , the navy provided crs with an information paper that stated the following in part: crs have averaged 106 days per year in the last decade , or 29% of each year .

this means over one quarter of every year is lost or has to be renegotiated for over 100,000 don [department of the navy] contracts ( conservative estimate ) and billions of dollars .

contractors translate this cr uncertainty into the prices they charge the government .

– the cost factors at work here are: price uncertainty caused by the cr and reflected in higher rates charged to the government ; government time to perform multiple incremental payments or renegotiate ; and contractor time to renegotiate or perform unnecessary rework caused by the cr .

these efforts are estimated at approximately 1 / 7 th of a man - year for all stakeholders or $26k [$26,000] per average contract .

– $26k x 100,000 contracts = $2.6b [$2.6 billion] per year .

while the estimate for each contract would be different , it can readily be seen that this is a low but reasonable estimate .

the navy paper did not provide any justification for the assumptions underpinning that calculation .

the literature on cr effects includes one relatively rigorous effort to determine whether multi - month crs are associated with delays and cost increases in dod procurement programs .

the study , conducted in 2017 by the rand corporation , was sponsored by the office of dod's senior acquisition official ( the then - under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics ) .

summarizing its review of the literature on cr effects , the rand team said because of a lack of quantitative data , many of the [asserted] consequences … would be very difficult to estimate quantitatively or to conclusively demonstrate .

all of the research that we reviewed on the consequences of operating under a cr employed qualitative approaches that focused on case studies , assertions , and anecdotal information .

to see whether crs systematically are associated with cost increases and delays in dod procurements , rand examined 151 procurement awards for relatively high - profile programs during fy2013-fy2015 .

in each of those years , dod operated under crs for several months .

comparing procurement awards originally scheduled to occur while the agency was under a cr with those made after a regular appropriations bill had been enacted , the study found no statistically significant difference between the two groups in whether an award was delayed ; if it was delayed , the length of the delay ; or whether the unit cost increased compared with the projected cost .

rand also compared the 151 procurement awards made during fy2013-fy2015—years when there were prolonged crs—with 48 awards made during fy1999 , when dod operated under a cr for only the first 3 weeks of the fiscal year .

a comparison of the awards made during the period of "long - crs" ( 2013-15 ) with awards made during a period in which there was one relatively short cr ( fy1999 ) showed no statistically significant difference in the percentage of awards that were delayed ; for cases in which a delay occurred , longer delays in fy2013-fy2015 than in the earlier period ; and larger unit - cost increases ( relative to original projections ) for cases during the fy1999 ( i.e. , the "short - cr" period ) .

in sum , rand concluded , "we did not find strong evidence … that crs are generally associated with delays in procurement awards or increased costs .

on the other hand , given the limitations inherent in our statistical analysis , we cannot use its results to rule out the occurrence of these kinds of negative effects. .

inasmuch as crs have become relatively routine , congress may wish to mandate a broader and more systematic assessment of dod's use of what the rand study calls "levers of management discretion" to ameliorate their potential adverse impacts .

in addition to cataloguing the techniques used and estimating their near - term costs , if any , congress also may sponsor assessments of the impact of crs over the longer term .

after nearly a decade of managerial improvisation to cope with relatively long - term crs' disruption of normal procedures , congress may wish to look for evidence that the dod has suffered adverse systemic impacts—problems that go beyond marginal increases in cost or time to impair dod's ability to protect the national security .

