congress chartered fannie mae and freddie mac , also known collectively as the government - sponsored enterprises ( gses ) , to promote homeownership by providing liquidity to the secondary markets for single - family residential mortgages and multifamily ( apartment and condominium ) construction .

guaranteeing single - family residential mortgages is their core business activity , but it comes with risks .

the gses retain the credit ( default ) risks from the mortgages they purchase from loan originators and subsequently issue mortgage - backed securities ( mbss ) , which are bond - like securities .

investors who purchase the mbss are guaranteed to get their initial principal investment returned , but they assume the risk that borrowers may choose to repay their mortgages ahead of schedule , known as prepayment risk .

the mbss are considered more liquid ( in comparison to the original mortgages with both attached risks ) because they may be traded or sold for cash more quickly .

if investors are willing to hold mbss , then more private - sector funds become available for relatively less liquid mortgages—particularly 30-year fixed - rate mortgages .

national mortgage rates tend to fall as the supply of funds in this market increases , making homeownership more affordable .

the federal housing finance agency ( fhfa ) , an independent federal government agency created by the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 ( hera ; p.l .

110-289 ) , is the gses' primary supervisor .

fhfa regulates the gses for prudential safety and soundness and ensure they meet their affordable housing mission goals .

in september 2008 , the gses experienced losses that exceeded their statutory minimum capital requirement levels due to the high rate of mortgage defaults .

the gses also experienced losses following spikes in short - term borrowing rates that occurred while they were funding long - term assets held in their portfolios .

the gses subsequently agreed to be placed under conservatorship .

until the gses' financial safety and soundness can be restored , the fhfa has the powers of management , boards , and shareholders .

the fhfa established three conservatorship performance goals designed to restore confidence in the gses and restore them to a safe and solvent condition: 1 .

the gses must promote a well - functioning national housing finance market while operating in a financially safe and sound manner .

2. credit or default risk to u.s. taxpayers should be reduced by increasing private capital's role in the mortgage market .

3 .

the gses must construct a contemporary single‐family securitization infrastructure for their use and other private mortgage securitizers .

in addition , the senior preferred stock purchase agreements ( pspas ) stipulate the conditions under which the u.s. treasury will provide financial support to the gses while they are under conservatorship .

the pspas require the gses to pay dividends to treasury rather than private shareholders while they are under conservatorship .

the pspas also require the gses to reduce the size of their lending portfolios to $250 billion .

since they entered conservatorship , congressional interest in the gses has continued due to uncertainty in the housing , mortgage , and financial market .

for example , the final amount and duration of financial support that treasury will eventually provide the gses is difficult to predict at present .

furthermore , reforming or replacing the gses might affect the availability of single - family 30-year fixed - rate mortgage loan products .

this mortgage product is arguably popular with borrowers , but private lenders may be reluctant to retain them in their lending portfolios because they are relatively less liquid mortgages—with both credit and prepayment risks attached—and may last for several decades .

congressional interest has been reflected by various draft proposals , bills , and oversight hearings on housing finance reform .

during the 116 th congress , the u.s. senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs released a proposal that would affect the gses' role in the housing finance system .

president donald j. trump also released a memorandum directing federal agencies to develop a plan to reform the housing finance system , which includes ending the conservatorships .

this report first describes fannie mae's and freddie mac's activities and mission .

it then summarizes the progress made to date on fhfa's initiatives , focusing primarily on the management of the gses' credit and liquidity risks .

the fhfa has directed the gses to share more of the credit risk linked to their single - family mortgage purchases with the private sector to reduce potential risks that would be borne by u.s. taxpayers .

the gses must also standardize numerous processes to foster greater liquidity in the market for their mbss .

this report concludes with a discussion of the policy implications of gse challenges while they are under conservatorship .

for example , recent fhfa initiatives require the gses to harmonize their business models , including certain borrower risk characteristics that are eligible for securitization .

the gses' ability to satisfy their affordable housing goals , therefore , might depend upon the extent to which borrowers with risk characteristics deemed eligible for securitization overlap with those who traditionally face greater difficulty accessing mortgage credit .

in addition , the gses' ability to purchase and securitize mortgages may depend upon certain legal protections that loan originators receive when their mortgages are sold to the gses .

the regulation , which is known as the gse patch ( or qm patch ) , expires on january 10 , 2021 , and it is difficult to predict how secondary - market participants—loan originators , the gses , and investors—will respond if it expires as scheduled .

borrowers obtain their mortgages from loan originators in the primary market ; loan originations may be bought and sold in the secondary market .

by law , the gses cannot originate mortgages directly to borrowers in the primary market .

instead , the gses operate in the secondary mortgage market , interacting with loan originators ( that sell mortgages to the gses ) and investors ( that purchase the gses' debt and mbs issuances ) .

the gses purchase conforming mortgages , single - family mortgages that meet certain eligibility criteria based on size and creditworthiness , from loan originators .

the gses use two methods to acquire conforming mortgages .

a gse may pay cash directly from its cash window to a loan originator for delivery of a small number of mortgages .

alternatively , the gses may enter into a swap agreement with a loan originator to purchase a large number ( pool ) of mortgages .

in exchange for a pool ( s ) , the purchasing gse delivers one ( or more ) mbs that is linked to the mbs trust that will hold the mortgages .

an mbs trust is a legal entity established to hold pools of conforming mortgage loans ; the streams of principal and interest are deposited as borrowers repay their mortgages .

the gses issue mbss to investors .

mbss are essentially derivative products that contain one , rather than both , of the financial risks attached to the original mortgages that the gse purchased .

investors that purchase an mbs receive a coupon , which is the yield composed of the principal and interest repayments from borrowers whose mortgages are held in mbs trusts .

however , various fees are subtracted before the coupons are paid to investors .

for example , a designated mortgage servicer retains a fee to collect borrowers' regular payments , resolves borrower delinquency and default problems , and disburses payments to the gses ( which subsequently disburse payments to mbs investors ) .

other fees related to the home purchase ( eg , settlement costs ) that borrowers may have chosen not to pay upfront may also be subtracted .

simply put , the coupon is the rate of return net of fees that an investor receives for purchasing or investing in an mbs .

the gses , like banks , are financial intermediaries that match mortgage borrowers with ultimate lenders .

under a traditional banking model , banks borrow funds from their depositors and use the funds to originate longer - term consumer and business loans .

consumers and businesses pay higher interest rates to banks for these longer - term loans than the banks pay to their depositors for successive sequences of relatively lower - rate loans ( eg , recurring deposits ) for shorter periods of time .

l ending spreads are the difference between lending at higher rates ( revenues ) and borrowing at successive sequences of shorter rates ( costs ) .

a bank can retain all of the profits generated by its lending spreads if the entire lending process and associated financial risks are retained on its balance sheet .

similar to banks , the gses create profitable lending spreads to finance assets retained in their lending portfolios ( on - balance sheet ) and the conforming mortgages held in the mbs trusts ( off - balance sheet ) .

the gses issue to investors debt securities , referred to as unsecured debentures , with shorter maturities relative to the longer - term assets retained in portfolio .

by borrowing via successive sequences of lower - rate debentures , the gses create portfolio lending spreads .

in addition , the gses fund mortgages held in the mbs trusts .

rather than issuing debentures , the gses fund the mbs trusts via issuing mbss in the to - be - announced ( tba ) market .

when issuing mbss , however , the gses act more like monoline bond insurers , meaning they retain credit risk and transfer prepayment risk to private investors .

these concepts , which are key to understanding the gses' securitization activities , are described in detail in the sections below .

since conservatorship , the fhfa has focused primarily on ( 1 ) the credit risks retained by the gses ( posing a direct risk to u.s. taxpayers ) and ( 2 ) the liquidity of their mbs issuances .

the fhfa has released various versions of strategic plans and performance goals to inform the public .

this section highlights fhfa initiatives that focus on those specific risks .

congress established the gses with a public policy mission that includes a variety of ways to support affordable housing .

following the great recession , congress also established a macroprudential economic policy tool in the form of new mortgage market underwriting requirements to mitigate a systemic risk event .

given these broader public policy objectives , this section discusses selected challenges for the gses while they are under conservatorship .

the gses have statutory single - and multi - family goals along with other requirements designed to promote affordable housing .

the affordable housing goals , duty to serve goals , and cash contributions make up the three sets of requirements: 1 .

the gses must satisfy specified housing goals that require them to purchase certain percentages of mortgages for families with very low incomes ( at or below 50% of area median family income ) and extremely low incomes ( at or below 30% of area median family income ) .

2 .

hera created a duty to serve for underserved markets , specifically manufactured housing , rural housing , and affordable housing preservation .

the fhfa requires the gses to develop their own duty to serve plans to encourage lenders to increase their lending in these areas .

3 .

hera requires the gses to contribute to the housing trust fund ( htf ) and the capital magnet fund ( cmf ) .

the htf funds states and state - designated entities for eligible activities that primarily support affordable rental housing for extremely low - and very low - income families , including homeless families .

the cmf awards competitive grants to financial institutions designated as community development financial institutions and qualified nonprofit housing organizations for which the development or management of affordable housing is one of their principal purposes .

the gses must set aside 4.2 basis points ( 0.042% ) of the unpaid principal balance of mortgages purchased in a year for these funds .

achieving the affordable housing mission has been difficult for the gses while they are under conservatorship .

for one reason , fhfa suspended the requirement that the gses make contributions to the htf and the cmf between 2008 and 2014 .

the requirement was reinstated in 2015 .

another factor may be that the pspas caps of $250 billion on both of the gses' portfolios potentially limit the amount of mortgages with nonstandardized characteristics they can purchase .

the gses retained portfolios consist primarily of ( 1 ) mortgages in the pipeline to be securitized , ( 2 ) non - performing mortgages that may receive loss - mitigation , and ( 3 ) mortgages that support affordable housing mission goals .

the pspa caps and changing mortgage market conditions may prompt the gses to be more deliberate when allocating their portfolios for certain purposes .

under the current standardization initiatives , some mortgage purchases made to support the gses' affordable mission goals might not be securitized if they lack , for example , the prepayment characteristics required to be securitized into a umbs .

hence , the standardization initiatives would not adversely affect low - and moderate - income borrowers whose prepayment speeds can be securitized into umbss ; however , borrowers with prepayments speeds not acceptable for umbs securitization could pay more for mortgages if the gses' portfolios are being used primarily as securitization pipelines for acceptable mortgages and operating closer to their pspa caps while the gses are under conservatorship .

on january 10 , 2013 , the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) released a final rule implementing the ability - to - repay ( atr ) requirement of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ; p.l .

111-203 ) ; the rule took effect on january 10 , 2014 .

the dodd - frank act requires lenders to verify a borrower's atr with documentation .

the final rule provides multiple ways for a loan originator to comply , one of which is by originating a qualified mortgage ( qm ) .

if a loan meets certain underwriting and product - feature requirements , it receives qm status ; the lender receives a presumption of atr compliance for legal purposes .

specifically , qm loans provide safe harbor legal protection , meaning that a borrower would not be able to assert that the originator ( and any subsequent secondary - market purchaser ) failed to comply with any of the required underwriting criteria .

limiting the borrower's debt - to - income ( dti ) ratio to 43% is one of the underwriting requirements for a loan to receive qm status .

if , however , a loan's dti exceeds 43% , it may still receive qm status if another federal agency that insures mortgage credit risk is willing to guarantee it .

the qm patch allows the gses and other federal agencies to operate under their own qm rules for seven years ( until january 10 , 2021 ) or until the gses exit conservatorship , whichever is sooner .

consequently , the federal housing administration , u.s. department of veterans affairs , and united states department of agriculture did not adopt a 43% dti requirement for the mortgages they guarantee .

instead , these agencies adopted their own qm definitions , which included the exclusion of product features they considered would impede repayment from borrowers they predominantly serve—but they did not limit dtis to 43% .

furthermore , the cfpb's qm rule created an exemption from the 43% dti cap for mortgages eligible for purchase by the gses .

hence , loan originations either acquired by the gses while they are under conservatorship ( or until january 10 , 2021 ) or guaranteed by other federal agencies receive qm status .

since 2007 , the private - label securitizations market has diminished whereas the roles of gses and federal agencies that guarantee or issue residential mortgage loans have increased in importance .

one reason might be related to the legal protections linked to qm loan originations .

many originators have limited themselves to making only qm loans to avoid exposure to potential liability and litigation risks .

although they may be willing to assume customary lending risks , such as credit and prepayment , financial institutions historically have been less willing to originate mortgage loans with attached compliance or legal risks .

for example , since the passage of the 1994 home ownership equity protection act ( hoepa ) , mortgage originations covered by the law make up a small share of the mortgage market and are concentrated among very few lenders .

hoepa lending declined markedly after new regulations were implemented to amend the definition of a high - cost mortgage to cover more types of loans .

after the passage of the georgia anti - predatory lending act of 2002 , the gses announced that they would no longer purchase mortgages originated in the state of georgia to avoid the legal risk of assignee liability .

likewise , many mortgage originators have reportedly limited themselves to making qm safe harbor loans .

if the qm patch expires in january 2021 as currently scheduled ( or the gses are no longer in conservatorship ) , it is unclear whether the gses would purchase non - qm loans in the future .

because the gses currently purchase loans that meet the qm standards , questions that pertain to the legal liabilities of the gses ( and holders of gse issuances ) if they were to purchase non - qm loans are largely unknown at this time .

if the gses did limit their non - qm purchases , some borrowers could find it more difficult to access mortgage credit and others could experience an increase in the cost of obtaining a mortgage .

furthermore , the mbs and crt financial market conditions , in terms of demand , supply , and liquidity , could exhibit greater volatility after january 2021 if the patch expires .

