personal property management is a complex undertaking , as federal agencies must track , evaluate , dispose of , and replace a vast array of items .

personal property is defined as any property that is not real property ( land , buildings , and structures ) , with the exception of certain naval vessels ( battleships , cruisers , aircraft carriers , destroyers , and submarines ) .

everything else that an agency owns is considered personal property: desks , computers , vehicles , and laboratory equipment are common examples .

given the size and distribution of the federal workforce—more than 4 million federal civilian and military full - time equivalents are housed at thousands of locations across the country and overseas—the acquisition and maintenance of personal property has required sustained investment by the government .

in fy2017 , federal agencies reported $1.3 trillion in personal property assets .

effective management of federal personal property is necessary to prevent waste , fraud , and loss .

each agency is responsible for implementing policies and procedures—known as internal controls—that mitigate risk and promote the efficient use of federal assets .

internal controls help an agency answer fundamental questions about its personal property inventory , such as: does the agency know what it owns ? .

does the agency need everything it has ? .

is the agency disposing of unneeded assets so that other agencies or the public may make use of them ? .

is the agency getting the best price on replacement items ? .

what safeguards are in place to make it difficult to steal or misuse personal property ? .

the office of management and budget ( omb ) provides agencies with broad guidance on establishing internal controls via circular a - 123 .

specific guidance for agency personal property policies and procedures is primarily located in the federal management regulation , which is promulgated by the general services administration ( gsa ) .

in addition , appendix b of circular a - 123 establishes requirements for internal controls over the management of federal charge cards , which includes safeguards for the receipt of personal property acquired with purchase cards .

personal property management is a relatively decentralized process , and there is no government - wide source of data on agency inventories .

policymakers and federal auditors have shown particular interest in the disposal of personal property , as recent assessments demonstrate that agencies fail to identify and dispose of items they no longer need .

agencies must continually survey their property holdings , identify items that are not needed , and dispose of any unneeded property by transferring it at no cost to other federal agencies , donating it to state or local entities , selling it to the public , or abandoning or destroying it .

executive agencies use this process to dispose of tens of thousands of items a year .

when agencies do not efficiently track , inventory , and dispose of unneeded ( excess ) property , agencies increase federal expenditures and waste the unused value of personal property assets .

for example , an agency may purchase items they could have obtained at no cost from another agency's excess inventory , and property that is lost or stolen when not properly inventoried may need to be replaced .

when federal agencies do not follow a sound property management process , state and local entities may lose the opportunity to acquire excess federal property at no charge , resulting in higher costs for them when serving the public .

the federal government also incurs greater storage expenses when agencies hold onto excess property and loses revenue from potential sales .

to address these concerns , congress passed the federal personal property management act of 2018 ( personal property act ; p.l .

115-419 ) , which establishes new inventory tracking and assessment requirements for federal agencies .

this report begins with a discussion of federal personal property management guidance , then examines weaknesses in agency policies and procedures .

next , the report analyzes the personal property act and how it may address weaknesses in the personal property disposal process .

the report concludes with observations on the intersection of real property and personal property .

the personal property disposal process begins when an agency determines it no longer needs certain items .

to ensure that agencies are able to identify unneeded or "excess" personal property in a timely manner , they are required to maintain adequate property controls and continually survey their inventories to determine the utility of each item .

when an agency identifies excess property , it has the option to transfer an item directly to another federal agency , provided the item had an acquisition cost of less than $10,000 .

excess property with an acquisition cost of $10,000 or more may be transferred directly to another federal agency with verbal approval from the appropriate gsa regional office .

generally , direct transfers are made at no charge for the property itself , but the requesting agency is responsible for transportation and shipping costs .

agencies may also perform a direct transfer of computers or peripheral tools ( eg , modems and printers ) to schools or educational nonprofits through the computers for learning program , which was established pursuant to executive order 12999 , "educational technology: ensuring opportunities for all children in the next century," and encompasses educational institutions for children in pre - kindergarten through secondary school .

if an agency does not perform a direct transfer of excess personal property , it must promptly report the property to gsa .

excess property may be reported online through the gsaxcess system , electronic batch , or hard copy .

once excess property is reported to gsa , it undergoes a 21-day screening process , during which the property may be viewed online ( if it was entered into gsaxcess by the reporting agency ) or inspected onsite ( at the agency ) .

during the 21-day period , excess personal property may be transferred to other federal agencies as well as to the senate , the house of representatives , the architect of the capitol , the district of columbia government , and certain mixed - ownership government corporations .

if no federal agency requests the excess property , then it is declared "surplus," and gsa has five days to donate it at no charge to eligible recipients .

such recipients include state and local governments ; municipal agencies ; and nonprofits that provide support for education , public health , or veterans groups .

the surplus personal property is not transferred directly to the recipients .

rather , each state has a state agency for surplus property ( sasp ) , which receives the property and distributes it to qualified agencies and organizations .

surplus personal property that is not donated within the five - day period may be sold to the general public .

gsa makes surplus property for sale available on its public auction website and may also sell property through live auctions , fixed price or negotiated sales , sealed bids , or spot bids .

generally , proceeds from the sale of surplus property are deposited into the u.s. treasury , less the cost of disposition .

items that do not sell may be recycled , abandoned , or destroyed if they have no value or the estimated cost of their continued care and handling exceeds the estimated proceeds from sale .

while gsa plays a central role in screening and transferring excess personal property , each executive agency is responsible for continually surveying its own inventory and declaring unneeded property "excess" in a timely manner .

when agencies do not fulfill these duties , government resources are not used efficiently , and public funds may be expended unnecessarily .

a federal agency may purchase items that could have been obtained at no charge from another agency's excess inventory , for example , or a state government may expend public funds to acquire equipment it could have obtained for free from a federal warehouse .

in addition , agencies did not always obtain the maximum exchange allowance or sales price when replacement items were needed .

the variance in agency disposal policies and practices likely contributes to wasteful and inefficient use of federal personal property .

the personal property act ( p.l .

115-419 ) was written to address the inconsistent standards in agency inventory practices and thresholds .

to that end , section 2 of the legislation requires the gsa administrator to issue guidance that will direct agencies to conduct an annual inventory and assessment of capitalized personal property to identify which items , if any , are no longer needed and should be declared excess .

the guidance also requires agencies to regularly inventory and assess their accountable personal property .

the evaluation of need for both capitalized and accountable personal property must consider: the age and condition of the personal property , the extent to which the executive agency uses the personal property , the extent to which the mission of the executive agency is dependent on the personal property , and any other aspect of the personal property that the administrator determines is useful or necessary for the executive agency to evaluate .

section 2 further requires agencies to establish capitalization and accountability thresholds for acquisitions of personal property .

agencies are also required to establish and maintain records of accountable property in a centralized system .

the personal property act was enacted in january 2019 .

gsa has not issued the required guidance as of the date of this report .

the disposal of excess personal property is often initiated by "triggering events," such as relocation , reconfiguration , or consolidation .

in such cases , agencies appear to be unaware of the full scope of excess property in their inventories until they are tasked with moving or replacing it .

if an agency is unprepared to manage the disposal of excess property during a transition to new space , whether temporary or permanent , it may cause delays or increase the costs associated with the move .

in august 2017 , for example , gsa began the process of reconfiguring federally leased space at 26 federal plaza in new york city .

the project , which has an estimated completion date of february 2020 , required gsa to relocate several federal agencies to one world trade center during the reconfiguration .

gsa did not have a plan to dispose of the excess personal property left behind at 26 federal plaza .

without a disposal plan in place , gsa did not ensure that sufficient staff were available to adequately manage the disposition of so many items .

moreover , gsa did not follow the required screening process in which unneeded property is first offered to federal agencies for 21 days , then offered to sasps , then for put up for sale to the public , then considered for abandonment or destruction .

instead , gsa primarily relied on informal "word of mouth" communication with other federal agencies for disposition .

the disposal process was further delayed by inadequate personal property records , which forced the relocated agencies to reassess their inventories .

one year after the relocation was complete , "a large volume of excess personal property" remained at 26 federal plaza .

this may delay the reconfiguration and increase the costs associated with the project .

the issues observed during the 26 federal plaza reconfiguration may be experienced on a broader scale during implementation of the federal assets sale and transfer act of 2016 ( fasta , p.l .

114-287 ) , a sweeping piece of real property management legislation .

fasta requires federal landholding agencies to submit recommendations for the sale , transfer , conveyance , renovation , reconfiguration , or consolidation of unneeded real property .

these recommendations are submitted to the gsa administrator , who reviews and edits them and then passes a government - wide list of proposals on to a newly established public buildings reform board .

the board examines gsa's list of proposals , holds hearings on them , solicits additional proposals from the public , and compiles a revised list of recommendations to send to the director of omb , who may approve or reject the board's recommendations in whole .

if they are rejected , the board may resubmit its recommendations after reviewing the omb director's explanation for the rejection .

if the omb director approves either the initial or revised list , agencies must begin planning the implementation of all of the recommendations .

initial steps toward implementation must begin within two years and be completed within six years .

the fasta process could result in dozens—perhaps hundreds—of real property transitions taking place during the same time period .

many executive agencies may not have accurate inventories of their personal property , may not know the volume of excess inventory they may be required to dispose of , or may lack the resources to manage the disposal of excess personal property at multiple locations .

without adequate preparation , agencies may not be able to dispose of excess personal property in a timely manner , thereby disrupting the transition schedule .

one possible way to mitigate these concerns would be for omb and gsa to develop implementation guidance specific to managing personal property .

the guidance might require agencies to prioritize property inventories at sites included in their fasta recommendations and incorporate personal property disposal into their transition plans .

in addition , the guidance might require agencies to request assistance from gsa if they lack the expertise or manpower to effectively dispose of excess property at given sites .

in the future , policymakers might examine the potential benefits of expanding the federal real property profile ( frpp ) to include personal property as well .

the frpp is a comprehensive , publicly accessible database of federally owned and leased buildings , structures , and land .

among other things , it provides data on the size and status of each property , such as square footage and whether it is needed , excess , or surplus .

when populated with accurate data , the frpp enhances the transparency of the federal real property inventory , facilitates policy analysis , and enables the public to search for information about properties that are currently or may become available for conveyance or purchase .

arguably , adding personal property data to the frpp may provide similar benefits .

an expanded frpp could include agency inventories of capitalized property , thereby giving the public and policymakers a single source for data on much of the government's most expensive plant , property , and equipment investments .

the personal property act requires agencies to have complete inventories of accountable property .

typically , accountable property ( eg , cars , medical equipment ) has a shorter useful life than capitalized property and becomes excess sooner .

by including data on accountable property , an expanded frpp might enable policymakers to better evaluate the funding needs of agencies that face aging assets .

it might also assist certain government agencies and nonprofits , as they may use the information to estimate when accountable federal property might be declared excess and therefore become available to them .

the expanded frpp might also include information on excess property , although it would need to be updated regularly to reflect the movement of property through the disposal process .

publishing data on excess property in this manner might help hold agencies accountable for completing their inventories and ensuring that disposal is completed in a timely manner .

