congress and the donald j. trump administration are debating enhancing and expanding barriers on the southwest border .

the extent of these barriers , and how construction of these barriers will be funded has become a central part of the interactions between congress and the trump administration on border security and funding legislation for the broader federal government .

the debate has revealed the lack of an authoritative compilation of data on the details of federal investment in border barriers .

this is in part due to the evolving structure of the appropriations for agencies charged with protecting the border—account structures have shifted , initiatives have come and gone , and appropriations prior to fy2017 typically did not specify a precise level of funding for barriers as opposed to other technologies that secure the border .

the trump administration's continued advocacy for funding for a "border wall system" has led to a congressional interest in the historical context for border barrier funding .

this report briefly contextualizes the history of u.s. enforcement of the u.s. - mexico border , before turning to funding for border barriers within the contemporary period , accounting for changing appropriations structures .

during the 109 th and the first session of the 110 th congresses ( 2005-2007 ) , comprehensive immigration reform legislation and narrower border security measures were debated .

one result was that congress explicitly authorized and funded new construction of border barriers , significantly increasing their presence .

on january 25 , 2017 , the trump administration issued executive order 13767 , "border security and immigration enforcement improvements. .

section 2 ( a ) of the eo indicates that it is the policy of the executive branch to "secure the southern border of the united states through the immediate construction of a physical wall on the southern border , monitored and supported by adequate personnel so as to prevent illegal immigration , drug and human trafficking , and acts of terrorism. .

the eo goes on to define "wall" as "a contiguous , physical wall or other similarly secure , contiguous , and impassable physical barrier. .

section 4 of e.o .

13767 , "physical security of the southern border of the united states," focuses almost entirely on the construction of "a physical wall" on the u.s. - mexico border as a means of obtaining operational control of the nearly 2,000-mile border .

cbp has indicated that it cannot provide authoritative historical data prior to fy2007 on the level of funding invested in border barrier planning and construction .

to briefly recap the funding that has been provided by congress in response to the trump administration's initiative , the $4.47 billion in appropriations provided by congress to cbp for border barrier planning and construction during the trump administration exceeds the amount provided for those purposes in the bsfit account for the 10 years from fy2007 to fy2016 by $2 billion .

of the $4.47 billion: $1.04 billion was specifically directed to barrier replacement projects ; $2.02 billion was specifically directed to construction needs in the rio grande valley sector ; and $1.41 billion has been provided for planning and construction of border barriers without specific direction in regards to location or whether the funding was for barrier replacement or construction of additional miles of barriers .

despite the historically high volume of resources provided , the administration has taken unprecedented steps—noted above—in an attempt to more than double the funding level appropriated to cbp by congress for barrier construction since the signing of e.o .

13767 .

$601 million was provided to dhs in fy2019 from the treasury forfeiture fund .

as noted in " border barrier funding outside the appropriations process ," $124 million of that funding is being used for construction , while $477 million is for real estate planning and acquisition , increased project costs , and construction management costs .

generally , the administration , in its discussion about border barriers , relies on the u.s. border patrol impedance and denial prioritization strategy , which includes a list of projects for barrier construction .

there are no known authoritative cost estimates for the total construction or operation and maintenance costs of these projects if they are all completed , or publicly available assessments of how completion of various projects might affect cbp's operational costs .

furthermore , gao reported in 2016 that the border barriers' contributions to cbp goals were not being adequately measured .

gao reported in 2018 that cbp's methodology for prioritizing border barrier deployments did not use cost estimates that included data on topography , land ownership , and other factors that could impact the costs of individual barrier projects .

the administration's stated intent is to expand the amount of border barriers on the southwest border , and this issue will likely be part of debates on the budgets for the current and future fiscal years .

congress may wish to obtain the following information and explore the following questions in assessing border barrier funding proposals: 1 .

what are the projected operation and maintenance costs for the existing southwest border barriers ? .

how will those change with additional replacements , upgrades , or new construction of barriers ? .

2 .

what are the projected land acquisition and construction costs of cbp's remaining top priority border barrier projects , based on unique topography , land ownership , and strategic intent of the projects ? .

what steps is cbp taking to control the growth of those costs ? .

who within the administration is providing oversight of how these funds are used , and are they reporting their findings to congress ? .

3 .

are existing barriers and completed improvements having measurable impacts on attempted illegal entry into the u.s. and smuggling of contraband ? .

how are cbp and other stakeholders making their assessments ? .

is cbp getting its desired tactical or strategic outcomes ? .

4 .

are the operational benefits worth the financial and operational costs , or are there more efficient ways to achieve the desired tactical or strategic outcomes ? .

5 .

how should congress respond to the administration's exercise of reprogramming and transfer authorities to provide funding for border barrier work above the amount congress provided to cbp for that purpose ? .

the united states' southern border with mexico runs for nearly 2,000 miles over diverse terrain , through varied population densities , and across discontinuous sections of public , private , and tribal land ownership .

the department of homeland security ( dhs ) customs and border protection ( cbp ) is primarily responsible for border security , including the construction and maintenance of tactical infrastructure , but also the installation and monitoring of surveillance technology , and the deployment of border patrol agents to impede unlawful entries of people and contraband into the united states ( eg , unauthorized migrants , terrorists , firearms , and narcotics ) .

built barriers , such as fencing , are a relatively new feature on the southern border .

these structures vary in age , purpose , form , and location .

at the end of fy2015 , approximately 653 miles—roughly one - third of the international boundary—had a primary layer of barriers .

approximately 300 miles of the "primary fence" was designed to prevent vehicles from entering , and approximately 350 additional miles was designed to block people on foot—"pedestrian fencing. .

cbp has used various materials for pedestrian fencing , including bollard , steel mesh , and chain link , and employed bollard and normandy - style fencing for vehicle barriers .

across 37 discontinuous miles , the primary layer is backed by a secondary layer of pedestrian fencing as well as an additional 14 miles of tertiary fencing ( typically to delineate property lines ) .

on january 10 , 2020 , the administration announced the completion of the first 100 miles of the "new border wall system" under the trump administration .

based on cbp's information , the 100 miles of new border wall system largely replaces less formidable existing barriers with 18- to 30-foot bollard style fencing designed to obstruct both vehicles and pedestrians .

it does not represent additional miles of the primary layer of border barriers .

cbp has not announced the completion of any additional miles of primary fencing since 2015 , but sections of legacy fencing and breached areas have been replaced or repaired and other improvements have been made .

an interactive online project by inewsource ( a nonprofit , nonpartisan investigative online newsroom in san diego ) and kpbs ( a public broadcasting service television and radio station in san diego , california ) used data obtained via a freedom of information act ( foia ) request to customs and border protection to account for every mile of existing border fencing by the year built .

the data are used in this appendix to produce figure a - 1 showing the number of miles of primary border barrier constructed for the period 1960-2018 ( annual data shown in table a - 1 ) .

small areas of the border had fencing prior to 1990 .

by 1993 , fencing in the san diego area had been completed , covering the first 14 miles of the border east from the pacific ocean and a few other areas .

under the provisions of iirira , the secretary of homeland security—and , prior to 2003 , the attorney general—has the discretion to determine the appropriate amount of additional barriers to build , as well as their location .

approximately 40 additional miles of primary fence were constructed on the southern border through 2005 .

the vast majority of the existing primary barriers—more than 525 miles—were constructed between 2007 and 2009 ( see table a - 1 and figure a - 1 ) .

