e ach term , the supreme court typically hears arguments in one or more cases concerning the rights and status of indian tribes and their members .

prominent issues addressed by the sup reme court in recent terms have included ( 1 ) tribes' civil jurisdiction over nonmembers , ( 2 ) the scope of tribal sovereign immunity , and ( 3 ) termination of indian parents' rights in adoption cases .

the october 2018 term likewise featured several indian law issues: the court heard arguments in three significant cases , each of which implicated the complex relationships among tribal , state , and federal laws .

in washington state department of licensing v. cougar den , the court upheld a washington supreme court decision permitting a tribe to import fuel without paying state fuel taxes .

the right to travel on public highways guaranteed by an 1855 treaty , the court ruled , included the right to transport goods for sale on the reservation without paying additional taxes to do so .

in herrera v. wyoming , the court determined that neither wyoming's admission into the union nor the designation of the bighorn national forest abrogated an earlier treaty preserving tribal hunting rights .

thus , a tribe member's conviction for exercising those hunting rights in violation of wyoming state law could not stand .

finally , in carpenter v. murphy , the court reviewed whether congress disestablished the muscogee ( creek ) reservation more than a century ago , with potential consequences for oklahoma's ability to prosecute major crimes in the eastern half of the state .

however , the eight justices considering this case have not yet reached a decision , and the case is scheduled to be reargued in the october 2019 supreme court term .

this report discusses each of these three cases in turn , focusing on analyses of the supreme court's interpretive rubric for treaties and relevant legislation , statements about the scope of legislative authority and discussions of legislative intent , and possibilities for future congressional action .

on march 19 , 2019 , the supreme court upheld a 2017 washington supreme court decision defending a right - to - travel provision in an 1855 treaty ( 1855 yakama treaty ) between the united states and the yakama tribe against a state attempt to impose a motor fuels tax on a yakama member .

the treaty guaranteed the yakamas the "right , in common with citizens of the united states , to travel upon all public highways. .

cougar den , inc. ( cougar den ) —a business owned by a yakama member—purchased and transported motor fuel into the state and resold it to on - reservation retailers .

the washington supreme court ruled that the treaty insulated cougar den from having to pay a washington state motor fuels tax on that gasoline .

the supreme court agreed , though in such a way that the limits of the right - to - travel provision in the 1855 yakama treaty may still not be perfectly clear .

nonetheless , this case could affect the interpretation of similar provisions in other treaties , and potentially impact state taxation of other activities both on - and off - reservation .

in herrera v. wyoming , the supreme court resolved a disagreement about whether either wyoming's admission into the union or the later establishment of the bighorn national forest abrogated the crow tribe of indians' treaty rights to hunt on "unoccupied lands of the united states. .

the court concluded that neither event categorically affected those treaty rights .

this decision was especially notable because the supreme court formally repudiated its 1896 ruling in ward v. race horse , which had held that wyoming's admission into the union effectively abrogated a similar hunting - rights provision in a treaty between the united states and another indian tribe .

race horse had already appeared to be in considerable tension with the court's decision over a century later in minnesota v. mille lacs band of chippewa indians , when the court declared that "[t]reaty rights are not impliedly terminated upon statehood. .

however , it was not until herrera that the tension was resolved ; the court stated that it was "formaliz[ing] what is evident in mille lacs itself .

while race horse 'was not expressly overruled' in mille lacs , 'it must be regarded as retaining no vitality' after that decision. .

this rejection of race horse undermined other cases relying on it , causing a domino effect that ultimately led the supreme court to reverse the wyoming state court decisions that had declined to recognize the crow tribe's treaty hunting rights .

in carpenter v. murphy , the supreme court is reviewing a decision by the u.s. court of appeals for the tenth circuit ( tenth circuit ) concerning whether oklahoma could legally charge and convict patrick murphy , a member of the muscogee ( creek ) nation who was convicted of killing a fellow tribe member .

the validity of murphy's murder conviction may turn on whether his crime was committed within the boundaries of the muscogee ( creek ) reservation—a reservation that oklahoma says ceased to exist in the early 1900s .

although the oklahoma state courts rejected murphy's efforts to overturn his conviction , the tenth circuit concluded that the crime did occur on reservation land , and that oklahoma thus lacked authority to prosecute murphy .

although the supreme court heard oral arguments in carpenter v. murphy at the end of 2018 , it ordered the case restored to the calendar and set for reargument in the october 2019 term .

whether the court will ultimately agree with the tenth circuit's decision is uncertain , but if it does , the decision could have significant consequences beyond murphy's case .

the land where the crime occurred would then be "indian country" under federal law , which oklahoma says would significantly limit its criminal jurisdiction over offenses committed by indians on such land .

such a decision could prompt additional litigation concerning the status of other tribal lands within oklahoma .

the parties have asked the supreme court to decide whether the land that was historically designated as belonging to the muscogee ( creek ) nation constitutes "indian country," and if so , whether oklahoma has any criminal jurisdiction over crimes like murphy's .

the federal government ( and congress in particular ) has long been recognized as having plenary authority over indian affairs , so states generally cannot exercise criminal jurisdiction over indians in "indian country" without federal permission .

a federal statute defines "indian country" to mean ( 1 ) all land within an indian reservation , ( 2 ) all dependent indian communities , and ( 3 ) all indian allotments that still have indian titles .

an area qualifies as indian country if it fits within any of these three categories , meaning a formal designation of indian lands as a "reservation" is not required .

federal law establishes parameters for when states may prosecute certain crimes committed within indian country .

most relevant to this case , the major crimes act reserves federal jurisdiction over certain serious crimes , like murder and kidnapping , when committed by an indian within indian country .

federal jurisdiction under the major crimes act generally forecloses overlapping state ( though not tribal ) jurisdiction , though legislative exceptions permit some states to exercise jurisdiction over such crimes .

the supreme court has explained that congress alone has the power to change or erase reservation boundaries .

once land is designated as a reservation , it generally stays that way until congress eliminates ( "disestablishes" ) or reduces ( "diminishes" ) it .

appealing his state murder conviction to the tenth circuit , murphy contended that the muscogee ( creek ) reservation had never been disestablished and therefore constituted "indian country," precluding state jurisdiction over his offense .

the tenth circuit agreed .

in its decision , the tenth circuit briefly described the history of the muscogee ( creek ) reservation .

in the 1820s , the federal government forcibly relocated the tribe's members ( and members of several other tribes ) to what is now present - day oklahoma .

as part of that relocation , the government signed a series of treaties with the muscogee ( creek ) nation , ultimately giving the tribe a vast area of land roughly equivalent to present - day oklahoma .

that tract of land was later reduced .

the final reduction occurred after the civil war , when the treaty of 1866 required the muscogee ( creek ) nation to transfer the western half of its new lands back to the united states .

though the muscogee ( creek ) nation later experienced many changes in its relationship with the federal government—most notably related to tribal governance and a push for individual ownership of the land—the boundaries of the muscogee ( creek ) land remained generally unchanged until at least the early 1900s .

at that point , the "unique history" of oklahoma began to transition toward statehood , effectively merging eastern indian lands and western non - indian lands into a single geographic entity .

to determine whether congress intended to disestablish the muscogee ( creek ) reservation land , the tenth circuit applied a three - step analysis employed in the supreme court's 1984 decision , solem v. bartlett .

under this framework , courts examine ( 1 ) the language of the governing federal statute ; ( 2 ) the historical circumstances of the statute's enactment ; and ( 3 ) subsequent events such as congress's later treatment of an affected area .

importantly , the solem framework instructs courts to resolve any uncertainty in favor of the tribes: if the evidence is not clear , courts "are bound by our traditional solicitude for the indian tribes to rule that diminishment did not take place and that the old reservation boundaries survived .

 .

 .

. .

using this framework , the tenth circuit agreed with murphy that his criminal conduct occurred in indian country , and oklahoma therefore lacked jurisdiction over it .

although oklahoma referenced eight separate federal acts that it viewed as collectively disestablishing the muscogee ( creek ) reservation , the tenth circuit ruled that none of those statutes clearly referred to disestablishment , and in some instances reflected congress's continued recognition of the reservation's borders .

oklahoma's evidence that congress intended to change its governance over the muscogee ( creek ) reservation failed to convince the tenth circuit that congress also intended to erase the reservation boundaries .

similarly , the tenth circuit concluded that events subsequent to legislation cited by oklahoma insufficiently supported the argument that congress intended the muscogee ( creek ) reservation to be disestablished .

in sum , the tenth circuit did not find that congress clearly intended to disestablish the muscogee ( creek ) reservation , so it concluded that oklahoma lacked jurisdiction to convict murphy for a murder occurring on those lands .

oklahoma petitioned for certiorari review of the tenth circuit's decision , which the supreme court granted on may 21 , 2018 .

in its brief to the court , oklahoma claimed that no one has treated the relevant land like a reservation since oklahoma became a state in 1906 .

it also argued that because congress broke certain promises in the treaties that had established the reservation , congress must have intended to disestablish it .

according to oklahoma , it "is inconceivable that congress created a new state by combining two territories while simultaneously dividing the jurisdiction of that new state straight down the middle by leaving the former indian territory as indian country. .

in other words , in oklahoma's characterization of the matter , congress could not have intended the state to lack jurisdiction over major crimes in half its land mass .

finally , oklahoma contended that the solem framework should be inapplicable in the unique context of oklahoma statehood .

the federal government made similar arguments in a brief it filed in support of oklahoma .

however , the federal government additionally claimed that congress had elsewhere granted oklahoma broad criminal jurisdiction over indian country , which it said should enable prosecution of cases like murphy's—regardless of whether his crime was committed in indian country .

more specifically , the united states argued that congress had eliminated tribal jurisdiction and evinced an intent to have all crimes prosecuted by the same entity ( whether committed by or against a tribal member or not ) throughout the territory that became oklahoma ; in the united states' view , that intent should not be "implicitly" repealed by later statutes like the major crimes act .

following oral argument , the supreme court ordered both oklahoma and murphy to address whether or not oklahoma would have criminal jurisdiction over cases like murphy's if the crimes were found to have been committed in indian country .

it also asked the parties to address whether a reservation could ever not qualify as indian country .

these questions might be relevant if , for example , the court sought additional information to clarify whether it would need to find that the muscogee ( creek ) reservation had been disestablished in order to conclude that oklahoma could exercise jurisdiction over murphy .

in murphy's supplemental brief , he began by stressing that oklahoma had disavowed the argument that it could exercise criminal jurisdiction over him if the muscogee ( creek ) reservation endured .

murphy then argued that congress has never given oklahoma jurisdiction to prosecute crimes committed by indians , and—anticipating the assertion that several statutes could be read together to implicitly accomplish that result—declared that "when congress transfers jurisdiction to states , its statutes are bell - clear. .

none of the statutes mentioned by the united states in its briefing , murphy argued , do anything like clearly grant criminal jurisdiction over tribes and tribal members to the state of oklahoma .

oklahoma adopted the united states' view that it had jurisdiction to prosecute crimes regardless of the muscogee ( creek ) land's status , based on a series of laws passed by congress between 1897 and 1907 .

however , the state asked the court not to "leave open whether [muscogee ( creek ) and other historical territories] constitute indian reservations today," arguing that such a decision "risks undermining the convictions of many federal prisoners" and "may also undermine federal and tribal authority currently exercised on restricted allotments and trust lands. .

both murphy and oklahoma answered the court's second question in the negative: they agreed , under current law a federally established reservation always constitutes "indian country" under the governing statute .

the supreme court heard oral arguments in this case on november 27 , 2018 .

justice gorsuch was not present at oral arguments and is not slated to participate in deciding the case—presumably because he participated in earlier discussions about this case while he was still a judge on the tenth circuit .

a decision was expected by the end of the supreme court's 2018 term , but on june 27 , 2019 , the court ordered this case restored to the calendar for reargument in the next term .

if the supreme court reverses the tenth circuit and finds that the muscogee ( creek ) reservation was disestablished , murphy's conviction and death sentence would be reinstated , and oklahoma would presumably continue to prosecute cases like murphy's .

but if the supreme court agrees with murphy and the tenth circuit that the muscogee ( creek ) reservation has not been disestablished , the decision's ramifications for federal , state , and tribal jurisdiction in the eastern half of oklahoma might be significant , and could extend well beyond the muscogee ( creek ) reservation .

in addition to the muscogee ( creek ) nation , several other tribes were forcibly relocated to oklahoma under similar circumstances and under the same or similar treaties .

the parties in murphy filed a joint appendix containing several historical maps depicting reservation boundaries in oklahoma in the early 1900s .

oklahoma has argued that , if those statutes did not disestablish the muscogee ( creek ) reservation , similar arguments could be maintained with respect to other lands comprising most of eastern oklahoma .

if the supreme court agrees with the tenth circuit that congress never disestablished reservations like the one in this case , oklahoma argues that its ability to prosecute many crimes in the eastern part of the state would be significantly narrowed .

according to oklahoma and some amici , the tenth circuit's decision "would create the largest indian reservation in america today .

 .

 .

 .

that revolutionary result would shock the 1.8 million residents of eastern oklahoma who have universally understood that they reside on land regulated by state government , not by tribes. .

if a significant part of oklahoma is indian country , then the burden would shift to the federal and tribal governments to prosecute many offenses involving indian offenders or victims —at least , absent other federal statutory authority allowing the state to prosecute .

however , other amici have joined murphy in arguing that the tenth circuit's decision should be upheld .

some , including the muscogee ( creek ) nation , contend that recognition of the muscogee ( creek ) reservation's continued existence would leave intact most state and local functions on those lands .

for example , the muscogee ( creek ) nation argues that even on reservation land , state and local governments retain most civil jurisdiction , including taxing and zoning authority .

the supreme court might also seek to avoid the question of whether the muscogee ( creek ) reservation still exists .

for example , the supreme court could decide either to reassess the approach it endorsed in solem , or—as suggested by tenth circuit chief judge tim tymkovich—conclude that the solem framework is ill - suited to the unique circumstances surrounding oklahoma's statehood .

alternatively , the court could adopt the federal government's argument that oklahoma had jurisdiction to prosecute murphy because earlier statutes granted such jurisdiction , thereby rendering the major crimes act inapplicable .

regardless of the supreme court's decision , the choice to disestablish a reservation still lies solely with congress .

if the supreme court agrees that the muscogee ( creek ) reservation still exists , a statute clearly disestablishing it would limit this case's applicability in the future .

congress could also pass a law expressly giving oklahoma jurisdiction to prosecute major crimes in indian country if the supreme court holds that no such law currently exists .

if the supreme court disagrees with the tenth circuit and holds that the muscogee ( creek ) reservation no longer exists , congress could—depending on the exact grounds of the ruling—countermand that decision by reestablishing or clarifying the continued existence of the muscogee ( creek ) reservation .

