the rise in popularity of cryptocurrencies and the underlying blockchain technology presents both challenges and opportunities to the energy sector .

cryptocurrencies , such as bitcoin , are sometimes referred to as virtual currency , a term that can also refer to a broader class of electronic money .

a blockchain is a digital ledger that enables parties to agree on the current ownership and distribution of assets in order to conduct new business .

when applied to cryptocurrencies , the blockchain allows the validation of transactions to occur by a decentralized network of computers .

as cryptocurrencies ( such as bitcoin , the cryptocurrency with the largest market capitalization ) have increased in popularity , the energy demand to support cryptocurrency mining activities has also increased .

the state of washington , by some estimates , hosted 15% - 30% of all bitcoin mining operations globally in 2018 .

when such increases in energy demand for cryptocurrency mining occur at a local level , the resulting peak loads may increase customers' electricity rates depending on pricing structure .

however , not all cryptocurrencies require energy - intensive operations .

outside of cryptocurrencies , opportunities arising from blockchain technologies could include facilitating energy and financial transactions on a smart grid .

this report explains how cryptocurrency is "mined," where mining activity is concentrated , how some states and utilities are responding to localized increases in energy demand from bitcoin mining facilities , and potential considerations for congress .

considerations for congress include potential policy options to address energy conservation and energy efficiency standards as well as options for blockchain technology in the energy sector .

this report is part of a suite of crs products on cryptocurrencies and the underlying technology , distributed ledger technology , and blockchain ( see textbox below ) .

blockchain provides a means of transacting among parties who may not otherwise trust one another .

blockchain networks allow for individuals engaging in transactions to also be the ones to validate them .

cryptocurrencies such as bitcoin , ether , alpha coin , and papyrus provide a means of validating transactions in a decentralized network that is outside of an intermediary , such as a bank for financial transactions or a title company for a real estate transaction .

this validation can be done in bulk and at relatively high speeds , making cryptocurrency an attractive avenue for certain financial transactions .

cryptocurrencies are built to allow the exchange of some digital asset of value ( the cryptocurrency ) for a good or service .

bitcoin is the most popular cryptocurrency , garnering the largest market share , and bitcoin arguably initiated the interest in blockchain technology .

blockchain uses a combination of technologies to work .

these technologies include encryption and peer - to - peer ( p2p ) networks .

transactions are added to a blockchain in an addition - only manner .

once added , a transaction cannot be altered , providing a layer of security and transparency .

transactions are grouped together to form a tranche , or "block. .

blocks are added to a blockchain in a manner that links it to the previous block , so any change data in a previous block makes that change known to users immediately as they try to add a new block .

encryption is used to ensure that parties trading assets on a blockchain have rights to that asset , and that data held in the blockchain is tamper resistant .

p2p networks are used to distribute information across participating users without a central authority acting as an arbiter of that information .

cryptocurrency mining requires energy to ( 1 ) operate the devices computing the calculations required to maintain the integrity of the blockchain and ( 2 ) thermally regulate the devices for optimal operation .

a node , or computing system , on the blockchain may be composed of an individual user or a group of users that have pooled resources ; as such , the exact number of connected devices on the network is unknown .

devices have different hashrates—the number of calculations ( or hash functions ) performed on the network per second—and have different power requirements .

devices with greater hashrates can perform more calculations in the same amount of time than devices with lesser hashrates .

for example , "a hashrate of 14 terahashes [14 trillion attempted mining solutions] per second can either come from a single antminer s9 running on just 1,372 w [watts] , or more than half a million sony playstation - 3 devices running on 40 mw [megawatts—million watts]. .

there are four main factors that contribute to energy consumption of cryptocurrency mining: 1. hardware computing power ; 2. network hashrate ; 3. the difficulty ; and 4. the thermal regulation for the hardware .

these factors , some of which also interact with the price of bitcoin , can alter the energy intensity of mining .

for instance , in december 2017 , the price of bitcoin rose creating an influx of mining .

as the mining network grew , the difficulty and hashrate increased .

miners sought out more powerful equipment as the competition increased , which consumed more energy .

several studies have examined the energy consumption of cryptocurrencies .

while technology advancements in devices used for bitcoin mining have led to increases in the hashrates of mining devices ( i.e. , improved device efficiency ) , the network hashrate has also increased as the popularity of bitcoin increased .

according to one recent estimate , as of "mid - march 2018 , about 26 quintillion hashing operations are performed every second and non - stop by the bitcoin network. .

estimating the power consumption of the global bitcoin network depends upon the efficiency of different hardware , the number of machines in use , and the cooling requirements for large - scale mining facilities .

table 1 presents various estimates for the power required by the bitcoin network .

generally , these estimates use hashrates and miner hashing efficiencies to determine energy consumption .

one study relied upon hardware data derived from initial public offering ( ipo ) filings to estimate power consumption .

fewer studies have examined power requirements for other cryptocurrencies ( bitcoin is the largest cryptocurrency platform in both currency in circulation and transactions processed ) , although those studies have found comparatively lower power requirements than for bitcoin .

global power requirement estimates for bitcoin have increased within the last five years .

for comparison , the largest estimate of 7,670 mw in table 1 is nearly 1% of u.s. electricity generating capacity ( or approximately 0.1% of global electricity generating capacity ) .

opinions differ on whether future growth in bitcoin will significantly impact energy consumption and subsequent carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) emissions .

some argue that sustainability concerns due to energy consumption are misplaced , and that the competitiveness of bitcoin mining means that only miners with the most competitive mining hardware and the lowest electricity costs will persist over time .

further , this could lead to fewer miners using energy inefficient hardware , as they may no longer be able to compete effectively .

some anticipate that energy demands will diminish as the reward incentive shifts from discovering new bitcoin to earning revenue through transaction fees .

as a result , some would argue that the energy consumption from mining bitcoin is a temporary issue .

others recognize the volatility of cryptocurrency markets but observe that network hashrates of several cryptocurrencies have trended upward suggesting that energy consumption ( and subsequent co 2 emissions ) will increase .

however , these estimates do not include energy required for cooling systems and other operations and maintenance activities associated with cryptocurrency mining .

one study on projections of bitcoin growth considered the potential effects on global co 2 emissions should bitcoin eventually replace other cashless transactions .

the study found that the associated energy consumption of bitcoin usage could potentially produce enough co 2 emissions to lead to a 2 o c increase in global mean average within 30 years .

these projections assume that the global portfolio of fuel types ( and subsequent co 2 emissions ) used to generate electricity remains fixed according to portfolio profiles from 2014 and does not consider that , in many cases , bitcoin is often mined in areas with plentiful and affordable renewable energy .

further , the projections do not consider any potential effects of a collapse of bitcoin prices on hashrates or energy consumption , and whether the capital invested in bitcoin mining could be used for other cryptocurrencies or for other purposes .

projections of continued growth in energy consumption led some to call for reform in the cryptocurrency industry .

others argue that continued reliance on fossil - fuel - based electricity is the important issue and not the energy intensity of bitcoin .

several factors contribute to ideal mining locations and include energy costs , regulations , and technology .

often the energy costs are affected by geographical characteristics like proximity to hydroelectric power or lower ambient temperature that reduces the need for cooling .

local and national governments around the world have responded differently to the growth of bitcoin: some are actively developing cryptocurrency industries , some are restricting cryptocurrencies , and some are regulating cryptocurrencies in an effort to balance financial innovation and risk management .

according to a study in 2017 , nearly three - quarters of all major mining pools are based in either china ( 58% ) or in the united states ( 16% ) .

some countries and regions where significant cryptocurrency mining activities have been identified include australia , canada , georgia , russia , and sweden , as shown in figure 1 .

china has taken steps to regulate and tax the trading of bitcoin , and has even proposed implementing a ban on mining .

as of april 2019 , it was reported that the national development and reform commission , deemed mining as a "wasteful and hazardous" activity .

china's share of major mining pools may change substantially in response to regulations and policy actions .

in 2013 , the chinese government reportedly restricted chinese banks from using cryptocurrencies as currency , citing concerns about money laundering and a threat to financial stability .

in september 2017 , beijing declared that initial coin offerings ( ico ) were illegal and that all mainland cryptocurrency exchanges be shut down .

in january 2018 , china's leading group of internet financial risks remediation submitted a request to local governments to regulate electricity , taxes , and land use for mining companies , and "guide the orderly exit of such companies from the bitcoin mining business. .

since the implementation of these regulatory measures , bitcoin trading with the chinese yuan has reportedly dropped from 90% of global bitcoin trading to under 1% .

however , as illustrated in figure 1 , china , despite changes in regulation , remained a popular location for mining in 2018 , partly due to the comparatively low cost of energy .

the generation sources that provide low cost electricity to cryptocurrency miners in china vary regionally .

in some regions , the electricity likely is provided from fossil fuel sources ; for example , in inner mongolia where cryptocurrency miners have been active , thermal power represents 63% of the electric capacity .

cryptocurrency mining includes costs associated with equipment , facilities , labor , and electricity .

mining pool companies around the world therefore seek cheap , reliable electricity .

while many mining pools are still in china , some have been able to utilize closed industrial facilities in the united states that can provide abundant electricity at affordable rates .

as miners are not typically bound by geographic location , locations with favorable electricity rates and policies may encourage operations .

conversely , locations with restrictive regulations or high electricity prices may discourage mining operations .

in the united states , the sale of electricity is governed by a patchwork of federal , state , and local regulations .

for the sale of electricity , the states generally have regulatory jurisdiction over retail electricity transactions , though federal and municipal authorities may also play a role .

state approaches to regulation vary considerably .

states and cities that are dealing with an influx of cryptocurrency mining because of affordable electricity rates are instituting local laws as issues arise .

examples of such approaches—both domestic and international—along with the more general benefits and challenges associated with developing a cryptocurrency mining industry are delineated through the selected examples below .

blockchain is a method of quickly validating transactions and of record keeping for large quantities of data .

some blockchains and cryptocurrencies do not operate through a decentralized , permission - less network like bitcoin .

within the energy sector , a number of opportunities for blockchain technology have been proposed .

these opportunities include smart contracts , distributed energy resource record keeping , and ownership records .

one of the more easily transferrable options for blockchain is trading renewable energy credits ( recs ) .

using blockchain to trade recs could provide customers the ability to purchase recs without the need for a centralized entity to verify transactions .

in october 2018 , a subsidiary of the pjm interconnection llc—a regional transmission organization that operates an electric transmission system serving part of the eastern interconnection electricity grid —announced plans for testing blockchain technology to trade recs .

other more advanced utilizations for blockchain in the energy sector could be highly disruptive .

for example , there is increasing interest in net metering and a transactional grid ( i.e. , where producers of distributed energy resources , such as rooftop solar , can sell the electricity to nearby consumers ) .

prototype projects have relied upon blockchain technology among other peer - to - peer approaches to facilitate renewable energy transactions at the local level .

other peer - to - peer efforts include managing virtual power plant operations and enabling those who do not own renewable energy systems to pay for a portion of the energy generation of a host's system in exchange for a reduction on their utility bills ( eg , renters paying for a portion of an apartment building's rooftop solar system ) .

if such applications are found to be practical and economical , blockchain technology could alter the manner in which electricity customers and producers interact .

traditionally electric utilities are vertically integrated .

blockchain could disrupt this convention by unbundling energy services along a distributed energy system .

for instance , a customer could directly purchase excess electricity produced from their neighbor's solar panels instead of purchasing electricity from the utility .

on the one hand , this could result in a more transparent and efficient system .

blockchain could encourage more competition among generators and more flexibility and choice for consumers .

on the other hand , unbundling energy services could lead to concerns over distribution control to accommodate the decentralization .

furthermore , storing vast quantities of data about critical infrastructure on distributed ledgers may introduce additional cybersecurity concerns .

the sale of electricity via blockchains that are independent of a conventional utility framework may be subject to significant legal interpretation , and potentially represents the intersection of various federal and state statutes and regulations .

jurisdiction over the sale of electricity from a distributed energy resource or electric vehicle charging station hinges upon its definition as either a retail transaction or a sale for resale .

retail transactions are generally defined by the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) as "sales made directly to the customer that consumes the energy product," whereas sales for resale are defined as "a type of wholesale sales covering energy supplied to other electric utilities , cooperatives , municipalities , and federal and state electric agencies for resale to ultimate consumers. .

states typically regulate retail electricity transactions , while ferc has jurisdiction over the transmission and wholesale sales of electricity in interstate commerce .

one survey by the electric power research institute , collected data on the potential barriers and advantages of blockchain in utilities .

of those surveyed , utilities in the united states were in early pilot stages or in the research phase , while some utilities in europe had been using blockchain for over a year .

respondents identified opportunities and challenges to investment in blockchain technology with 77% of respondents identifying concerns that the energy industry "lacks appropriate standards. .

in addition to state and local policy efforts that seek to mitigate the regional effects of growth in cryptocurrency mining , there are options that could be adopted by the federal government to improve the energy efficiency of mining operations .

further , as the financial and energy sectors , among others , explore adopting blockchain , congress may consider options to curb the energy intensity of the technology .

rules and regulations governing the retail sale of electricity generally originate with a state public utility commission .

an electric utility is defined in federal law as any person , state , or federal agency "which sells electric energy. .

definitions may be found in public utility regulatory policies , 16 u.s.c .

section 2602 .

this definition could potentially be interpreted that generators of electricity that make energy trades using blockchain technology are electric utilities by virtue of the fact that they sell electricity , and are therefore subject to all laws , requirements , and regulations pertaining to electric utilities .

congress may choose to consider extending or clarifying ferc's role regulating blockchain technology use in the energy sector .

while blockchain could be implemented as a means to validate peer - to - peer distributed electricity trading , these transactions could potentially still be subject to ferc oversight as engaging in a sale for resale .

applications of blockchain technology in the energy sector have been limited in scope to date ; wide - scale adoption of blockchain technologies could pose additional vulnerabilities to grid operations .

ferc may also have a role in considering whether the existing grid infrastructure is capable of handling more power movement at high speeds in response to blockchain users' transactions .

other potential issues could include data privacy , interoperability of technology solutions , and market structure .

ferc has not issued guidance or announced standards associated with blockchain technologies .

within this context , utilities and industry groups may interpret the lack of guidance as a signal to continue business as usual .

as the bitcoin network's energy consumption grows , some have questioned whether the proof - of - work ( pow ) algorithm that is used by bitcoin is sustainable .

many alternative algorithms exist .

pow and two approaches that are conceptually less energy intensive—proof - of - stake and proof - of - authority—are discussed below and illustrated in figure a - 1 .

proof - of - work under proof - of - work ( pow ) , miners are presented a difficult computational problem , or puzzle .

pow identifies a numeric value ( called a nonce ) , which is used to generate an authenticator ( hash value ) .

the hash value ensures a user that the block of data sent has not changed .

hashes are determined by submitting the data through an algorithm that will output a string of characters .

by inserting the nonce into the algorithm , miners seek to change the hash value .

identifying these valid nonces and hashes is computationally intensive , and the essence of mining .

the security properties of hash algorithms are such that a miner tests nonces until a valid hash is found for a block .

generally , by solving the problem or puzzle , miners win the opportunity to post the next block and possibly receive a reward for doing so .

in the case of bitcoin , miners who create and publish new blocks in the blockchain are rewarded with bitcoin .

once the problem is solved and a valid hash is identified , the miner announces it to the community .

other users can validate the solution immediately—without going through the resource - intensive computation process—by having transparent access to the entire history of the blockchain's transaction ledger .

once the majority of the community validates and confirms the block , the next block can be added to the chain .

proof - of - stake proof - of - stake ( pos ) depends on the community's actual stake in the currency instead of consuming energy in a race to be the first to solve computations .

the more currency a "forger" ( i.e. , the pos term in lieu of the pow term "miner" ) holds , the more transactions can be validated .

this method skips the energy - intense hashing race .

all of the currency is already created , and the amount is stagnant .

forgers earn currency through transaction fees for building a new block ( and thereby validating a transaction ) .

a new block is determined by the level of stake ( eg , wealth ) a forger has invested in the cryptocurrency .

thus , forgers put their own cryptocurrency investment at risk and therefore would likely only build a block for valid transactions .

if a forger added a block to the blockchain based on an invalid transaction , it would risk losing its stake .

potential energy reductions from use of pos are leading to changes in some major cryptocurrencies .

ethereum—a platform that uses a cryptocurrency called ether—plans to move to a pos system and is currently working on the remaining challenges , such as scaling a pos system and maintaining a decentralized system .

the ethereum network expects to go through several upgrade phases in order to fully transition to pos .

the timeline for this transition has not yet been revealed , but this new solution upgrade , known as serenity , was announced at devcon 4 .

the serenity upgrade would utilize a new pos algorithm called "casper" that is intended to overcome some of the drawbacks ( eg , centralizing a traditionally decentralized currency ) of a pos community .

proof - of - authority proof - of - authority ( poa ) is another method of validating transactions in a blockchain .

like much of the terminology associated with blockchain , there is not a formal definition of poa , and the definition may differ from one group to another , depending on the purpose of the blockchain platform .

one understanding of poa—as it relates to cryptocurrency—has validators curating their own reputation in order to achieve payout .

validators earn their reputation by running software to put transactions into blocks that require a link to properly identify that validator .

this method places every person in the network on equal footing—everyone only has one identity .

an alternative understanding of poa , among the supply chain industry , uses a blockchain network to track logistics transparently .

poa provides a level of scalability and security within private networks that pos or pow cannot .

limitations of pos , poa , and pow pos , poa , and pow algorithms have limitations .

while pos and poa both reduce energy consumption levels and require far less sophisticated equipment , they both create a more controlling and limited environment .

pow requires community decisionmaking .

pos and poa are more individualistic .

this could undermine the concept of the decentralized nature of the distributed ledger system design , which is one of the fundamental principles in cryptocurrency .

cryptocurrency was developed to move away from the centralized power of the banking system and move toward a decentralized network .

the ethereum upgrade is intended to integrate several new aspects and is expected to achieve a more decentralized system even when compared with pos .

ethereum's "phase zero" of the pos specification was frozen on june 30 , 2019 , with the formal launch targeted for january 3 , 2020 .

pow is also vulnerable to attacks .

pow blockchains publish new blocks to the longest available chain .

although difficult to accomplish , a malicious actor could devote overwhelming computational resources to rewriting a blockchain—developing different transactions with different nonce and hash values .

this is known as the "51% attack. .

at a point where their chain is the longest , the malicious actor could publish the blockchain , and the system would accept it as the valid one .

by rewriting the chain , the malicious actor would reestablish the distribution of resources ( i.e. , which accounts have bitcoin and how much the account holds ) .

this would require substantial energy consumption , space , equipment , and money , and would all have to be done covertly to avoid being caught .

while this may appear to be difficult to execute , pow algorithms are not invulnerable .

