this report provides analysis of relevant background information and considerations for congress associated with ongoing department of defense ( dod ) efforts to obtain enterprise - wide cloud computing services through the joint enterprise defense infrastructure ( jedi ) cloud acquisition program .

in september 2017 , then - deputy secretary of defense ( dsd ) patrick shanahan issued a memorandum calling for the accelerated adoption of a dod enterprise - wide cloud services solution as a key component of ongoing dod modernization efforts .

dod views this adoption process as a two part effort: in the first phase , dod is seeking to acquire a cloud services solution accessible to the entirety of the department that can support unclassified , secret , and top secret requirements , focusing on commercially available cloud service solutions , through the jedi cloud acquisition program .

in the second phase , dod seeks to transition selected existing data and applications maintained by the military departments and agencies to the cloud .

significant attention has focused on dod's intent to award the jedi cloud contract to a single company .

some observers contend that an initial single award appears to contradict broader federal cloud computing implementation guidance and industry best practices that stress the importance of multi - cloud solutions .

other experts point to the implementation approaches identified by dod's cloud strategy as an indication that the department expects the jedi cloud to serve certain enterprise - wide functions , performing as one component of a broader multi - cloud , multi - vendor system .

some observers , however , have concluded that the jedi cloud requirements are misaligned with dod's cloud strategy , and have urged the department to rescind and revise the jedi cloud rfp .

those opposed to dod's use of a single - award contract for the jedi cloud program have suggested that a single - award contract could potentially restrict future competition for enterprise - wide dod iaas and paas cloud services .

supporters of dod's approach argue that the jedi cloud program's requirement for offerors to develop platform - agnostic applications and data schema suggests that the department will be well equipped to migrate from any service environment developed under the jedi cloud contract to another such environment .

potential considerations for congress concerning the ongoing jedi cloud acquisition process , as well as any follow - on efforts , include the following issues .

as dod has indicated that it believes the initial two - year base ordering period is sufficient time to validate the jedi cloud test model , congress may consider directing dod to provide detailed rationale and justification for any extension of the jedi cloud contract prior to the exercise of contract options .

at the time of option exercise , congress may also consider directing the department to report on any notable lessons learned or challenges experienced in the execution of the jedi cloud contract .

as emphasized in the conference report accompanying the fy2019 ndaa ( h.rept .

115-874 ) , congress may also wish to monitor the extent to which the department has "improved communication with congress" to enable sufficient congressional oversight of the jedi cloud program and dod's cloud adoption initiative .

the u.s. court of federal claims decision agreed with the department's finding that the actions of the individuals identified by oracle america in its bid protest lawsuit did not negatively impact the procurement or grant amazon web services an unfair competitive advantage .

however , the individual violations of ethical standards for federal employees involved in the acquisition of goods and services for the u.s. government—which generated the appearance of unresolved conflicts of interest—identified by dod in the course of its investigations delayed the jedi cloud procurement process .

the far directs government procurement activities to be "conducted in a manner above reproach," and for government employees to strictly "avoid … even the appearance of a conflict of interest. .

congress may accordingly consider directing dod to examine the current emphasis on ethical conduct and the procurement integrity act in education , training , and qualification requirements for designated acquisition positions—as well as considering the need to include equivalent training for dod servicemembers and civilian employees outside of the defense acquisition workforce who may provide technical expertise or other support for procurement programs—and determine what , if any , changes should be made to associated curriculum and certification requirements .

