historic preservation is the practice of protecting and preserving sites , structures , objects , landscapes , and other cultural resources of historical significance .

various federal , state , and local government programs , as well as privately funded activities , support historic preservation in the united states .

this report provides an overview of the federal role in historic preservation , including background and funding information for some of the major preservation programs authorized by congress .

in addition to establishing national policies governing historic preservation , congress considers the federal government's role in financing many of these programs through the annual appropriations process .

some programs also periodically come before congress for reauthorization .

as a result , issues related to historic preservation are of perennial interest to congress .

some members of congress support proposals to eliminate the federal role in historic preservation , leaving such programs to be sustained by other levels of government or by private support .

other members feel federal support for historic preservation should be maintained or increased .

the heavy toll of recent natural disasters such as hurricanes harvey and irma on historic resources has contributed to increased support for incorporating preservation needs in federal disaster relief planning and aid .

this report includes a summary of the federal government's role in historic preservation activities , from its early efforts in the late 1890s to today .

the report contains a list of many of the federal grant programs funded through the annual appropriations process ( see appendix ) .

it also includes overviews of historic preservation grants for tribal historic preservation , african american civil rights , historically black colleges and universities ( hbcus ) , japanese american confinement sites ( jacs ) , native american graves protection and repatriation act ( nagpra ) programs , the save america's treasures grant program , and the american battlefield protection program ( abpp ) .

the appendix includes eligibility requirements , matching fund guidelines , and statutory authorization for each program .

it also includes an overview of federal funding for historic preservation activities from fy2016 to fy2020 , along with requested totals for fy2021 .

finally , the report outlines some potential issues facing the 116 th congress in determining whether and how to address historic preservation needs at the federal level .

the federal role in historic preservation was limited for much of the country's early history , with no formal federal policy in place .

the two most significant early efforts at federal historic preservation came in the 1890s .

first , congress passed laws intended to protect ancient puebloan sites in the american southwest .

soon thereafter , congress acquired thousands of acres of private land to establish five civil war national battlefield parks to be administered by the department of war .

these two distinct federal efforts—commemorating very different moments in american history—are often marked as the genesis of the united states' federal preservation program .

in the 20 th century , a legislative campaign for a comprehensive historic preservation policy bolstered these efforts .

various federal programs and federally established entities support historic preservation across the united states .

many of these programs and entities were established in nhpa and its subsequent amendments ; however , congress has authorized through separate legislation several other programs that also support activities related to historic preservation .

although it is beyond the scope of this report to discuss all federal programs and entities that support historic preservation , selected major programs and entities are highlighted .

the federal government currently supports historic preservation through a variety of grant programs .

the largest source of funding for federal historic preservation programs is the hpf , which currently funds state , tribal , and local historic preservation , african american civil rights grant programs , grants to underrepresented communities , tribal heritage grants , the save america's treasures program , disaster recovery grants , historic revitalization grants , and grants to historically black colleges and universities ( hbcus ) .

several other historic preservation grant programs are funded through annual appropriations under other nps and non - nps accounts rather than through the hpf .

these programs include grants for japanese american confinement sites , native american grave protection and repatriation , and preservation and acquisition grants for american battlefields .

for a complete list of these programs and their guidelines , refer to the appendix .

 table 1 , below , compares selected designations used by congress and the executive branch for historic properties and sites .

the table provides information on the entity that confers each designation ( eg , congress , the president , the interior or agriculture secretary ) ; statutory authorities for the designation ; the agency or agencies that administer each type of area ( also noting designations for which the area typically is under nonfederal management ) ; selected characteristics of the areas ; and examples of each type of area .

designations for nonfederally owned and managed sites are listed according to the agency with administrative responsibility for the designation ( eg , responsibility for evaluating site qualifications and providing technical and / or financial assistance to designated sites ) .

the federal government supports historic preservation through direct appropriations for federally protected sites and grants to nonfederal entities .

grant funding is typically provided to nps - administered accounts within the annual interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill .

these accounts provide technical and financial assistance to state , local , and tribal governments , educational institutions , and nonprofit organizations with the goal of protecting cultural resources and promoting historic preservation activities across the united states .

the majority of the funding is split between two nps accounts: the hpf account , the primary source of funding for federal historic preservation programs , and the national recreation and preservation ( nr&p ) account , which provides funding for a variety of other congressionally authorized grant programs .

funding for historic preservation programs is not limited to these two accounts , however , nor does congress exclusively fund grant programs as part of the interior appropriations bill .

table 2 and table 3 provide fy2016-fy2020 appropriations figures and the fy2021 budget request for programs funded as part of the hpf and nr&p accounts .

historic preservation programs are of perennial interest to congress and have been the subject of congressional oversight and legislation in the 116 th congress .

some members of congress support proposals to eliminate a federal government role in both administering and financing historic preservation programs , leaving such programs to be sustained by other levels of government or by private support .

others feel that a federal role in supporting historic preservation should be maintained or expanded .

similarly , some advocates believe there may be an inherent or increased tension between preservationist goals and federally controlled or licensed infrastructure projects .

the majority of federal grant programs for historic preservation receive funding through the annual appropriations process .

members of congress as well as both current and past administrations have expressed various opinions as to how federal funding for these programs should be allocated and at what levels .

both the fy2020 and the fy2021 budget requests from nps would have significantly reduced funding for the hpf and would provide no funding for african american civil rights grant programs , grants to underrepresented communities , the save america's treasures program , or historic revitalization grants .

in response to the fy2020 budget proposal , the house subcommittee on national parks , forests , and public lands of the committee on natural resources held oversight hearings in april 2019 on the spending priorities and mission of nps .

during these hearings , some members expressed concern that the proposed reduction in grant funding would impact the ability of communities to protect and maintain culturally and historically important resources .

others—including witnesses from nps—expressed the position that "core" nps priorities such as infrastructure and the nps maintenance backlog should take priority over historic preservation when considering the appropriation of federal funds .

other issues congress may consider are specific to nhpa and current historic preservation laws and regulations .

for instance , some have argued that the "stop , look , and listen" approach under section 106 of nhpa does not provide adequate protection for historic resources , since the law only establishes a procedural requirement for federal agencies .

according to a study commissioned by the national trust for historic preservation in 2010 , nps reported to congress that only 2% of all shpo reviews for section 106 compliance included findings of adverse effects to historic properties .

for those undertakings that are deemed to have an adverse effect on a given historic property , the agency in question is only required to consider these effects—with no explicit legal mandate requiring them to address these potential impacts .

in other words , although agencies are compelled to consult with the shpo / thpo to develop solutions to mitigate effects , agency officials are not required to pursue the solutions , regardless of any adverse effects .

as a result , some preservation advocates have charged that nhpa fails in its purported mission to protect cultural and historic sites .

others suggest that section 106 compliance results in unnecessary and costly delays and have suggested that in some cases , opponents of specific federal projects may invoke section 106 procedural steps in the hopes of delaying approval for a project—sometimes to the point of impacting a project's feasibility .

although federal regulations provide certain ways for agencies to tailor the section 106 process to their needs , some stakeholders have asserted that these options are time - consuming to implement and not flexible enough for undertakings that involve new or emerging technologies .

multiple bills have been introduced to exempt or limit nhpa reviews for certain projects , such as rail and transit infrastructure projects and federal communications commission construction projects for communications facilities following a major disaster .

many of the programs that directly or indirectly support historic preservation also have received attention in recent years .

for example , in 2013 , the federal railroad administration published a study that concluded "there is no consistent approach on how to address the national register eligibility of railroad corridors. .

although federal regulations outline the criteria for inclusion of a property on the national register , the report states that inconsistent standards still abound , due to the multitude of entities conducting national register evaluations .

another program of congressional interest has been the national heritage areas program .

legislation has been introduced in recent congresses to establish a national heritage areas system governing the designation , management , and funding of nhas , to replace the stand - alone approach currently in place .

additionally , some members—as well as past and current administrations—have expressed interest in ensuring that nhas eventually become financially self - sufficient and in limiting the federal funding for long - standing areas .

in addition , congress often considers bills to designate specific properties or areas as historically important , under various designations .

for example , in the 116 th congress , p.l .

116-9 included provisions that designated three new historical sites as units of the national park system and six new national heritage areas , as well as stand - alone provisions that recognized the historical importance of sites across the united states .

although many of the programs described in this report provide for properties to receive historical designation administratively , congress has at times conferred individual designations in law .

certain programs or designations require congressional action to establish new areas or to designate properties as historically significant .

 table a - 1 is an overview of selected federal historic preservation grant programs .

this overview focuses on programs with the primary mission of historic preservation and is not a complete representation of all federal grant programs that support historic preservation activities .

most of the programs listed here are subject to annual appropriations and therefore may not be currently funded , despite some programs having congressional authorization to administer grants .

programs authorized or funded in fy2020 for the first time may not be listed below .

for example , as part of the fy2020 funding bill ( p.l .

116-94 ) , congress provided funding for a new civil rights grant program that would preserve and highlight the sites and stories associated with women , american latino , native american , alaska native , native hawaiian , and lgbtq americans .

nps has not yet published eligibility requirements or program guidelines .

p.l .

116-94 also authorized two new grant programs as part of the american battlefield protection program ( abpp ) : a battlefield interpretation modernization grant program and a battlefield restoration grant program .

as these new programs have yet to receive appropriations from congress , they are not listed below .

