on july 2 , 1862 , with the passage of the first morrill act ( 12 stat .

503 ; 7 u.s.c .

301 et seq .

 ) , the united states began a then novel policy of providing federal support for post - secondary education , specifically for agriculture and the mechanical arts .

the national system of land - grant colleges and universities that has developed since then is recognized for its breadth , reach , and excellence in teaching , research , and extension .

located in every state , washington , d.c. , and many insular areas , these institutions educate the next generation of farmers , ranchers , and citizens , and form the backbone of a national network of agricultural extension and experiment stations .

later federal legislation expanded the scope and reach of the 1862 morrill act .

beyond providing initial resources for establishment of the land - grant institutions , the federal government contributes funds annually through a variety of capacity and competitive grants administered by the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda ) national institute of food and agriculture ( nifa ) .

capacity grants , also known as formula funds , are allocated to states based on statutory formulas .

competitive grants are awarded to specific projects selected through peer - review processes .

in many cases , the states and territorial governments complement federal appropriations through matching funds .

legislation has also expanded the land - grant system to include historically black colleges and universities ( hbcus ) and tribal colleges and universities ( tcus ) .

additional institutional categories are recognized for specific programs .

these categories include non - land - grant colleges of agriculture ( nlgcas ) , hispanic - serving agricultural colleges and universities ( hsacus ) , and cooperating forestry schools .

looking forward , the scheduled fall 2019 relocation of nifa from its current location in washington , d.c. ; the shifting balance of public and private investment in agricultural research ; disparities in state matching funds among the different classes of land - grant institutions ; and the funding of tcu land - grant institutions may invite congressional engagement .

while state and local governments have roles in the u.s. land - grant university system , this report focuses on federal laws , appropriations , and other matters .

the u.s. land - grant university system has evolved over the past 150 years .

multiple pieces of legislation have added to its original mission , expanded its reach , and adjusted its funding structure .

this section identifies enacted legislation that is among the most significant for land - grant universities ( see table 1 for a summary of select statutes ) .

details regarding federal funding and state matching requirements are discussed in the section following this legislative overview ( " funding " ) .

funding discussed in this report is discretionary unless otherwise stated .

the usda national institute of food and agriculture ( nifa ) administers federal capacity and competitive grants to partner institutions for research , education , and extension activities ( see table 2 for nifa discretionary appropriation details ) .

c a pacity grants are recurring federal appropriations allocated to states based on legislative formulas .

states are generally required to contribute matching funds , and specific project decisions are made locally .

competitive grants are awarded to specific projects selected through peer - review processes , without consideration of the state of the sponsoring institution .

researchers and institutions must apply for these funds .

nifa is usda's extramural research agency , meaning that it funds research conducted at other institutions .

it provides scientific leadership and administers federal grant programs for the land - grant university system .

since its creation in 2008 , staff entirely based in washington , d.c. have carried out nifa program coordination and planning .

its predecessor agency , the cooperative state research , education , and extension service ( csrees ) , was also located entirely in washington , d.c .

in august , 2018 , the secretary of agriculture announced the intention to relocate the majority of nifa and employees out of the national capital region .

a cost - benefit analysis released on june 13 , 2019 , indicated that 294 of 315 nifa positions would be required to relocate .

while the cost - benefit analysis references 315 nifa positions , nifa has 412 permanent full - time positions .

staffing of 315 at the time of the cost - benefit analysis indicates an initial vacancy rate of 24.6% , before relocation plans were developed .

concurrent with the release of the cost - benefit analysis , the secretary announced that nifa would be moved to the kansas city region .

usda has reported that 73 nifa employees accepted relocation by the july 15 decision deadline .

these data suggest that nifa may start its work in kansas city with 75% or more of positions located there empty or filled by recent hires .

reduced staffing levels have the potential to affect nifa's ability to manage the congressionally mandated programs that fund the land - grant university system .

for more information , see crs in focus if11166 , proposed relocation / realignment of usda's ers and nifa , by tadlock cowan .

public investment in agricultural research in the united states has declined in inflation - adjusted dollars since 2008 , while private funding has steadily increased .

the share of food and agriculture research funded by the public sector decreased from around 50% between 1970 and 2008 to less than 25% in 2013 .

figure 2 provides an overview , prepared by the usda economic research service , of agricultural research funding in 2013 from federal , state , and non - governmental sources .

many factors have influenced this shift in funding sources .

these include expansion of markets and increasing globalization of trade ; laws and legal decisions since the 1970s that paved the way for intellectual property rights for biological innovations and commercial products derived from federally sponsored research ; technical advances in biotechnology innovation that have increased potential profitability of agricultural research ; and declining state investment in agricultural research since the 1990s .

a 2012 report by president's council of advisors on science and technology ( pcast ) states that private industry has an important role in agricultural research , and that public funding is essential to meeting agricultural research challenges .

in may , 2019 , the association of public and land - grant universities and the charles valentine riley memorial foundation called for increased public funding of agricultural research , in part to ensure that the united states remains globally competitive in agricultural technology and productivity .

whereas public funding pursues public goods , with the exception of some private foundations , private funding is typically oriented to generating profit .

thus the shift from predominantly public funding of agricultural research to more private funding has the potential to shape agricultural research towards crops , livestock , and technologies with the greatest profit potential and away from smaller crops or technologies that may not prove to be as profitable .

increasing federal appropriations for agricultural research or requiring increases in state matching funds may bolster basic research and research on agricultural products and activities that are important to some agricultural constituencies , yet currently have limited economic incentives .

federal research and extension capacity grants to the land - grant system generally require one - to - one non - federal matching funds .

all states meet the matching requirements for their 1862 institutions , which are predominantly white .

in contrast , ten of the nineteen 1890 institutions , which are predominantly black , received a full match from their states in fy2016 .

those 1890 institutions that do not meet the 100% matching funds requirement must apply to usda for a waiver or forfeit their federal capacity funding .

while receiving a waiver allows an 1890 institution to receive its allocation of federal funding , such a waiver reduces the total public support for the institution , from the combination of federal and state funding , compared with what it would receive if a complete match was provided .

this opens a disparity between 1890 and 1862 institutions .

if states had contributed 100% matching funds , overall state contributions for research and extension at 1890 institutions would have been $17.8 million higher in fy2015 , and in $18.5 million higher in fy2016 than actual matching contributions. .

in 1977 when congress , through naretpa , originally created the evans - allen research and naretpa section 1445 extension capacity funding for 1890 institutions , it did not require state matching funds .

through areera in 1998 , congress instituted an initial 30% state matching requirement for fy2000 that increased to 50% by fy2002 .

at that time , congress gave usda the ability to waive the state matching requirement for fy2000 , but not thereafter .

the 2002 farm bill ( p.l .

107-171 ) increased the matching requirement over time until it reached 100% in fy2007 .

the 2002 farm bill reintroduced the ability for usda to issue waivers , above the 50% level , if a state was unlikely meet the matching requirement .

eliminating the opportunity to apply for a waiver may result in some states increasing their matching funds to ensure that their 1890 institutions qualify for federal funding .

however , this change may result in other institutions becoming ineligible to receive any federal funds if their states do not increase their matching contributions .

another option that may incentivize increased non - federal matching is to increase the waiver threshold above 50% .

section 7116 of the 2018 farm bill ( 7 u.s.c .

3221 ( a ) ) addresses concerns about disparities in state matching funds through a transparency requirement .

it requires that usda report annually "the allocations made to , and matching funds received by , 1890 institutions and 1862 institutions ... for each of the agricultural research , extension , education , and related programs ... " under the relevant statutes ( smith - lever 3 ( b ) and 3 ( c ) , hatch , and sections 1444 and 1445 of naretpa ) .

supporters of the 1890 institutions voice hope that the new transparency requirement will encourage states to provide 100% matching funding for those institutions .

the 1994 institutions , which are all tribal colleges and universities , make up the newest class of land - grant institution .

significant institutional differences among the 1862 , 1890 , and 1994 institutions , in terms of numbers of students served , types of degrees awarded , and focal missions , factor into federal funding allocations .

while land - grant designation gave 1994 institutions new access to federal funding , this access is more limited than that of 1862 and 1890 institutions .

table 3 illustrates differences in federal research funding among land - grant institution types .

in fy2018 , 1994 institutions as a group received appropriations equal to about 1.2% of the research funds , through the tribal college research grants program , as 1862 institutions received through hatch act appropriations .

they received about 2% of the extension funds , through the tribal colleges extension program , as 1862 institutions received through smith - lever capacity grant programs .

in comparison , there were 61.5% as many 1994 institutions as 1862 institutions in fy2018 .

the american indian higher education consortium ( aihec ) , a non - profit group representing tcus , has consistently requested increased appropriations for 1994 institutions , characterizing the difference in funding between 1994 and 1862 institutions as an inequity .

others might argue that funding differences are appropriate to the different academic structures and institutional missions of 1994 and 1862 institutions .

section 7120 of the 2018 farm bill included 1994 institutions in one new avenue for competitive funding .

this section , titled "new beginning for tribal students," authorizes usda to make competitive grants , with a one - to - one matching funds requirement , to land - grant institutions targeting support for tribal students .

institutions may use such funds to support tribal students through recruiting , tuition and related fees , experiential learning , and student services .

no state may receive more than $500,000 per year through this program .

