t ax policy is one of several policy tools that can be used for disaster relief .

at various points in time , congress has passed legislation to provide tax relief and to support recovery following disaster incidents .

permanent tax relief provisions may take effect following qualifying disaster events .

targeted , temporary tax relief provisions can be designed to respond to specific disaster events .

the internal revenue code ( irc ) contains a number of permanent disaster - related tax provisions .

these include provisions providing that qualified disaster relief payments and certain insurance payments are excluded from income , and thus not subject to tax .

taxpayers are also able to deduct casualty losses and defer gain on involuntary conversions ( an involuntary conversion occurs when property or money is received in payment for destroyed property ) .

the internal revenue service ( irs ) can also provide administrative relief to taxpayers affected by disasters by delaying filing and payment deadlines , waiving underpayment of tax penalties , and waiving the 60-day requirement for retirement plan rollovers .

for disasters declared after december 20 , 2019 , the irs is required to postpone federal tax deadlines for 60 days .

the availability of certain tax benefits is triggered by a federal disaster declaration .

before 2017 , casualty losses were generally deductible .

however , changes made in the 2017 tax revision ( commonly referred to as the "tax cuts and jobs act" [tcja] ; p.l .

115-97 ) restrict casualty loss deductions to federally declared disasters .

temporary tax - related disaster relief measures were enacted following a number of major disasters that occurred between 2001 and 2019 .

the following measures addressed specific disasters: the job creation and worker assistance act of 2002 ( job creation act ; p.l .

107-147 ) responded to the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 .

the katrina emergency tax relief act of 2005 ( ketra ; p.l .

109-73 ) responded to hurricane katrina .

the gulf opportunity zone act of 2005 ( go zone act ; p.l .

109-135 ) responded to hurricanes katrina , rita , and wilma .

the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( 2008 farm bill ; p.l .

110-246 ) responded to severe storms and tornadoes in kansas in 2007 .

the heartland disaster tax relief act of 2008 , enacted as title vii of division c of p.l .

110-343 ( the heartland act ) , and other provisions in p.l .

110-343 responded to severe midwest storms in summer 2008 and hurricane ike and provided general disaster relief for events occurring before january 1 , 2010 .

the disaster tax relief and airport and airway extension act of 2017 ( disaster tax relief act of 2017 ; p.l .

115-63 ) responded to hurricanes harvey , irma , and maria .

the 2017 tax act ( p.l .

115-97 ; commonly referred to using the title of the bill as passed in the house , the "tax cuts and jobs act" ) responded to disasters occurring in 2016 .

the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( bba18 ; p.l .

115-123 ) responded to the 2017 california wildfires .

the taxpayer certainty and disaster tax relief act of 2019 ( division q of the further consolidated appropriations act , 2020 ; p.l .

116-94 ) provided relief for major disasters that generally occurred in 2018 or 2019 .

this report provides an overview of permanent and temporary disaster tax provisions that have been enacted in response to specific disaster events .

the report also summarizes which types of temporary provisions have been used to support different disaster events .

policy considerations related to business , individual , and charitable disaster relief are also addressed .

there are several permanent disaster tax relief provisions .

in some cases , these provisions apply to any property that is destroyed or damaged due to casualty or theft .

in other cases , relief is limited to property lost as a result of federally declared disasters or for disasters for which the irs undertakes administrative actions .

additionally , as discussed further below , there are instances where these permanent relief provisions have been temporarily enhanced in response to specific disaster events .

at times , congress has chosen to use tax policy to provide temporary relief and support following disaster incidents .

temporary and event - specific disaster tax policy has been enacted following many major disaster events in recent years .

however , temporary or targeted tax relief has not been enacted following all major disaster events .

for example , no temporary or targeted disaster tax relief was enacted in response to hurricane irene in 2011 or hurricane sandy in 2012 .

the specific tax relief provisions enacted to respond to past disaster events are summarized in table 3 and table 4 .

the following discussion provides additional information on these provisions .

tax provisions that have been used to respond to disasters most recently are discussed first .

tax policy for disaster relief might be motivated by multiple objectives .

one objective could be distributional or relief - oriented .

tax policy could be designed to provide additional resources to businesses or individuals who experienced an uncompensated disaster loss .

this relief could be targeted toward the low - income , although there are limitations when using tax policy to address low - income individuals and businesses .

tax policy can also be used to encourage investment in disaster - affected areas .

absent government intervention , some level of private rebuilding will occur .

a policy question , however , is whether this private building is sufficient , or if there are other barriers to investment in the disaster - affected region that call for government intervention .

when investment subsidies are provided , there is the question of how much new investment is supported relative to how much investment is subsidized that would have occurred absent the subsidy .

there are also challenges associated with identifying the disaster area for the purposes of providing tax relief .

in some cases , relief has been provided to a certain geographic area .

in other cases , relief has been tied to a federal disaster declaration or provided only when individual assistance or individual and public assistance is provided .

narrowly defined geographic areas can limit tax benefits to those most likely to be harmed by the disaster , but can exclude some disaster victims .

the following sections discuss considerations by examining instances in which disaster relief was provided through the tax code for businesses and individuals , as well as through tax policy designed to support disaster - related charitable giving .

since 2001 , a variety of temporary tax policies have been used to respond to various disaster events .

following some disaster events , tax relief packages providing numerous types of tax relief were passed by congress and became law .

following other disaster events , no temporary disaster relief was enacted .

certain permanent tax provisions provide tax relief to all affected by qualifying disasters , even in cases where specific or targeted disaster tax relief is not enacted .

disasters are inevitable .

each disaster is also unique , with damages affecting individuals , businesses , industries , and other economic sectors differently .

this poses a challenge for policymakers in determining what type of disaster relief can provide efficient and effective one - size - fits - all relief .

some disasters may require a targeted and tailored policy response .

some disasters are especially catastrophic events that fundamentally change the economy of the affected region .

if disasters cause economic hardships across the region , disaster relief might include broader economic development measures , ones that go beyond compensating individuals or businesses for lost income or property .

disaster tax relief as presently applied combines a base set of permanent disaster tax provisions , with additional provisions or relief provided for certain disaster events , targeted disaster zones , or time periods .

conceptually , this provides policymakers with flexibility regarding relief provided after certain disaster events .

a question to consider is whether the current balance of permanent and temporary disaster tax relief provides the desired policy response efficiently and effectively .

if temporary tax relief cannot be relied upon to deliver relief that is efficient and effective , one option could be to expand the set of permanent disaster - triggered tax relief provisions .

tax relief that is provided broadly , however , may not be particularly efficient , as it is not designed to provide the specific type of relief needed in the wake of a certain disaster event .

