p olicy discussions around issues such as border security , drug trafficking , and the opioid epidemic often involve questions about illicit drug flows into the united states .

for instance , while u.s. border officials are charged with facilitating the lawful flow of people and goods , they are also responsible for stopping unauthorized entries and preventing illicit drugs and other contraband from being smuggled into the country .

border security policy debates include questions of how to balance sometimes competing priorities and allocate finite border enforcement resources to respond to various threats .

for example , some have questioned where to place border enforcement and drug detection resources to best target the flow of illicit opioids such as heroin , fentanyl , and synthetic opioid analogues being smuggled into the united states .

available data that can help policymakers understand how illicit drugs are trafficked into the united states are often estimated , incomplete , imperfect , or lack nuance .

and debates about drug flows and how best to counter drug trafficking into the country often rely on selected data on drug seizures by border officials .

this report provides a brief discussion of what data are and are not available to help understand the universe of illicit drugs produced globally as well as what data are and are not available to indicate how much of the illicit drugs produced are destined for and trafficked into the united states .

the report illuminates available data on illicit drug seizures by u.s. border officials and discusses potential implications of using these data to inform u.s. policy on drug trafficking into and within the country .

one way of conceptualizing the flow of illicit drugs into the united states is as a funnel .

at the top of this funnel is the universe of illicit drugs produced around the world .

these drugs generally fall into two categories: plant - based ( eg , cocaine , heroin , and marijuana ) and synthetic ( eg , methamphetamine and fentanyl ) .

although some illicit drugs are produced in the united states , many originate elsewhere and are smuggled into the country .

see figure 1 for a depiction of the illicit drug supply chain .

the next step in the supply chain of illicit drugs produced abroad and destined for the united states is the transit of these substances toward and into the country , as depicted in figure 1 .

the united states , while a major consumer of illicit drugs , is just one of many drug consumption markets .

of the illicit drugs that are produced around the world , some may be consumed in the country of production , some may be destined for the united states , and some may be intended for an alternate market .

of those drugs intended to be moved to the united states , some may become degraded or lost in transit , some may be seized by law enforcement or otherwise destroyed or jettisoned by traffickers pursued by enforcement officials , and some reach the u.s. border .

the challenge of estimating drug flows in transit is a longstanding one .

while there are estimates of certain types of illicit drugs produced in certain countries that are subsequently bound for the u.s. market , there is not a comprehensive publicly available dataset detailing the estimated amount of each type of illicit drug produced in each source country that is suspected to be destined for the united states .

however , snapshots of these data exist .

one of these datasets is the consolidated counterdrug database ( ccdb ) , managed by the office of the u.s. interdiction coordinator .

according to the u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) , the ccdb "records drug trafficking events , including detections , seizures , and disruptions .

the database is vetted quarterly by members of the interagency counterdrug community to minimize duplicate or questionable reported drug movements. .

specifically , it records drug trafficking events , which helps provide estimates on illicit drugs , particularly cocaine , destined for the united states via the transit zone from south america .

of the unknown total amount of drugs that reach the u.s. border by land , air , or sea , some portion is seized by border officials , and some portion makes its way into the country .

while the pro portion of illicit drugs coming into the country that are seized at the border is unknowable , the amount of illicit drugs seized is .

it is this snapshot of seizure data that has served as a point of reference for current policy debates surrounding border security and drug flows into the country .

there are no exact data on the total quantity of foreign - produced illicit drugs flowing into the united states .

indeed , a fundamental element to understanding drug smuggling is the acknowledgement that the total flow of drugs crossing the border—at and between ports of entry ( poes ) —into the united states is unknowable .

as reflected in figure 1 , as illicit drugs are brought to the border of the united states , they generally fall into two initial categories: drugs that are detected and seized by officials at the border , and drugs that , whether detected or not , are not seized by officials at the border .

illicit drugs that are detected and seized at the border during inbound inspections are quantifiable .

those drugs that are not seized at the border are generally not quantifiable at the time they enter the country .

however , some portion of illicit drugs successfully smuggled across the border may later be seized by law enforcement officers .

the largely unknown subset of foreign - produced drugs that enter the country but are not seized by officials during inbound inspections at the border is divided into two categories: drugs that are later detected and seized by federal , state , local , or tribal officials ; and drugs that , whether detected or not , are not seized by officials .

illicit drugs not seized at the border enter the united states where there are also domestically produced drugs .

as such , drugs that are later seized by federal , state , local , or tribal officials in the united states may be of foreign or domestic origin .

these drugs may be seized in the interior of the country or by border officials conducting outbound inspections of people and goods leaving the country .

in the absence of comprehensive and precise data on illicit drugs trafficked into the united states , seizure data can provide some insight into various elements of drug flows such as smuggling points into the united states and target markets within the country .

for instance , some have relied on selected border seizure data to help understand the locations at which federal enforcement efforts are stopping a portion of the illicit drugs produced abroad from entering the country and joining the domestic drug market .

in current policy discussions regarding border security , cbp drug seizure data can help inform policy decisions that involve the most effective placement of counterdrug resources .

in addition , drug seizures—both at the border and in the interior of the country—that are chemically analyzed can provide information on the likely geographic sources of certain illicit drugs found throughout the united states .

policymakers may ask a variety of questions as they debate how to target finite resources to countering illicit drug flows , including which types of illicit drugs are of the highest concern , what are the means traffickers most often employ to smuggle illicit drugs into and throughout the united states , and where can enforcement officials interdict the greatest quantity of top - priority illicit drugs ? .

border seizure data can also help inform efforts to act on certain policy priorities .

if , for example , lawmakers and enforcement officials are particularly concerned with specific categories of illicit drugs such as illicit opioids , they may examine the sufficiency of existing enforcement efforts in the areas where intelligence and seizure data indicate that the flow of these substances may be the highest .

for instance , the most recent dea national drug threat assessment notes that illicit opioids such as heroin are more often smuggled through than between poes ; likewise , cbp seizures of these substances have also been higher at the ports than between them , as reflected in greater seizures of illicit opioids by ofo than by the border patrol .

as such , in order to counter threats posed by illicit opioids , and in balancing other law enforcement and counterdrug priorities , congress may consider whether cbp should maintain or change the amount and types of resources allocated to screening for and interdicting illicit drugs at and between poes .

notably , as reflected in figure 1 , a focus on border seizures largely excludes a discussion of drug seizures by law enforcement officials throughout the interior of the country .

as such , border seizures cannot speak to drug transportation and distribution throughout the u.s. market or law enforcement priorities in the interior of the country .

a focus on border seizures also largely excludes a discussion of illicit drugs that are produced domestically .

this is , in part , because border seizures largely reflect drugs detected during inbound inspections ( and thus are more likely to reflect foreign - produced drugs being moved into the united states ) .

however , drugs detected and seized during outbound inspections may reflect both foreign - produced drugs that were not seized when they entered the country as well as domestically produced drugs being taken out of the country .

if policymakers are interested in having a more comprehensive view of drug seizures throughout the united states , they could move to enhance and consolidate data collection .

with respect to federal agencies , congress could take a variety of steps to enhance data availability on drug seizures , both at the border and in the interior of the country .

as noted , the nss at epic contains data on drug seizures of certain sizes by specific federal agencies , as well as additional voluntary reports from additional law enforcement entities , but these data are not comprehensive .

lawmakers could ask gao to conduct a study on agencies' collection and reporting of drug seizure data ; this could provide a better understanding of the portion of drug seizures currently included in the nss .

another option is that congress could require that all federal law enforcement agencies report information on a greater portion of—or all—drug seizures to a central database like the nss .

congress could also direct the nss to enhance outreach to state and local law enforcement agencies to encourage them to submit drug seizure data .

yet another option would be for policymakers to incentivize states—for example , by providing or withholding grant funding—to collect and report such data to help establish a more robust view of seizures in the united states .

enhanced data on drug seizures away from the border may not illuminate how these drugs entered the country ; however , these data could help provide a more nuanced picture of the domestic drug market .

to counter threats at u.s. borders , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) uses a risk management approach , which the department defines as "the process for identifying , analyzing , and communicating risk and accepting , avoiding , transferring , or controlling it to an acceptable level considering associated costs and benefits of any actions taken. .

border threats are continually evolving and include those posed by a wide range of actors , from terrorists who may have weapons of mass destruction and transnational criminals smuggling drugs and other contraband to migrants entering the country without authorization .

risks associated with various threats can be seen as a function of the likelihood that the threat will be realized and its potential consequences .

however , threats are complex , threat actors are strategic and adaptive in their behaviors , and assessing the likelihood and gauging potential consequences of the various threats can be challenging .

for instance , in understanding the risks posed by threat actors smuggling drugs into the united states , one may consider the likelihood of drugs successfully flowing into the country .

this likelihood may be complicated by a variety of factors including past and expected frequencies .

as the true frequency of illicit drug smuggling is unknown , officials may rely on a combination of intelligence and known drug seizure levels to inform their expectations .

notably , seizure data reflect illicit drugs that were not successfully smuggled into the country ; they reflect known , unsuccessful smuggling attempts .

in addition , seizures vary across sectors of the border , differ on whether they were made at or between poes , and are diverse in the associated modes of land , air , or sea transport ; as such , they can help inform , along with intelligence , the likelihood of smuggling attempts at various locations and via a host of transport modes .

however , seizure data do not speak to the portion of drugs successfully smuggled into the country .

moreover , expectations of future drug flows may combine knowledge about past flows with intelligence and analysis of additional information such as drug market forces in source and destination countries .

policymakers may question how border officials use intelligence about drug flows and data on drug seizures to assess the risks posed by drug trafficking and appropriately allocate resources to counter the threat .

because there is a need to balance resources for sometimes competing priorities , some may also question whether dhs's risk management approach to countering threats at the borders is able to effectively evaluate and reduce threats posed by drug trafficking—and whether the data to make this evaluation exist .

the united states has a number of strategies aimed , at least in part , at reducing drug trafficking into and within the country , and data on drug flows can help evaluate progress toward achieving goals outlined in them .

for instance , the 2019 national drug control strategy outlines that one of three key elements in the overarching goal of building a stronger , healthier , drug - free society is reducing the availability of illicit drugs in the united states .

the strategy notes that some measures of performance are to "significantly reduce the availability of illicit drugs in the united states by preventing their production outside the united states , disrupt their sale on the internet , and stop their flow into the country through the mail and express courier environments , and across our borders. .

it also notes that some measures of effectiveness are that "[t]he production of plant - based and synthetic drugs outside the united states has been significantly reduced , illicit drugs are less available in the united states as reflected in increased price and decreased purity , and drug seizures at all u.s. ports of entry increase each year over five years. .

a robust picture of drug production and movement toward and into the united states can help inform , for instance , whether changes in drug seizures at poes—as outlined in the strategy—may be attributable to the effectiveness of u.s. drug control efforts .

intelligence and data on drug flows and seizures could also inform whether changes in seizures may be influenced by other factors such as the amount of drugs arriving at u.s. borders , the means by which traffickers attempt to smuggle drugs into the country , or the staffing levels at and between poes .

for instance , policymakers and officials may question whether fluctuations in drug seizures at ports of entry by ofo , as shown in figure 2 and figure 3 , taken with intelligence about other drug supply and demand factors , reflect progress toward meeting goals outlined by the national drug control strategy .

other strategies , such as the national southwest border counternarcotics strategy and the strategy to combat transnational organized crime , also provide action items that involve reducing drug trafficking .

while these strategies do not outline specific effectiveness measures , as does the national drug control strategy , the action items and goals could potentially be better evaluated with more specific data such as that on illicit drug production ( both domestic and foreign ) , flows , and seizures .

