congress established the national wild and scenic rivers system ( nwsrs ) in 1968 through the wild and scenic rivers act ( wsra ) .

the wsra established a policy of preserving designated free - flowing rivers for the benefit and enjoyment of present and future generations .

it also complemented the then - current national policy of constructing dams and other structures that altered flow along many rivers .

designated rivers usually are referred to as wild and scenic rivers ( wsrs ) .

the wsra established three classes of wsrs , reflecting the characteristics of a river at the time of designation and affecting the type and amount of development that may be allowed afterward: w ild rivers are free from impoundments ( dams , diversions , and so forth ) and generally inaccessible except by trail .

the watersheds are primitive , and the shorelines are essentially undeveloped .

scenic rivers are free from impoundments and in generally undeveloped areas but are accessible in places by roads .

recreational rivers are readily accessible by road , with some shoreline development , and may have been subject to some impoundment or diversion in the past .

at the passage of the wsra in 1968 , congress initially designated 789 miles in eight rivers as part of the nwsrs and began to expand the system in 1972 ; since then , every congress has added rivers .

altogether , the system now includes 226 river units comprising over 13,400 miles in 41 states and the commonwealth of puerto rico .

congress plays an ongoing role in shaping the nwsrs through legislation and oversight .

congress establishes new wsrs within the system , directs the administration to study potential wsrs , and determines the level of agency funding for wsr administration .

for individual wsrs , congress has made specific provisions concerning river management , land acquisition and use in river corridors , and other matters .

ongoing issues for congress include whether to designate additional wsrs , how to address local and federal roles on nonfederal river segments , and more .

rivers may come into the nwsrs either by congressional designation or by state nomination to the secretary of the interior .

in some cases , prior to adding a river to the system , congress first directs in legislation that a study be conducted to determine whether the river area is suitable for wild and scenic designation .

congress also has directed the secretaries of agriculture and the interior to evaluate rivers for inclusion in the nwsrs through agency planning processes .

congress may designate rivers as part of the system without first requiring a study .

the secretary of the interior or agriculture , as appropriate , is responsible for conducting authorized studies and reporting to the president on the suitability of a proposed addition .

the president in turn submits recommendations to congress .

the act states that the studies are to discuss , among other things , the "outstandingly remarkable values" ( orvs ) that make the area worthy or unworthy of addition to the system ; current land ownership and use ; potential future uses of the land and water that could be affected by addition to the system ; the federal agency that would administer the area ; the cost of acquiring the land , if applicable ; and the extent to which management costs would be shared by state and local agencies .

the act also directs the administering agency to determine which river classification—wild , scenic , or recreational—best fits the designated river segments .

however , congress may preclude the need for these agency determinations by specifying particular classifications in law .

although congress designates most rivers , the secretary of the interior also may add wsrs to the nwsrs through administrative action .

a state - nominated river may be added to the national system if the river is designated for protection under state law , approved by the secretary of the interior , and permanently administered by a state agency ( see " state - administered wild and scenic rivers " for further information ) .

a minority of wild and scenic river designations have been made in this manner .

the wsra affords rivers designated by congress for study ( known as study rivers ) the same protections as designated rivers ( see " agency role after designation ," below ) .

these protections last through the study process and extend to a three - year period following the transmittal of the final study report by the president to congress .

the act does not protect rivers studied through an agency's planning process , although the agency may use other authorities to protect attributes such as free flow or orvs .

after congress designates a river segment as a wsr , the segment falls under the jurisdiction of one of the four major federal land management agencies .

the agency's role depends on the ownership of the land through which the river flows .

if the river flows through federal lands ( wholly or in part ) , the agency of jurisdiction manages the river as part of its overall land management activities .

the national park service ( nps ) acts as the federal administrator for rivers entirely on nonfederal lands .

for these rivers , nps may provide technical and financial assistance to relevant jurisdictions ; it also ensures compliance with section 7 of the wsra , which prohibits certain water resources projects that would adversely affect the values for which the rivers were established ( see " water resources projects: section 7 ," below ) .

the wsra authorizes or prohibits certain activities for all wsrs .

however , management of wsrs differs based on the lands where individual rivers lie and other factors .

various federal agencies administer rivers in the nwsrs designated by congress .

typically , congress specifies that either the secretary of agriculture or the secretary of the interior administer newly designated wsrs .

the designated secretary then administers the river through one of the four federal land management agencies—the bureau of land management ( blm ) , nps , or u.s .

fish and wildlife service ( fws ) within the department of the interior or the forest service ( fs ) within the department of agriculture .

unless otherwise specified by congress , rivers administered by the secretary of the interior and managed by nps become part of the national park system , and those managed by fws become part of the national wildlife refuge system .

following designation , the agency prepares a management plan ( often called a comprehensive resource management plan , or crmp ) for the designated segment .

the crmp is to "provide for the protection of the river values" by addressing issues such as development of lands and facilities , user capacities , and other management practices .

by law , crmps must address resource protection , development of lands and facilities , user capacities , and other management practices necessary or desirable to achieve the purposes of the wsra .

agencies sometimes provide more specific direction regarding crmp components .

for example , in addition to the components listed , blm specifies that crmps should describe existing resource conditions , including detailed descriptions of orvs ; define the goals for protecting river values and the desired condition of the river ; address water quality and instream flow ; identify resources requiring compliance with other authorities ; identify regulatory authorities of other agencies that relate to river values ; and describe a river monitoring strategy .

crmps generally are to be completed within three fiscal years after the date of a river's designation .

there is no statutory requirement that crmps be updated .

in some river study authorizations , congress has required the study agency to develop a crmp in concert with the study process .

in some cases , congress has adopted these crmps in the legislation designating the river .

agencies have sometimes developed elements of the crmp while studying the river , even if not directed by congress to do so .

the agency determines the boundaries of areas along the designated river .

the land area included may not exceed an average of 320 acres per mile of river designated ( an average quarter - mile - wide corridor of land on each side of the river ) or 640 acres per mile in alaska ( an average half - mile - wide corridor of land on each side of the river ) .

in addition to the statutory direction discussed above , management of wsrs on federal lands differs based on the statutory management criteria for each agency's lands .

fs and blm manage their lands for a sustained yield of multiple uses .

nps manages the national park system under a dual mission: to preserve unique resources and to provide for their enjoyment by the public .

fws manages the national wildlife refuge system ( nwrs ) under a dominant mission to conserve plants and animals for the benefit of future and present generations .

these varying missions shape the management decisions the federal land management agencies make regarding wsrs on their lands .

wsrs need not flow entirely through federal land .

wsrs on nonfederal lands differ based on whether they were designated by congress or through an administrative process .

wsrs designated by congress may flow wholly through nonfederal land or may have segments on nonfederal land .

wsrs on nonfederal land managed at the state , county , or other nonfederal level , and usually congressionally designated , are referred to colloquially as partnership wild and scenic rivers ( or partnership wsrs ) .

wsrs also may be designated through an administrative process .

states may apply to the secretary of the interior for inclusion of a state - protected river in the nwsrs .

the relevant state administers wsrs added to the system in this way .

these wsrs , as well as those that contain both federal and nonfederal land , generally are not referred to as partnership wsrs .

for rivers administered by the four federal land management agencies , congress provides funds for operations and maintenance through annual congressional appropriations for the relevant agencies .

each agency approaches river management differently in its budget .

rivers administered exclusively by states typically do not receive federal funding for river administration .

the wsra authorizes federal agencies to assist states and their political subdivisions ( such as counties , townships , and others ) , landowners , organizations , or individuals in planning , protecting , and managing wsrs ; this provision includes financial and technical assistance , except in the case of administratively designated wsrs .

nps administers partnership wsrs and provides technical and financial assistance to manage these rivers .

wsr designation has been controversial in some cases , especially for wsrs containing nonfederal lands .

initially , congress primarily designated rivers on federal land and rivers on nonfederal land were primarily added to the nwsrs through the state nomination authority .

however , the state nomination authority has not been used since 2004 , and congress has designated all wsrs ( on federal and nonfederal land ) since that time .

congress also has increasingly authorized river studies on nonfederal lands .

with this increase in congressional studies and designations of nonfederal lands , concern has centered on local control of relevant lands , including potential for federal acquisition of newly designated lands .

the potential use of condemnation authority to acquire lands on partnership wsrs has been particularly contentious .

the wsra limits the federal government's condemnation powers for some but not all river areas .

according to the interagency wild and scenic rivers council , the federal government has rarely used condemnation authority in respect to wsrs , and nearly all uses of condemnation occurred in the early years of the wsra .

congress has sometimes prohibited the use of condemnation in designating legislation for individual river segments .

opinions regarding the balance of federal and local control over partnership wsrs have varied .

some stakeholders contend that the current partnership wsr model is successful .

others have expressed concern that provisions of wsr designation legislation—for example , that partnership wsrs are to be administered as part of the national park system unless otherwise specified—may lead to an undesirable loss of local control .

still other observers have expressed concern that local laws may not adequately protect partnership wsrs .

as discussed previously , the attributes of each partnership wsr are created separately by individual designating laws or by local and federal agency choices before or after designation—as opposed to stemming from a defined category in the wsra .

thus , it may be unclear whether these concerns are broadly applicable .

congress and nps have used varying methods to address concerns about local versus federal control of partnership wsrs and about adequate levels of protection for partnership wsrs , either in individual designating legislation or in agency action prior to or after designation .

in contrast to the partnership wsr model , the state - nominated process for designating wsrs consists of a fixed set of provisions .

the process affords rivers the same protection as congressionally designated wsrs but precludes federal management or land acquisition ( including by condemnation ) , and the state must demonstrate that adequate legal protections are in place prior to designation .

some have observed that congress intended the state nomination authority to be the primary means for nonfederal river segments to be included in the system and that congress envisioned the states taking a prominent role in developing the nwsrs .

prior to the 2000s , most nonfederal river segments were designated under the state nomination authority .

however , this designation method has not been used since 2004 ; costs of designation and management at the state level , and state and local politics , may have contributed to this decline .

congress may consider whether it is preferable to encourage use of the state - nominated process , which includes a set of fixed provisions , or to continue to establish partnership wsrs though individual designating statutes , whose provisions vary .

