t he supreme court term that began on october 1 , 2018 , was a term of transition , with the court issuing a number of rulings that , at times , signaled but did not fully adopt broader transformations in its jurisprudence .

the term followed the retirement of justice kennedy , who was a critical vote on the court for much of his 30-year tenure and who had been widely viewed as the court's median or "swing" justice .

in nine out of the last 12 terms of the roberts court , he voted for the winning side in a case more often than any of his colleagues .

justice brett kavanaugh replaced justice kennedy one week into the october 2018 term .

the court's newest member had served on the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia ( d.c .

circuit ) for over a decade before his elevation to the supreme court .

empirical evidence suggests the court can change with the retirement and replacement of one its members .

as a result , the question looming over the october 2018 term was how justice kennedy's departure and justice kavanaugh's arrival would alter the court's jurisprudence going forward .

indeed , one member of the court , justice ruth bader ginsburg , predicted justice kennedy's retirement to be "the event of greatest consequence for the current term , and perhaps for many terms ahead. .

notwithstanding the alteration in the court's makeup , observers have generally agreed that the october 2018 term largely did not produce broad changes to the court's jurisprudence .

although a number of cases presented the court with the opportunity to rethink various areas of law , the court largely declined those invitations .

for instance , the court in gamble v. united states opted not to overrule a 170-year old doctrine concerning the reach of the double jeopardy clause of the fifth amendment .

in other cases , a majority of the justices did not resolve potentially far - reaching questions , resulting in the court either issuing more narrow rulings or simply not issuing an opinion in a given case .

nonetheless , much of the low - key nature of the october 2018 term was a product of the court's decisions to not hear certain matters .

for instance , save for a three - page , per curiam opinion upholding an indiana law regulating the disposal of fetal remains , the court refrained from hearing cases touching on the subject of abortion during the october 2018 term .

the court also declined to review cases addressing a number of other high - profile matters , including a challenge to the federal ban on bumpstocks , a dispute over whether business owners can decline on religious grounds to provide services for same - sex weddings , a case concerning president trump's authority to impose tariffs on imported steel , and a challenge to the continued detainment of enemy combatants at guantanamo bay .

and for a number of closely watched cases it did agree to hear , the court opted to schedule arguments for the october 2019 term , including several cases concerning whether federal law prohibits employers from discriminating on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity and the lawfulness of the department of homeland security's decision to wind down the deferred action for childhood arrivals ( daca ) policy .

while the supreme court's latest term generally did not result in wholesale changes to the law , its rulings were nonetheless important , in large part , because they may provide insight into how the court will function following justice kennedy's retirement .

for the fourth straight year at the court , the number of opinions decided by a bare majority increased , with 29% of the court's decisions being issued by a five - justice majority .

some of these decisions saw the court divided along what are perceived to be the typical ideological lines , with justices appointed by republican presidents on one side and those appointed by democrats on the other .

these 5-4 splits occurred in several appeals concerning the death penalty and in three cases where the court expressly or implicitly overturned several of the court's previous precedents regarding sovereign immunity , property rights , and redistricting .

nonetheless , such divisions proved to be the exception rather than the rule in closely divided cases during the last term .

of the 21 cases decided by a single vote , seven cases saw 5-4 splits between what have been viewed to be the conservative and liberal voting blocs on the court .

instead , the october 2018 term witnessed a number of heterodox lineups at the court .

for instance , justice kavanaugh joined the perceived liberal wing of the court in a major antitrust dispute , and justice gorsuch voted with that same voting bloc in several cases involving indian and criminal law .

justice breyer joined the more conservative wing of the court in the term's biggest fourth amendment case .

and , as discussed in more detail below , in cases concerning the inclusion of a citizenship question on the 2020 census questionnaire and judicial deference afforded to interpretations of agency regulations , the chief justice voted with the perceived liberal voting bloc .

underscoring the new dynamics of the roberts court , three justices with fairly distinct judicial approaches voted most frequently with the majority of the court last term: justice kavanaugh ( voting with the majority 88% of the time ) , chief justice roberts ( 85% ) , and justice kagan ( 83% ) .

collectively , the voting patterns of the october 2018 term have led some legal commentators to suggest that the court has transformed from an institution that was largely defined by the vote of justice kennedy to one in which multiple justices are now the court's swing votes .

beyond the general dynamics of october 2018 term , the court issued a number of opinions of particular importance for congress .

while a full discussion of every ruling from the last supreme court term is beyond the scope of this report , table 1 and table 2 provide brief summaries of the court's written opinions issued during the october 2018 term .

the bulk of this report highlights five notable opinions from the october term 2018 that could affect the work of congress: ( 1 ) kisor v. wilkie , which considered the continued viability of the auer - seminole rock doctrine governing judicial deference to an agency's interpretation of its own ambiguous regulation ; ( 2 ) department of commerce v. new york , a challenge to the addition of a citizenship question to the 2020 census questionnaire ; ( 3 ) rucho v. common cause , which considered whether federal courts have jurisdiction to adjudicate claims of excessive partisanship in drawing electoral districts ; ( 4 ) american legion v. american humanist association , a challenge to the constitutionality of a state's display of a latin cross as a world war i memorial ; and ( 5 ) gundy v. united states , which considered the scope of the long - dormant nondelegation doctrine .

in affirming the petitioner's conviction for violating the sex offender registration and notification act ( sorna ) , a divided supreme court in gundy v. united states upheld the constitutionality of congress's delegated authority to the u.s. attorney general to apply registration requirements to offenders convicted prior to sorna's enactment .

in a plurality opinion written on behalf of four justices , justice kagan concluded that sorna's delegation "easily passes constitutional muster" and was "distinctively small - bore" when compared to the other broad delegations the court has upheld since 1935 .

justice gorsuch's dissent , joined by chief justice roberts and justice thomas , highlighted an emerging split on the court's approach in reviewing authority congress delegates to another branch of government .

providing the fifth vote to affirm gundy's conviction , justice alito concurred in the judgment only , declining to join justice kagan's opinion and indicating his willingness to rethink the court's approach to the nondelegation doctrine , which seeks to bar congress from delegating its legislative powers to other branches of government .

after gundy , whether the court revives the long - dormant nondelegation doctrine likely depends on justice kavanaugh's views on the doctrine .

 ( justice kavanaugh , who was not confirmed to the court at the time of oral arguments , took no part in the gundy decision. ) .

background: article i , section 1 of the constitution provides that "[a]ll legislative powers herein granted" will be vested in the united states congress .

the supreme court has held that the "text in [article i's vesting clause] permits no delegation of those powers. .

the nondelegation doctrine , as crafted by the courts , exists mainly to prevent congress from ceding its legislative power to other entities and , in so doing , maintain the separation of powers among the three branches of government .

at the same time , the court has recognized that the nondelegation doctrine does not require complete separation of the three branches of government , permitting congress to delegate certain powers to implement and enforce the law .

to determine whether a delegation of authority is constitutional , the court has required that congress lay out an "intelligible principle" to guide the delegee's discretion and constrain its authority .

under the lenient "intelligible principle" standard that has its origins in the 1928 decision j.w .

hampton , jr. , & co. v. united states , the court has relied on the nondelegation doctrine twice , in 1935 , to invalidate two provisions in the national industrial recovery act delegating authority to the president , rejecting every nondelegation challenge thereafter .

gundy , the latest nondelegation challenge at the supreme court , centered on the application of registration requirements under sorna to pre - act offenders .

enacted as title i of the adam walsh child protection and safety act of 2006 , sorna's stated purpose is "to protect the public from sex offenders and offenders against children" by establishing a comprehensive national registration system of offenders .

to this end , sorna requires convicted sex offenders to register in each state where the offender resides , is employed , or is a student .

section 20913 ( d ) of sorna authorizes the attorney general to "specify the applicability" of the registration requirements "to sex offenders convicted before the enactment" of the act and to "prescribe rules for the registration of any such sex offenders" and for other offenders unable to comply with the initial registration requirements .

as decided by the court in reynolds v. united states , the law's registration requirements did not apply to pre - sorna offenders until the attorney general so specified .

accordingly , in a series of interim and final rules and guidance documents issued between 2007 and 2011 , the attorney general specified that sorna's requirements apply to all sex offenders , including sex offenders convicted before the statute's enactment .

before the enactment of sorna , petitioner herman gundy was convicted of a sex offense in maryland .

after serving his sentence , gundy traveled from maryland to new york .

subsequently , he was arrested and convicted for failing to register as a sex offender in new york under sorna .

in his petition to the supreme court , gundy argued , among other things , that sorna's grant of "undirected discretion" to the attorney general to decide whether to apply the statute to pre - sorna offenders is an unconstitutional delegation of legislative power to the executive branch .

supreme court's decision: in gundy , justice kagan announced the judgment of the court , affirming the lower court , and authored a plurality opinion joined by justices ginsburg , breyer , and sotomayor that followed the modern approach toward the nondelegation doctrine , rejecting gundy's argument that congress unconstitutionally delegated "quintessentially legislative powers" to the attorney general to decide whether to apply the statute to pre - sorna offenders .

relying on reynolds , justice kagan read sorna as requiring the attorney general to "apply sorna's registration requirements as soon as feasible to offenders convicted before the statute's enactment. .

based on this interpretation , the plurality decided that congress did not violate the nondelegation doctrine based on the court's "long established law" in upholding broad delegations .

the plurality explained that under the intelligible principle standard , so long as congress has made clear the "general policy" and boundaries of the delegation , such broad delegations are permissible .

compared to very broad delegations upheld in the past ( eg , delegations to agencies to regulate in the "public's interest" ) , the plurality concluded that the attorney general's "temporary authority" to delay the application of sorna's registration requirements to pre - act offenders due to feasibility concerns "falls well within constitutional bounds. .

dissenting and concurring opinions: in contrast , in his dissent , justice gorsuch , joined by chief justice roberts and justice thomas , viewed the plain text of the delegation as providing the attorney general limitless and "vast" discretion and "free rein" to impose ( or not ) selected registration requirements on pre - act offenders .

in concluding the delegation to be unconstitutional , justice gorsuch distinguished his analysis from the plurality and the court's precedents by focusing on the separation - of - powers principles that underpin the nondelegation doctrine .

in the dissent's view , the nondelegation doctrine used to serve a vital role in maintaining the separation of powers among the branches of government by assuring that elected members of congress fulfill their constitutional lawmaking duties .

justice gorsuch warned that delegating congress's constitutional legislative duties to the executive branch bypasses the bicameral legislative process , resulting in laws that fail to protect minority interests or provide political accountability or fair notice .

consequently , the dissent faulted the "evolving intelligible principle" standard and increasingly broad delegations as pushing the nondelegation doctrine further from its separation - of - powers roots .

arguing for a more robust review of congressional delegations , justice gorsuch outlined several "guiding principles. .

according to the dissent , congress could permissibly delegate ( 1 ) authority to another branch of government to "fill up the details" of congress's policies regulating private conduct ; ( 2 ) â fact - finding to the executive branch as a condition to applying legislative policy ; or ( 3 ) nonlegislative responsibilities that are within the scope of another branch of government's vested powers ( eg , assign foreign affairs powers that are constitutionally vested in the president ) .

applying these "traditional" separation - of - powers tests in lieu of the plurality's "intelligible principle" approach , justice gorsuch concluded that sorna's delegation was an unconstitutional breach of the separation between the legislative and executive branches .

he argued that sorna lacked a "single policy decision concerning pre - act offenders" and delegated more than the power to fill the details to the attorney general .

the dissent disputed the plurality's comparison of sorna's delegation to other broad delegations that the court has upheld , reasoning that "there isn't .

 .

 .

a single other case where we have upheld executive authority over matters like these on the ground they constitute mere 'details.' .

further , he asserted that the delegation is neither conditional legislation subject to executive fact - finding nor a delegation of powers vested in the executive branch because determining the rights and duties of citizens is "quintessentially legislative power. .

in "a future case with a full panel," justice gorsuch hoped that the court would recognize that "while congress can enlist considerable assistance from the executive branch in filling up details and finding facts , it may never hand off to the nation's chief prosecutor the power to write his own criminal code .

that 'is delegation running riot.' .

although justice alito voiced "support [for the] effort" of the dissent in rethinking the court's approach to the nondelegation doctrine , he opted to not join that effort without the support of the majority of the court .

as a result , justice alito concurred in the judgment of the court in affirming the petitioner's conviction .

in his brief , five - sentence concurring opinion , justice alito viewed a "discernable standard [in sorna's delegation] that is adequate under the approach this court has taken for many years. .

implications for congress: the divided opinions in gundy signal a potential shift in the court's approach in nondelegation challenges and potential resurrection of the nondelegation doctrine .

with three justices and the chief justice in gundy willing to reconsider or redefine the court's "intelligible principle" standard , justice kavanaugh , who did not participate in gundy , appears likely to be the critical vote to break the tie in a future case considering a revitalization of the nondelegation principle .

if the court were to replace the modern intelligible principle approach , new challenges may arise in determining when congress crosses the nondelegation line .

a more restrictive nondelegation standard could invite constitutional challenges to many other statutory provisions that delegate broad authority and discretion to the executive branch to issue and enforce regulations .

the significance of these challenges was the subject of a debate between the gundy plurality and dissent .

justice kagan cautioned that striking down sorna's delegation as unconstitutional would make most of congress's delegations to the executive branch unconstitutional because congress relies on broad delegations to executive agencies to implement its policies .

however , justice gorsuch countered that "respecting the separation of powers" does not prohibit congress from authorizing the executive branch to fill in details , find facts that trigger applicable statutory requirements , or exercise nonlegislative powers .

a future case may provide the court with the opportunity to provide guidance to the courts and congress on how precise congress must be in its delegation and how best to draw the line between permissible and impermissible delegations .

for now , however , the current intelligible principle standard in use since 1935 survives while the nondelegation doctrine continues to remain "moribund. .

