the funding of public elementary and secondary schools in the united states involves a combination of local , state , and federal government revenues .

state and local governments generally provide over 90% of the revenue available for public elementary and secondary education on an annual basis , with the federal government providing the remainder .

as such , there is consistent congressional interest in understanding how the majority of available funds are provided to local educational agencies ( leas ) and , ultimately , to public schools .

this report intends to provide context for consideration of the comparatively small but important role of the federal assistance programs in financing public education , discuss some of the ways that state and local finance policies and practices intersect with federal involvement , and explain selected key concepts in this field .

the report provides a basic overview of the mechanisms used by states and leas to fund public education and an introduction to core school finance concepts .

it begins with an examination of the sources of funding for public elementary and secondary education and how these funding sources vary by state and over time .

it then considers how states and leas raise revenue for public education through different types of taxes , including property taxes .

the report then focuses on state school finance programs , the varieties of policies under which states provide funds to leas , and the local units of government that administer public k - 12 education .

this includes an examination of the key concept of "equalization" in state school finance programs .

school finance programs often incorporate state - level weighted student funding programs , under which additional funds are provided to leas for the education of students with certain high - cost needs ( eg , associated with low family income or student disabilities ) or who are in high - cost educational programs ( such as technical education ) .

the next section of the report considers lea programs to finance individual public schools .

this is followed by a discussion of aspects of the largest federal k - 12 education aid program , title i - a of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , that incorporate a state school finance equity factor or weighted student funding components .

in addition , a new esea title i - e , as most recently comprehensively amended by the every student succeeds act ( essa ; p.l .

114-95 ) , authorizes the secretary of education to provide participating leas with flexibility to consolidate eligible federal funds with state and local funding for individual public schools to create a "single school funding system based on weighted per - pupil allocations for low - income and otherwise disadvantaged students. .

the report concludes with a review of recent efforts to collect and report data on the level of expenditures per pupil at individual public schools within leas , a topic that has garnered increasing interest among policymakers in recent years .

the funding of public elementary and secondary schools in the united states involves a combination of local , state , and federal government revenues , in proportions that vary substantially both across and within states .

overall , a total of $678.4 billion in revenues was devoted to public elementary and secondary education in the 2015-16 school year ( the latest year for which detailed data on revenues by source are available ) .

state governments provided $318.6 billion ( 47.0% ) of these revenues , local governments provided $303.8 billion ( 44.8% ) , and the federal government provided $56.0 billion ( 8.3% ) .

over the last several decades , the share of public elementary and secondary education revenues provided by state governments has increased , the share provided by local governments has decreased , and the federal share has varied within a range of 6.0% to 12.7% .

the federal share peaked in the recessionary period of 2009-2011 , and has declined thereafter .

table 1 provides the local , state , and federal shares for selected years over the 50-year period from 1965-1966 to 2015-2016 .

there is substantial variation among the states with respect to the shares of public elementary and secondary education revenues provided by state , local , and federal governments ( table 2 ) .

for example , hawaii , with a statewide system of public elementary and secondary education and no leas , provides virtually no local government revenues ; almost 90% of funding comes from the state government .

at the other end of this spectrum , the district of columbia , which has no state government , provides approximately 90% of revenues from local sources .

the other states fall between these two extremes of providing all or almost all of the nonfederal revenue from either state or local sources .

illinois has the lowest state share of revenues ( 24.1% ) and the highest local share ( 67.4% ) of the 50 states .

revenues are raised at the state and local levels to support public elementary and secondary education .

local revenues may be raised directly by an lea itself ( fiscally independent leas ) , or be raised and provided to an lea by a general purpose unit of local government , such as a county or city ( fiscally dependent leas ) .

the primary source of local revenues for public elementary and secondary education is the property tax .

this tax is primarily applied to real property ( residences , commercial buildings , etc .

 ) , and in some cases to vehicles or boats .

according to data from the u.s. census bureau for 2016 , 72.0% of all local government tax revenues were from property taxes , 17.4% were from sales taxes , 6.0% were from individual and corporate income taxes , and the remaining 4.6% came from motor vehicle and other miscellaneous taxes .

the property tax is an annual percentage of the assessed value of residential and commercial "real" property ( i.e. , buildings and land ) and , in some localities , "personal" property ( i.e. , automobiles , other vehicles , and occasionally other items such as livestock ) .

the property tax rate unit is often referred to as a "mill" or one - thousandth of the assessed value of the property .

because almost three - quarters of all local government revenues come from property taxes , variations in the value of such real or personal property relative to the number of school - age children in a locality is usually the primary cause of local variations in capacity to raise revenues per pupil for public elementary and secondary education .

beyond differences in taxable property per pupil , localities in many states are able to select their local property tax rate , at least within a limited range , and may choose to tax themselves at higher rates than other localities in the same state .

state revenues for public elementary and secondary education are raised from a variety of sources , primarily personal and corporate income and retail sales taxes , "excise" taxes such as those on tobacco products and alcoholic beverages , plus lotteries in several states .

according to data from the u.s. census bureau for 2016 , 47.8% of all state government tax revenues were derived from sales taxes , 42.2% were from individual and corporate income taxes , 1.7% were from property taxes , and the remaining 8.3% came from motor vehicle and other miscellaneous taxes .

as depicted in table 2 , all states ( but not the district of columbia ) provide a share of the total revenues available for public elementary and secondary education .

this state share varies widely , from approximately 25% in illinois to almost 90% in hawaii and vermont .

starting in the early 20 th century , all states began to establish public elementary and secondary finance programs in order to diminish somewhat the high degree of inequality in revenues per pupil that would result if funding were based only on local taxable resources and the willingness of local citizens to tax themselves .

the primary policies under which states allocate these revenues among their leas have been catalogued and categorized by school finance analysts on several occasions in recent decades .

for several years , the u.s. department of education's national center for education statistics ( nces ) financed and supported a joint effort with the american education finance association and the national education association to compile detailed information on the characteristics of state school finance programs .

however , the most recent of these publications was released in 2001 , was based on the 1998-1999 school year , and has not been updated .

since the publication of the last nces catalog of state school finance programs , individual education policy analysts have coordinated efforts to update at least some of the information .

for example , annual updates of key school finance policies for each state have recently been published by professor deborah verstegen of the university of nevada at reno .

note that while those organizing and compiling the surveys of state school finance programs provide guidance intended to elicit consistent responses from the states , responses are generally prepared by different individuals in each state who may not describe various policies using the same terminology or focus .

the programs through which state funds are provided to leas for public elementary and secondary education have traditionally been categorized by those involved in the compilations discussed above and other education finance analysts into five types of programs: ( 1 ) foundation programs , ( 2 ) full state funding programs , ( 3 ) flat grants , ( 4 ) district power equalizing , and ( 5 ) categorical grants .

in many cases , states often have elements of two or more of these types of programs in their school finance policies .

precise counts of how many states have finance programs in each of these categories vary—due to differences in the time at which analyses are conducted combined with the evolution of state policies over time , as well as variations of interpretation by individuals in each state responding to state policy surveys , among other factors .

nevertheless , there is general agreement that the first of these types of state school finance programs , typically referred to as foundation programs , is much more common than the other four types , and may be found to some degree in as many as 80% of the states .

a goal of all of the various types of state school finance programs is to provide at least some limited degree of "equalization" of spending and resources and / or local ability to raise funds for public elementary and secondary education across all of the leas in the state .

school finance equalization would seem to imply "equal spending per pupil" among a state's leas .

however , the meanings of both "equal" and "per pupil" may vary widely .

relatively few observers advocate absolute equality of dollars spent on behalf of every pupil in the state .

almost all state school finance programs allow for some level of spending differences based on local willingness to pay for public elementary and secondary education , differences in the costs of educating various categories of high - need pupils , or differences in the costs of providing education services in different geographic areas .

state school finance programs frequently account for certain types of pupils whose education imposes higher than average costs on leas , which might include pupils with disabilities , from low - income families and / or living in areas with high concentrations of poverty , with limited proficiency in the english language , or living in sparsely populated areas .

analysts of school finance programs sometimes use the term "horizontal equity" to refer to equal funding on behalf of similar pupils in different leas across a state , and "vertical equity" to refer to different levels of funding on behalf of pupils with different levels of need .

if a state school finance program provides more funds on behalf of high - cost pupils than other pupils in an effort to provide vertical equity , and if the distribution of these pupils is uneven across the state's leas , then the state's school finance system might be considered by many analysts to be equalized yet have significant differences in spending per enrolled pupil overall .

regardless of how one adjusts for the distribution of different types of pupils , there are two basic ways in which school finance equalization has been defined .

by far the most common method is based on equalization of the level of revenues or expenditures per pupil , however "pupil" might be defined .

the other , somewhat less common , method focuses on equalizing the amount of funds per pupil that each lea could raise per unit of local tax rate .

the first method would equalize actual amounts of funds available , while the second would equalize local ability to raise revenues .

these two basic concepts of equalization are reflected in many of the state school finance programs discussed above .

foundation programs often incorporate provisions to provide higher amounts per pupil on behalf of one or more categories of high - need pupils , and categorical grants often provide increased funds to serve specific high - need pupil groups .

in contrast , district power equalizing programs focus on equalizing the funds that could be raised per unit of local tax rate .

as seen above , the concept of pupil weighting is often applied in determining funding levels for leas under state school finance programs .

after state funds reach leas , they are combined with locally raised funds to provide educational resources to students in individual schools .

leas may also use weighted student funding formulas to allocate funds to individual public schools , but more often they use other funding strategies .

this section of the report provides an overview of conventional intra - lea budgeting policies and the use of weighted student funding policies by leas .

the esea includes one program and one secretarial authority that incorporate elements of the equalization and weighted student funding strategies used by states and leas .

the title i - a program authorizes federal aid to leas for the education of disadvantaged children .

title i - a grants provide supplementary educational and related services to low - achieving and other students attending elementary and secondary schools with relatively high concentrations of students from low - income families .

it is also the largest esea program ( $15.9 billion ) , accounting for over 60% of all esea funds in fy2019 ( $25.2 billion ) .

the formulas used to determine grants to leas under title i - a include both an equity component and weighted student funding elements .

title i - e provides the secretary of education ( the secretary ) with authority to provide leas with flexibility to consolidate eligible federal funds with state and local funding to create a "single school funding system based on weighted per - pupil allocations for low - income and otherwise disadvantaged students. .

both esea title i - a and title i - e are discussed below .

a separate development relevant to the adoption of weighted student funding by some leas has been increasing interest in the collection and reporting of school - level finance data for public schools .

while historically there have not been comprehensive state or federal efforts to calculate or report on specific budgets or expenditure levels for individual public schools , federal efforts to require and support the reporting of such information have expanded rapidly in recent years .

the availability of school - level financial data , based on standard concepts applied consistently nationwide , could be especially helpful in the administration of a key fiscal accountability requirement of the esea title i - a program , as discussed below .

such data could also inform state and local level consideration of equity among schools and groups of students , and increase transparency regarding budgeting and financial decisions by leas .

one factor that may help explain this increasing attention is the "comparability" requirement associated with the esea title i - a program .

this is a requirement that services provided with state and local funds in schools participating in title i - a must be comparable to those in non - title i - a schools within the same lea .

if all of an lea's schools participate in title i - a , then services funded from state and local revenues must be "substantially comparable" in each school within the lea .

the title i - a comparability requirement is intended to ensure that state and local funds are used to provide a comparable level of services in title i - a schools compared with non - title i - a schools prior to the receipt of title i - a funds .

comparability is measured only with respect to the public schools within the same lea , not statewide .

it is designed to ensure that federal title i - a funds provide a net increase in funding for title i - a schools compared to non - title i - a schools , and do not simply replace state and local funds that would , in the absence of title i - a , be provided to the title i - a schools .

in demonstrating comparability , leas are prohibited from using staff salary differentials for years of employment in determining expenditures per pupil from state and local funds or instructional salaries per pupil from state and local funds .

that is , actual staff salaries are not used in comparability determinations .

in recent years , there has been renewed attention to the extent to which the comparability requirement is being enforced , and to the nature and quality of school - level expenditure data used to determine compliance .

more broadly , a number of other federal requirements and research efforts have reflected this increased interest in school - level finance data collection and reporting .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 , title viii ) included a one - time requirement for states to compile and report expenditures for all public schools for the 2008-2009 school year .

states were required to report total personnel salaries for all school - level instructional and support staff ; salaries specifically for instructional staff ; salaries specifically for teachers ; and nonpersonnel expenditures , if available .

ed provided guidelines on the specific types of expenditures that states and leas should include in their reports .

states and leas were asked to report school - level expenditures from state and local funds only , and to exclude expenditures for special education , adult education , school nutrition programs , summer school , preschool , and employee benefits .

all expenditure data was to be reported based on actual expenditures , including those for staff salaries .

a study of the implementation of the title i - a comparability requirement that was based on the data collection required by the arra determined that within leas that had both title i - a and non - title i - a schools , "more than 40 percent of title i schools had lower personnel expenditures per pupil than did non - title i schools at the same grade level. .

for example , at the elementary school level 46% of title i - a schools had state and local personnel expenditures per pupil that were below the average for non - title i - a schools in the same lea , while 54% exceeded the average for non - title i - a schools in the same district .

title i - a middle schools and high schools were marginally less likely to have below - average per - pupil personnel expenditures ( 42% and 45% , respectively ) compared to non - title i - a schools in the same lea .

across all levels of elementary and secondary education , 48% of title i - a schools were not receiving the same level of per - pupil state and local personnel expenditures as non - title i - a schools in the same lea .

while this does not represent a violation of the title i - a comparability requirements , which are not based on actual personnel expenditures , it is an indication that a sizable group of title i - a schools may not actually be as equally resourced as non - title i - a schools prior to the receipt of title i - a funds .

in discussing this study , ed stated that , "[t]raditional district allocation methods have been shown to create significant funding disparities between title i and non - title i schools. .

separately , ed's office for civil rights began to collect selected school - level expenditure data starting with the 2009-2010 school year .

these data are captured every second year as part of the ongoing civil rights data collection , and include total personnel salaries ; salaries specifically for teachers , instructional aides , support services staff , and school administrators ; and nonpersonnel expenditures .

all expenditure data must be based on actual expenditures .

unlike data collected under the arra ( discussed above ) and esea ( discussed below ) requirements , these data are collected directly from schools and leas , not states .

in spring 2014 , the office of management and budget ( omb ) and ed's office of planning , evaluation , and policy development ( opepd ) requested that ed's national center for education statistics ( nces ) develop a school - level finance data collection , as such a collection had not been developed on a comprehensive , annual basis .

in response , nces launched pilot efforts to expand ongoing surveys of state and lea finances to include school - level financial data as well .

beginning with the 2013-2014 school year , nces conducted a pilot school - level finance survey ( slfs ) to evaluate the feasibility of collecting school - level finance data in conjunction with the school district finance survey and national public education financial survey for states and leas , jointly conducted by nces and the census bureau .

twelve states participated in this pilot survey for the 2013-2014 school year , and 17 states for 2014-2015 ( although only 15 states provided data deemed to be usable by nces ) .

based on pilot survey results for the 2014-15 school year , nces determined that ( 1 ) approximately one - half of the participating states were able to report complete personnel and / or nonpersonnel data for at least 95% of their public schools , ( 2 ) slfs data are generally consistent with data reported in other school finance surveys , ( 3 ) the development of standardized protocols "enhances the efficiency of reporting school - level finance data , ( 4 ) there remain "numerous inherent challenges in collecting school - level finance data," ( 5 ) and , nevertheless , "the feasibility of collecting and reporting school - level finance data of reasonable quality is relatively high. .

a major concern regarding school - level expenditure surveys is achieving consistency among the states on what kinds on expenditures to include or exclude .

the slfs currently includes 15 unique expenditure items covering a wide variety of personnel expenditures ( 6 items ) , including salaries , as well as nonpersonnel expenditures ( 9 items ) , such as educational technology .

excluded from these items are employee benefits and services provided centrally by leas such as transportation , capital spending , food services , central administration , and building operations and maintenance .

data for each of the 15 expenditure items were collected two ways: ( 1 ) without additional exclusions ( other than the aforementioned exclusions ) , and ( 2 ) with additional exclusions for expenditures paid from most federal funds , expenditures for prekindergarten , and expenditures for special education .

beginning with the 2015-2016 school year , the slfs was opened to all states on a voluntary basis .

beginning with the 2017-2018 school year data collection , nces began collecting complete operational expenditure data .

nces noted that "[c]omplete , accurate , and comparable school - level finance data across states will take time and effort to achieve. .

however , nces also noted that recent esea school - level finance reporting requirements ( discussed below ) , further development of standardized internal protocols for school - level finance accounting , and continued sea collaboration with nces and the census bureau on the slfs data collection should result in improved school - level finance data .

further , as mentioned above , the essa amended esea title i - a to require participating states to include in school report cards data on expenditures at each public school .

these report cards are to include "the per - pupil expenditures of federal , state , and local funds , including actual personnel expenditures and actual nonpersonnel expenditures of federal , state , and local funds , disaggregated by source of funds , for each local educational agency and each school in the state for the preceding fiscal year" ( section 1111 ( h ) ( 1 ) ( c ) ( x ) ) .

states are currently beginning to report expenditure data in response to this requirement .

arra: american recovery and reinvestment act ( p.l .

111-5 ) cv: coefficient of variation ed: u.s. department of education efig: education finance incentive grant el: english learner esea: elementary and secondary education act essa: every student succeeds act ( p.l .

114-95 ) lea: local educational agency nces: national center for education statistics ( ed ) omb: office of management and budget opepd: office of planning , evaluation , and policy development ( ed ) saipe: small area income and poverty estimates sea: state educational agency slfs: school - level finance survey tanf: temporary assistance for needy familie .

