the purpose of this report is to provide information and analysis for congress on afghanistan and the nearly two - decade u.s. project there .

topics covered include u.s. military engagement and security dynamics ; the regional context ; reconciliation efforts ; afghan politics and governance ; foreign assistance ; and social and economic development .

supplementary materials , including a historical timeline and background on the soviet war in afghanistan , are included as appendices .

this information is meant to provide background and context for lawmakers as they consider administration budget requests , oversee u.s. military operations and aid programs , and examine the u.s. role in south asia and the world .

for a more frequently updated treatment of current events in afghanistan and developments in u.s. policy , refer to crs report r45122 , afghanistan: background and u.s. policy in brief , by clayton thomas .

the u.s. and afghan governments , along with partner countries , remain engaged in combat with a robust taliban - led insurgency .

while u.s. military officials maintain that afghan forces are "resilient" against the taliban , by some measures insurgents are in control of or contesting more territory today than at any time since 2001 .

the conflict also involves an array of other armed groups , including active affiliates of both al qaeda ( aq ) and the islamic state ( is , also known as isis , isil , or by the arabic acronym da'esh ) .

since early 2015 , the north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) - led mission in afghanistan , known as "resolute support mission" ( rsm ) , has focused on training , advising , and assisting afghan government forces .

combat operations by u.s. counterterrorism forces , along with some partner forces , have increased since 2017 .

these two "complementary missions" make up operation freedom's sentinel ( ofs ) .

simultaneously , the united states is engaged in a diplomatic effort to end the war , most notably through direct talks with taliban representatives ( a reversal of previous u.s. policy ) .

in january 2019 , u.s. and taliban negotiators reached a draft framework , in which the taliban would prohibit terrorist groups from operating on afghan soil in return for the eventual withdrawal of u.s. forces , though lead u.s. envoy zalmay khalilzad insists that "nothing is agreed until everything is agreed. .

as of july 2019 , negotiations do not directly involve representatives of the afghan government , leading some afghans to worry that the united states will prioritize a military withdrawal over a complex political settlement that preserves some of the social , political , and humanitarian gains made since 2001 .

a major complicating factor underlying the negotiations is the unsettled state of afghan politics ; afghanistan held inconclusive parliamentary elections in october 2018 and the presidential election , originally scheduled for april 2019 , has been postponed until september 2019 .

the afghan government has made some notable progress in reducing corruption and implementing its budgetary commitments , but faces domestic criticism for its failure to guarantee security and prevent insurgent gains .

the united states has spent more than $132 billion in various forms of reconstruction aid to afghanistan over the past decade and a half , from building up and sustaining the afghan national defense and security forces ( andsf ) to economic development .

this assistance has increased afghan government capacity , but prospects for stability in afghanistan still appear distant .

some u.s. policymakers hope that the country's largely underdeveloped natural resources and geographic position at the crossroads of future global trade routes might improve the economic life of the country , and , by extension , its social and political dynamics .

nevertheless , in light of the ongoing hostilities afghanistan's economic and political prospects remain uncertain at best .

regional developments and relationships have long influenced events inside afghanistan .

the trump administration has linked u.s. policy in afghanistan to broader regional dynamics , particularly as they relate to south asia .

key states include afghanistan's most important neighbors , pakistan and iran ; the larger regional players india , russia , and china ; and the politically influential gulf states .

for years , the afghan government , the united states , and various neighboring states have engaged in efforts to bring about a political settlement with insurgents .

as of july 2019 , u.s. officials , led by special representative for afghanistan reconciliation zalmay khalilzad , are currently engaged in direct talks with the taliban in the most serious discussions to end the u.s. military effort there since it began .

however , the taliban still refuse to negotiate with representatives of the afghan government , which they seek to delegitimize .

political contention among afghans can be seen as both a sign of the country's u.s. - and internationally supported democratic development as well as a troubling reminder of the country's fractured past and a potential impediment to peace .

since the united states and its partners intervened in 2001 , the international community has contributed tens of billions of dollars in economic and development assistance to afghanistan .

at the height of this effort , donor aid accounted for more than 75% of afghanistan's gdp .

as of early 2018 , donor aid still accounts for about 60% of total afghan government expenditures ( both operating budget and development budget ) , with domestic revenues making up the rest .

experts and policymakers have debated many aspects of aid to afghanistan , including amounts , mechanisms for delivery , donor coordination , and distribution within afghanistan .

insurgents and terrorist groups have demonstrated considerable capabilities in 2018 and 2019 , throwing into sharp relief the daunting security challenges that the afghan government and its u.s. and international partners face .

at the same time , prospects for a negotiated settlement have risen , driven by direct u.s. - taliban talks , though the prospects for such negotiations to deliver a settlement are uncertain .

those talks currently are centered on the u.s. and taliban priorities , namely counterterrorism and the withdrawal of foreign troops , respectively .

special representative for afghan reconciliation khalilzad and other u.s. officials maintain that facilitating an intra - afghan settlement is also a u.s. objective , but the means by which the u.s. could force the taliban into dialogue with the afghan government ( let alone guarantee the taliban's adherence to certain political or other conditions ) is unclear , especially after a u.s. withdrawal from the country .

observers differ on whether or not the taliban pose an existential threat to the afghan government , given the current military balance , but generally agree that alterations to u.s. troop deployments or , perhaps more importantly , u.s. funding for the andsf , would pose a challenge to the afghan government .

as president ghani said in 2018 , "[w]e will not be able to support our army for six months without u.s. [financial] support. .

increased political instability , fueled by questions about the central government's authority and competence and rising ethnic tensions , may pose as serious a threat to afghanistan's future as the taliban does .

a potential collapse of the afghan military and / or the government that commands it could have significant implications for the united states , particularly given the nature of negotiated security arrangements .

regardless of how likely the taliban would be to gain full control over all , or even most , of the country , the breakdown of social order and the fracturing of the country into fiefdoms controlled by paramilitary commanders and their respective militias may be plausible , even probable ; afghanistan experienced a similar situation nearly thirty years ago during its post - soviet civil war .

under a more unstable future scenario , alliances and relationships among extremist groups could evolve , as could security conditions , offering new opportunities to transnational terrorist groups , whether directly or by default .

human rights would be likely to suffer as well .

in light of these uncertainties , members of congress and other u.s. policymakers may reassess notions of what success in afghanistan looks like , examining how potential outcomes might harm or benefit u.s. interests , and the relative levels of u.s. engagement and investment required to attain them .

the present condition , which is essentially a stalemate that has endured for several years , could persist ; some argue that the united states "has the capacity to sustain its commitment to afghanistan for some time to come" at current levels .

in may 2019 , former national security advisor h.r .

mcmaster compared the u.s. effort in afghanistan to an "insurance policy" against the negative consequences of the government's collapse .

other analysts counter that "the threat in afghanistan doesn't warrant a continued u.s. military presence and the associated costs—which are not inconsequential. .

the trump administration has described u.s. policy in afghanistan as "grounded in the fundamental objective of preventing any further attacks on the united states by terrorists enjoying safe haven or support in afghanistan. .

for years , some analysts have challenged that line of reasoning , describing it as a strategic "myth" and arguing that "the safe haven fallacy is an argument for endless war based on unwarranted worst - case scenario assumptions. .

some of these analysts and others dismiss what they see as a disproportionate focus on the military effort , citing evidence that "the terror threat to americans remains low" to argue that "a strategy that emphasizes military power will continue to fail. .

core issues for congress in afghanistan include congress's role in authorizing , appropriating funds for , and overseeing u.s. military activities , aid , and regional policy implementation .

additionally , members of congress may examine how the united states can leverage its assets , influence , and experience in afghanistan , as well as those of afghanistan's neighbors and international organizations , to encourage more equal , inclusive , and effective governance .

congress also could seek to help shape the u.s. approach to talks with the taliban , or to potential negotiations aimed at altering the afghan political system , through oversight , legislation , and public statements .

how afghanistan fits into broader u.s. strategy is another issue on which members might engage , especially given the administration's focus on strategic competition with other great powers .

some recognize fatigue over "endless wars" like that in afghanistan but argue against a potential u.s. retrenchment that could create a vacuum russia or china might fill .

others describe the u.s. military effort in afghanistan as a "peripheral war," and suggest that "the billions being spent on overseas contingency operation funding would be better spend on force modernization and training for future contingencies. .

appendix a .

historical timeline , 1747-2001 this timeline briefly describes the major political and military events that have shaped afghanistan's modern trajectory from the durrani empire to the u.s. invasion in 2001 .

appendix b. soviet war in afghanistan the soviet union's invasion of , and withdrawal from , afghanistan has emerged as a frequently referenced possible historical analogue for the u.s. experience there .

while there are clear and dramatic differences between the u.s. and soviet experiences in afghanistan , they also share some similarities that are of potential value in assessing various u.s. policy options .

the soviet union deployed troops into afghanistan in december 1979 to buttress the communist people's democratic party of afghanistan ( pdpa ) government , which had been established after the 1978 saur ( april ) revolution .

growing instability in afghanistan , including a nascent grassroots popular uprising against the pdpa's reform program and factional fighting within the pdpa , led soviet leaders to order the initial invasion of about 80,000 soviet troops , which quickly took control of urban centers , major lines of communication , and other strategic points .

soviet troops , which numbered over 100,000 at their peak , partnered with afghan government forces and various paramilitaries but generally bore the brunt of fighting against armed opposition groups , collectively known as the mujahideen .

mujahideen groups , supported by pakistan , the united states , saudi arabia , and others , led a guerilla campaign against soviet and afghan government forces characterized by sabotage operations , attacks against military and government sites , and attacks against some civilian targets .

the soviet effort was not just military in nature .

the ussr also "sent thousands of technical specialists and political advisors" to afghanistan to "help stabilize the government and broaden its base of support," though these missions were often undermined by "infighting and lack of coordination among advisers and other soviet officials. .

by 1985 , newly installed soviet leader mikhail gorbachev had decided to seek a withdrawal from afghanistan .

soviet military losses were substantial ( around 13,000 soviet troops killed and 40,000 wounded over the course of the decade - long intervention ) , but experts disagree about the extent to which these casualties motivated the decision to withdraw .

other reasons cited include international isolation , the economic cost of the war effort , the potential for political unrest within the ussr , and the greater importance gorbachev placed on his reform program .

increasingly , soviet attention turned to both pressuring squabbling afghan leaders to unify and building up the afghan military , which suffered from high rates of desertion , attrition , and casualties .

u.n. - mediated talks in geneva between delegations from the governments of afghanistan ( supported by the ussr ) and pakistan ( supported by the u.s. ) began in march 1982 and continued fitfully until the signing of the geneva accords in april 1988 .

the soviet withdrawal began in may , per the accords , and finished on february 15 , 1989 , when the last soviet soldier crossed back into the soviet union ( now uzbekistan ) from afghanistan .

in late 1988 , some soviet officials advocated maintaining a residual force in afghanistan , citing violations of the geneva accords by pakistan , and the withdrawal was briefly paused .

however , the united states and pakistan , perceiving that the soviet impulse to pull out would trump concerns about the post - withdrawal political situation , maintained aid to the mujahideen and "the bluff failed to work. .

mujahideen forces , as a nonstate movement , were excluded from u.n. negotiations and continued to receive support from the united states , pakistan , and other backers after the soviet withdrawal , as the afghan government continued to receive military and financial support from moscow .

with this support , the afghan government ( led by najibullah ahmadzai , commonly known by his first name ) defied expectations among some in the u.s. that it would quickly collapse after the soviet pullout and maintained its position for several years .

in september 1991 , as the soviet union was being engulfed in a major political crisis that would eventually lead to its dissolution in december 1991 , soviet and u.s. officials announced a final cutoff in their countries' support to their respective clients , effective january 1992 .

with the help of key defections including current vice president abdul rashid dostum , m ujah i deen and other afghan groups displaced najibullah in april 1992 , and the country sank into a civil war from which the taliban would emerge and eventually take control of most of the country .

upon their entry to kabul in september 1996 , one of the taliban's first acts was to torture and publicly hang najibullah .

appendix c. u.s. reconstruction assistance to afghanistan ( sigar ) .

