article iii , section i of the constitution provides that the "judicial power of the united states , shall be vested in one supreme court , and in such inferior courts as the congress may from time to time ordain and establish. .

consequently , congress determines through legislative action both the size and structure of the federal judiciary .

for example , the size of the federal judiciary is determined , in part , by the number of u.s. circuit and district court judgeships authorized by congress .

congress has , at numerous times over the years , authorized an increase in the number of such judgeships in order to meet the workload - based needs of the federal court system .

the judicial conference of the united states , the national policymaking body of the federal courts , makes biennial recommendations to congress to assist it in identifying any u.s. circuit and district courts that may be in need of additional judgeships .

the most recent recommendations for new u.s. circuit and district court judgeships were released by the judicial conference in march 2019 .

congress first exercised its constitutional power to determine the size and structure of the federal judiciary with passage of the judiciary act of 1789 .

the act authorized 19 judgeships , 13 for district courts and 6 for the supreme court .

congress , however , began expanding the size of the judiciary almost immediately—adding two additional district court judgeships in 1790 and another in 1791 .

while congress is constitutionally responsible for determining the size and structure of the federal judiciary , the judiciary itself can recommend legislation that alters or affects the size and structure of the federal court system .

this includes legislation to increase the number of u.s. circuit and district court judgeships ( and to identify which judicial circuits and districts are most in need of new judgeships ) .

the judicial conference of the united states , the national policymaking body for the federal courts , is the institutional entity within the judiciary that is responsible for making the judiciary's recommendations for new judgeships .

the judicial conference may recommend to congress that new judgeships be either permanent or temporary .

additionally , the judicial conference may recommend that a temporary judgeship be extended or converted into a permanent one , or that a judgeship serving multiple districts be assigned to a single judicial district or dual districts .

the judicial conference makes its judgeship recommendations biennially , typically in march or april at the beginning of a new congress .

the judicial conference's most recent recommendations to congress for new circuit and district court judgeships were made in march 2019 .

the conference recommended that congress authorize 5 new circuit court judgeships and 65 new permanent district court judgeships ( as well as convert 8 existing temporary district court judgeships to permanent status ) .

as discussed above , congress determines through legislative action the size of the federal judiciary .

consequently , creating additional u.s. circuit and district court judgeships requires congressional authorization of such judgeships .

such authorization can be accomplished by passing legislation devoted solely to judgeships ( i.e. , "omnibus judgeships bills" ) or by including the authorization in an appropriations bill or other legislative vehicle .

congress may decide not to authorize additional circuit and district court judgeships .

if congress were to authorize such judgeships , it has several options available to it .

these include ( but are not limited to ) the following: adopting all of the most recent recommendations of the judicial conference by creating 5 additional permanent judgeships for the ninth circuit and 65 additional permanent judgeships for the district courts specified by the conference ( as well as converting 8 temporary district court judgeships to permanent status ) .

adopting , in part , the recommendations of the judicial conference by creating additional permanent circuit and / or district court judgeships for some of the courts identified by the conference's biennial review process as needing additional judgeships .

adopting , in part , the conference's recommendations by authorizing new judgeships only for the six u.s. district courts identified by the conference as having the most urgent need for such judgeships .

it might also include only adopting the conference's recommendations for converting eight temporary judgeships to permanent status .

as presented in table 1 , each of the current temporary judgeships is set to lapse in 2020 if not further extended or made permanent by congress .

authorizing new judgeships for circuit and / or district courts that were not recommended for additional judgeships by the judicial conference ( such judgeships might be permanent or temporary ) .

congress might conclude on the basis of its own review that there is a need for such judgeships in other courts not included in the conference's most recent recommendations .

for example , the judicial conference only assesses a circuit court's need for additional judgeships if at least a majority of active judges serving on the court approve of a request for additional judgeships .

congress may nonetheless decide to authorize additional judgeships for circuit courts where this threshold has not been met .

authorizing new judgeships for some of the courts recommended by the judicial conference as needing new judgeships , as well as authorizing new judgeships for other courts not included in the conference's most recent recommendations .

