this report compiles the final congressional votes on free trade agreements ( ftas ) , trade promotion authority ( tpa ) , and u.s membership to the world trade organization ( wto ) .

in the past 30 years , the united states has pursued bilateral , regional , and multilateral trade agreements in an attempt to liberalize markets and reduce trade and investment barriers .

congress has played a central role in shaping this trade policy .

congress—through debate and legislation—defines trade negotiation priorities , approves ftas , and helps oversee agreements' implementation and enforcement .

while the president has the authority to negotiate treaties with foreign countries , congress has sole constitutional authority to regulate international trade .

since 1934 , congress has periodically delegated some authority to negotiate trade agreements to the president .

in the trade act of 1974 , congress outlined many of the congressional and executive roles regarding trade agreements ; congress delegated negotiation authority to the president , but required congressional approval ( through implementation legislation ) of free trade agreements .

congress also created a process to allow for expedient consideration in congress of ftas , provided that the president observe certain statutory requirements .

this expedient consideration is known as tpa or , formerly , "fast - track" consideration .

the united states is currently party to 12 bilateral ftas ( with australia , bahrain , chile , colombia , israel , jordan , south korea , morocco , oman , panama , peru , and singapore ) and to 2 regional free trade agreements ( the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) and the dominican republic - central america - united states free trade agreement ( cafta - dr ) ) .

the united states has also signed an agreement with canada and mexico to replace nafta .

the united states - mexico - canada agreement ( usmca ) has been ratified by all three parties , and the agreement will enter into force , after the necessary legal and regulatory measures are in place for each party to meet its commitments .

for a list and timeline of trade agreements where negotiations were concluded , see table 1 .

for a compilation of final congressional votes on ftas considered in congress , see table 2 .

in addition to bilateral and regional ftas , the united states is also party to multilateral agreements that outline membership in the wto , a 164-member international organization .

the wto was created in 1995 to oversee and administer multilateral trade rules , serve as a forum for trade liberalization negotiations , and resolve trade disputes .

when congress approved the wto uruguay round agreement , it included a set of procedures to allow congress to reconsider u.s. membership in the wto by passing a joint resolution calling for withdrawal from the organization .

congress may vote every five years on withdrawal from the wto .

resolutions were introduced in the 106 th and 109 th congress ; neither passed .

see table 3 for a compilation of major legislation and votes concerning u.s. membership to the wto .

all u.s. ftas , except the agreement with jordan , were considered in congress under trade promotion authority ( tpa ) .

tpa is the process by which congress enables fta legislation to be considered under expedited legislative procedures , provided the president observes certain statutory obligations .

because tpa is extended only for limited periods , congress periodically reconsiders legislation to extend it and to outline future negotiation objectives .

since 1974 , congress has passed seven measures extending tpa .

tpa , like many issues related to international trade , has been politically contentious in congress over time , resulting in vigorous debate and two multi - year lapses in authority .

for a list of major votes on tpa , see table 4 .

congressional consideration of bills can be a complex process , sometimes requiring multiple votes .

for clarity's sake , this report only provides the final vote for each measure .

more complete bill information can be found on congress.gov—including roll call votes for all legislation back to 1993 .

the bill numbers listed in the following tables link to congress.gov , and the vote tallies link to the house and senate roll call votes , for all votes back to 1993 .

table 1 provides a timeline of trade agreements including the date the agreement was signed , the date implementing legislation was enacted , and the date the agreement went into force .

the table also notes the tpa legislation under which the trade agreement was considered in congress .

the table includes fully implemented trade agreements , as well as two recent agreements: the usmca , which has not yet entered into force , and the trans - pacific partnership , a trade agreement that the united states signed , but later announced that it would not ratify .

table 2 provides major votes on ftas , including the final house and senate votes on fta implementing legislation .

table 3 provides major votes on u.s. membership to the wto , including implementing legislation for multilateral agreements and resolutions calling for the united states to withdraw from the wto .

table 4 provides major votes on tpa legislation .

it includes the final house and senate votes on tpa - related provisions .

votes are grouped by the trade agreement authority granted to the president .

for a selected list of crs products on ftas and tpa , see the appendix .

crs in focus if10297 , tpp - trade promotion authority ( tpa ) timeline , by ian f. fergusson crs report r43491 , trade promotion authority ( tpa ) : frequently asked questions , by ian f. fergusson and christopher m. davis crs report rl33743 , trade promotion authority ( tpa ) and the role of congress in trade policy , by ian f. fergusson crs infographic ig10001 , trade promotion authority ( tpa ) and u.s. trade agreements , by brock r. william .

crs report r45198 , u.s. and global trade agreements: issues for congress , by brock r. williams crs report r44981 , nafta and the united states - mexico - canada agreement ( usmca ) , by m. angeles villarreal and ian f. fergusson .

crs in focus if10997 , u.s. - mexico - canada ( usmca ) trade agreement , by m. angeles villarreal and ian f. fergusson crs legal sidebar lsb10399 , usmca: implementation and considerations for congress , by nina m. hart crs in focus if10733 , u.s. - south korea ( korus ) fta , coordinated by brock r. williams crs report rl34470 , the u.s. - colombia free trade agreement: background and issues , by m. angeles villarreal and edward y. gracia crs report rs22164 , dr - cafta: regional issues , by clare ribando seelke crs in focus if10394 , dominican republic - central america - united states free trade agreement ( cafta - dr ) , by m. angeles villarreal crs insight in10903 , crs products on the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , by m. angeles villarreal crs in focus if10000 , tpp: overview and current status , by brock r. williams and ian f. fergusso .

crs report r45417 , world trade organization: overview and future direction , coordinated by cathleen d. cimino - isaac .

