small businesses are owned by and employ a wide variety of entrepreneurs—skilled trade technicians , medical professionals , financial consultants , technology innovators , and restaurateurs , among many others .

as do large corporations , small businesses rely on loans to purchase inventory , to cover cash flow shortages that may arise from unexpected expenses or periods of inadequate income , or to expand operations .

the federal reserve has reported that lending to small businesses declined during the great recession of 2007-2009 .

during the recession , many firms scaled down operations in anticipation of fewer sales , and lenders also tightened lending standards .

a decade after the recession , evidence on whether lending to small business has increased is arguably inconclusive .

some small firms may be able to access the credit they need ; however , others may still face credit constraints , and still others may be discouraged from applying for credit .

furthermore , drawing direct conclusions about small business access to credit can be difficult because available data are limited and fragmented .

congress has demonstrated an ongoing interest in small business loans ( sbls ) , viewing small businesses as a medium for stimulating the economy and creating jobs .

congress's interest in small business credit access generally focuses on ( 1 ) whether small businesses can secure credit from private lenders and ( 2 ) whether small businesses can obtain such credit at fair and competitive lending rates .

in other words , policymakers are interested in whether market failures exist that impede small business access to credit and , if so , what policy interventions might be warranted to address those failures .

market failures , in economics and specifically in the sbl market context , refer to barriers that impede credit allocation by private lenders .

for example , some lenders may be reluctant to lend to businesses with collateral assets ( eg , inventories ) that are difficult to liquidate , as may be typical of some small businesses ( eg , restaurants ) .

under certain financial or regulatory circumstances , small loans may not generate sufficient returns to justify their origination costs , which also may be considered a market failure .

in addition , market failures may exist when borrowers pay noncompetitive lending rates in excess of their default risk .

start - ups and some small businesses that provide niche products frequently must rely on mortgage or consumer credit or private equity investors rather than more traditional sbls because lenders find it challenging to price loans for these firms , which could be another indicator of sbl market failure .

obtaining conclusive evidence on sbl market performance in terms of quantities and pricing is difficult for several reasons .

first , there is no consensus definition of a small business across government and industry .

moreover , as the federal reserve stated , "fully comprehensive data that directly measure the financing activities of small businesses do not exist. .

drawing conclusions about the availability and costs of sbls is not possible using existing data sources , which lack information such as the size and financial characteristics of the businesses that apply for credit , the types of loan products they seek , the types of lenders to whom they applied for credit , and which credit requests were rejected and which were approved .

second , the risks small business owners take are not standardized and vary extensively across industries and locations .

for this reason , determining whether sbl prices ( lending rates and fees ) are competitive is difficult without standardized benchmark prices that can be used to compare the relative prices of other sbls .

to address sbl market failures , congress passed legislation to facilitate lending to small businesses that are likely to face hurdles obtaining credit .

for example , the small business act of 1953 ( p.l .

83-163 ) established the small business administration ( sba ) , which administers several types of programs to support capital access for small businesses that can demonstrate the inability to obtain credit at reasonable terms and conditions from private - sector lenders .

the community reinvestment act ( cra ; p.l .

95-128 ) encouraged banks to address persistent unmet small business credit demands in low - and moderate - income ( lmi ) communities .

the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ; p.l .

111-203 ) required the bureau of consumer financial protection ( cfpb ) to collect data from small business lenders to identify the financing needs of small businesses , especially those owned by women and minorities .

 ( the cfpb has not yet implemented this requirement. ) .

in addition , various bills addressing the sbl market have been introduced in the 116 th congress .

for example , h.res .

370 would express "the sense of the house of representatives that small business owners seeking financing have fundamental rights , including transparent pricing and terms , competitive products , responsible underwriting , fair treatment from financing providers , brokers , and lead generators , inclusive credit access , and fair collection practices. .

h.r .

3374 would amend the equal credit opportunity act to require the collection of small business loan data related to lgbtq - owned businesses .

h.r .

1937 and s. 212 , the indian community economic enhancement act of 2019 , among other things , would require the government accountability office to assess and quantify the extent to which federal loan guarantees , such as those provided by the sba , have been used to facilitate credit access in these communities .

this report examines th e difficulty of assessing and quantifying market failures in the sbl market , which consists of small business borrowers ( demanders ) and lenders ( suppliers ) .

it begins by reviewing various ways to define a small business , illustrating that there is no consensus definition of the demand side of the sbl market across government or industry .

the focus then shifts to describing the supply side—namely the types of lenders that lend to small businesses , as well as their lending business models and practices .

the report subsequently attempts to identify credit shortages in certain sbl market segments ( eg , the market for small loans , loans for businesses with risky or unsuitable collateral , and loans for businesses in underserved communities ) .

it also examines whether market failures associated with sbl pricing can be identified .

finally , the report concludes by briefly discussing the dodd - frank act requirement that the cfpb collect data to facilitate the understanding of sbl market activity .

there is no universally accepted definition of a small business .

the federal government and industry define small businesses differently in different circumstances .

although factors such as annual earnings , number of employees , type of business , and market share are typically considered , determining the universe of small businesses from which to collect data is difficult without a consensus definition .

if a consensus definition existed , then identifying a small business for data - collection purposes would become more feasible—for example , a concise question on a loan application might identify whether the business applying for the loan met certain defined factors making it a small business .

below are examples of the ways regulators , researchers , congress , and industry have defined small businesses: the sba defines a small business primarily by using a size standards table it compiles and updates periodically .

the table lists size thresholds for various industries by either average annual receipts or number of employees .

the sba also defines small businesses differently for different sba programs .

for example , the sba's 7 ( a ) , certified development company / 504 , and small business investment company ( sbic ) programs have alternative size standards based on tangible net worth and average net income .

academic research frequently uses a firm that has 500 employees or fewer ( but does not monopolize an industry ) as a proxy measure for a small business .

this definition has been adopted by various federal agencies , such as the u.s. census bureau , the bureau of labor statistics , and the federal reserve .

in addition , some research views microbusinesses as a subset of small businesses .

a common academic definition of a microbusiness is a firm with only one owner , five employees or fewer , and annual sales and assets under $250,000 .

small business definitions in statute also vary .

for example , the internal revenue service ( irs ) sets different size standards for small businesses under various tax laws .

the irs provides certain tax forms for self - employed taxpayers and small businesses with assets under $10 million .

the patient protection and affordable care act of 2010 ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 ) , however , defined a small business in multiple ways ( eg , fewer than 50 full - time employees to avoid aca's employer shared responsibility provision ; fewer than 25 full - time equivalent employees for tax credits , etc. ) .

according to a federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) survey , small and large banks have their own definitions of a small business .

small banks ( defined as banks with $10 billion or less in assets ) view a small business as one in which the owner "wears many hats," referring to an owner who performs multiple tasks , perhaps because the firm is a start - up or still in its early growth stage .

large banks define small businesses more formally , in terms of annual revenues and sales .

this section provides background on small business lenders and underwriting practices .

although small businesses rely on a variety of credit sources that include personal ( consumer or mortgage ) credit , family , friends , and crowd - funding , they also rely on various types of financial institutions ( banks and nonbanks ) .

financial institutions vary in how they are regulated , the business models they adopt , the types of loans they offer , and the growth stages of the small businesses they serve .

these differences are all factors involved when evaluating whether shortages exist in the sbl market .

some lenders are increasingly using business credit scores to assess creditworthiness , and they may deny sbls due to either a lack of or poor business credit history .

the sba since 2014 has also relied upon credit scores to qualify applicants for its 7 ( a ) loan program .

in 2016 , the small business american dream gap report found that many businesses failed to understand their business scores or even know that they had one .

the text box below summarizes the information used to compute credit scores specifically for businesses .

this section attempts to find evidence of market failures that may be addressed by policy interventions .

the specific areas of potential concern are ( 1 ) whether the lending industry is providing enough small loans for small businesses ; ( 2 ) whether certain small businesses lack the type of collateral that lenders require to secure the loans ; ( 3 ) whether the amount of credit provided in low - and moderate - income ( lmi ) communities is insufficient ; and ( 4 ) whether the price of credit is too expensive for small businesses .

the dodd - frank act requires financial institutions to compile , maintain , and report information concerning credit applications made by women - owned , minority - owned , and small businesses .

this data collection is intended to "facilitate enforcement of fair lending laws" and to "enable communities , governmental entities , and creditors to identify business and community development needs and opportunities of women - owned , minority - owned , and small businesses. .

the dodd - frank act authorizes the cfpb to collect various data from financial institutions about the credit applications they receive from small businesses , including the number of the application and date it was received ; the type and purpose of loan or credit applied for ; the amount of credit applied for and approved ; the type of action taken with regard to each application and the date of such action ; the census tract of the principal place of business ; the business's gross annual revenue ; and the race , sex , and ethnicity of the business's principal owners .

on may 10 , 2017 , the cfpb announced that it was seeking public comment about the small business financing market , including relevant business lending data used and maintained by financial institutions and the costs associated with the collection and reporting of data .

specifically , the cfpb requested information on five categories: " ( 1 ) small business definition , ( 2 ) data points , ( 3 ) financial institutions engaged in business lending , ( 4 ) access to credit and financial products offered to businesses , and ( 5 ) privacy. .

with respect to definition , the cfpb sought comment on the best definition of a small business and the burden of collecting data under that definition .

in addition , the cfpb requested information on what data financial institutions should be required to collect and report , and which institutions should be exempted .

the cfpb also requested feedback on product types offered to small businesses because the variety of terms and loan covenants that can be used to tailor loans , in addition to the interest rate , are part of the overall cost ( price ) of credit .

the comment period closed on september 14 , 2017 .

the cfpb has not yet issued a proposed rule , but it recently announced that such a rule was part of its spring 2019 regulatory agenda .

evaluating the small business lending market's overall performance ( in terms of market failures ) would be easier with less fragmented , more complete data .

collecting data , however , poses challenges for the cfpb and industry lenders .

first , the equal credit opportunity act prohibits the collection of race and gender information , thus increasing the difficulty for the cfpb to implement a rule that would require such reporting .

in addition , the collection and reporting of sbl data would likely need to be converted to a digital format .

the fixed costs to implement digital reporting systems could be relatively larger for small financial institutions than for large institutions .

large institutions have more customers ( to justify the initial expense ) and offer a more limited range of standardized products .

depending upon the collection requirements eventually implemented , some institutions might decide to offer more standardized , less tailored financial products to reduce reporting costs .

it is possible that more financial institutions may require minimum loan amounts ( eg , exit the loan market delineated as $100,000 and below ) to ensure that the loans generate enough revenue to cover the costs to fund and report data .

from an economics viewpoint , the ability to evaluate the performance of various sbl market segments—specifically whether ( 1 ) a small business credit shortage exists or ( 2 ) pricing for loans to small businesses is significantly above the lending risks and funding costs—is extremely challenging .

policymakers have been interested in whether market failures that impede small business access to capital exist and , if so , what policy interventions might address those market failures .

however , it is difficult to discern which policy interventions would be most well - suited to addressing potential small business credit market failures without better data about the market itself .

arriving at more definitive conclusions about the availability and costs of sbls might be possible with information such as the size and financial characteristics of the businesses that apply for loans , the types of loan products they request , the type of lenders to whom they applied , and which applications were approved and rejected .

collecting the necessary data , however , presents both legal and cost challenges .

