t he current september 11 th victim compensation fund ( vcf ) provides cash benefits to certain persons whose health may have been affected by the aftermath of the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks on the pentagon and the world trade center , and the terrorist - related aircraft crash at shanksville , pa .

the current iteration of the vcf may be unable to pay full benefits to eligible persons and is scheduled to sunset on december 18 , 2020 .

current vcf data are provided in this report's appendix .

on september 22 , 2001 , the air transportation safety and system stabilization act ( atssa ; p.l .

107-42 ) was enacted into law .

quickly passed by congress in the wake of the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , this legislation provided various forms of relief to the american airline industry and affirmed congress's commitment to improving airline safety .

title iv of the atssa also established the vcf to compensate persons injured or the representatives of persons killed in the attacks or their immediate aftermath .

the vcf originally closed in 2003 and was reopened in 2011 and expanded to provide compensation to responders to the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks and others , such as certain new york city residents , who may have suffered health effects in the aftermath of the attacks .

the vcf was reauthorized in 2015 and , if not reauthorized in the 116 th congress , will sunset on december 18 , 2020 .

the costs of vcf benefits and administration are not subject to annual appropriations .

rather , costs for group a benefits and administration were financed by the $2.775 billion in appropriations provided by the zadroga act .

costs for group b benefits and administration are financed by the one - time appropriation of $4.6 billion provided in the zadroga reauthorization act of 2015 .

thus , the total funding available for the vcf since its reopening is $7.375 billion .

funding was made exempt from budget sequestration by the zadroga reauthorization act of 2015 .

total funding for vcf benefits and administrative costs is capped by the $7.375 billion in appropriations that have been provided in the zadroga act and zadroga reauthorization act of 2015 , with a total cap of $4.6 billion for vcf group b awards .

the vcf statute requires the special master to annually reassess vcf policies and procedures to determine if these policies and procedures satisfy the statutory requirements that claimants with the most debilitating physical conditions have their claims prioritized and that total expenditures for awards and administrative costs associated with group b claims do not exceed the $4.6 billion in available funding .

the vcf is scheduled to sunset on december 18 , 2020 .

the 116 th congress faces the question of whether to reauthorize the program or let it expire .

on june 12 , 2019 , the house committee on the judiciary ordered that h.r .

1327 , the never forget the heroes: permanent authorization of the september 11 th victim compensation fund act , be reported .

identical legislation , s. 546 , is pending committee action in the senate .

this reauthorization legislation includes the following major components: authorization for the vcf through fy2090 , with a deadline of october 1 , 2089 , to file claims ; removal of the cap on vcf funding ; appropriations of "such sums as may be necessary" for the vcf for each fiscal year through fy2090 ; payment of the difference between the full award and the actual amount received for all persons who received reduced awards due to the special master's actions ; authority for the special master to exceed the limit on noneconomic loss if it is determined that a person's pain and suffering is of such severity as to make the award "insufficiently compensatory" ; and a cost of living adjustment , to be made every five years , to the maximum amount of annual income permitted to be considered by the special master when determining economic loss ( currently $200,000 ) .

the reauthorization legislation would not make any changes to the basic eligibility for vcf awards .

the legislation also would not specifically address the three drivers of increased vcf costs that the special master identified in her 2019 congressional testimony: ( 1 ) increases in death claims , ( 2 ) cancer claims , and ( 3 ) claims from non - responders .

however , because this legislation would provide full funding for the vcf not subject to annual appropriations , any increases in program costs would not result in the vcf having insufficient funding to pay all benefits .

the congressional budget office has estimated that this legislation , if enacted , would result in $6.785 billion in direct spending on benefits and administration between fy2019 and fy2024 and $10.180 billion in spending between fy2019 and fy2029 .

on july 12 , 2019 , the house of representatives passed h.r .

1327 with the following amendments: the bill's title was changed to the "never forget the heroes: james zadroga , ray pfeifer , and luis alvarez permanent authorization of the september 11 th victim compensation fund act" ; the appropriations of "such sums as may be necessary" for the vcf for each fiscal year through fy2090 is changed to include each fiscal year through fy2092 , and the deadline for filing claims is changed from october 1 , 2089 , to october 1 , 2090 ; the authority for the special master to exceed the limit on noneconomic loss is changed from requiring a determination that a person's pain and suffering is of such severity as to make the award "insufficiently compensatory" to a determination that the claim "presents special circumstances" ; the original bill's requirement that the special master apply a cost - of - living adjustment to the maximum amount of annual income permitted to be considered when determining economic loss ( currently $200,000 ) every five years was replaced with a provision requiring the special master to "periodically" adjust the limit "to account for inflation" ; a provision was added permitting the attorney general to appoint up to two deputy special masters and providing that the special master and the deputies serve at the pleasure of the attorney general ; and a provision was added specifying that the legislation's budgetary effects shall not be entered on the statutory or senate paygo scorecards , thus making the legislation exempt from paygo requirements that new legislative spending not increase the deficit .

