mozambique , in southeastern africa , faces political , economic , and security headwinds , some arguably related to the continuous domination of the state by the mozambique liberation front ( frelimo ) political party .

frelimo , a former armed liberation movement that fought for self - determination and freedom from portuguese colonial rule , has held a parliamentary majority since achieving independence in 1975 .

prior to a resurgence of political tensions and violence in 2013 between frelimo and renamo , a former armed rebel movement that is now the main opposition party , mozambique was widely viewed as having made a durable transition to peace after its postindependence civil war ( 1977-1992 ) .

it also made a transition , beginning in the late 1980s , from politically and economically centralized , one - party , socialist rule , to a multiparty democratic system underpinned by a largely market - based economy .

the development of large offshore natural gas reserves discovered in the country's north in 2010 is expected to lead to gas exports in the early to mid - 2020s and , together with rising exports of coal , to spur rapid economic growth and reverse a slump that began in 2016 .

this downturn was preceded by nearly two decades of post - civil war economic expansion underpinned , in part , by inflows of foreign direct investment ( fdi ) tied to large industrial projects .

mozambique has also received large inflows of foreign aid aimed at addressing its myriad development challenges .

while there has been marked progress in reducing poverty rates and raising a range of once very low socioeconomic indicators , most mozambicans ( see figure 1 ) have remained poor , and there are many unmet development needs .

there also have been regional and demographic disparities regarding access to the fruits of growth .

large fdi - driven industrial projects prioritized by the state , for instance , have helped speed macroeconomic growth rates , but often have provided relatively few jobs or economic gains for the general population .

corruption and elite use of political influence to accumulate private wealth also have grown over the post - civil war period ( see below ) , with worrisome implications for the economy and stability .

the post - 2015 economic decline followed disclosures that the government had failed to report to the international monetary fund ( imf ) over $2 billion in state - guaranteed debt , which violated the terms of mozambique's cooperation with the imf .

two foreign banks provided these loans , in an allegedly corrupt manner , to state - owned firms registered as private entities and controlled by state intelligence officials .

this set of events , known as the "hidden debt affair," has had far - reaching consequences .

it has spurred an ongoing major political scandal , mozambican and u.s. prosecutions , and aid suspensions by multiple donor governments ( albeit not by the united states ) .

along with broader indicators of corruption , the debt affair also has prompted some observers to question whether the state has the political will and capacity to administer effectively—and in the public interest—a large projected windfall of earnings from the energy sector .

the government recently requested imf technical assistance in undertaking an assessment of governance and corruption challenges .

the scandal also reduced mozambique's sovereign debt ratings and placed it in debt distress , reducing the state's access to credit needed for development projects and government operations .

as of late 2018 , mozambique's public debt totaled about $15.9 billion—110.5% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) —and the country was $1.2 billion in arrears .

mozambique also faces security challenges .

it is gradually overcoming a destabilizing political dispute spurred by long - standing renamo grievances over alleged electoral misconduct and continuous de facto frelimo control of the state .

the dispute turned into a low - level armed conflict between renamo and state forces between 2013 and late 2016 , when a temporary cease - fire was signed .

it was later extended .

in 2018 , the two parties signed political and military agreements to end their dispute , and in august 2019 they signed a permanent cease - fire prior to signing a comprehensive peace accord .

since late 2017 , the country also has faced a brutal insurgency by armed islamist extremists in its far north , in an area where large - scale gas development operations are underway .

trafficking of persons , wildlife , and illicit drugs , along with other organized crime activity , also poses security challenges .

mozambique enjoys cordial relations with the united states and receives sizable u.s. global health assistance , but has received relatively limited congressional attention since the early 2000s .

however , the country hosted congressional delegations in 2016 and 2018 that focused on such issues as u.s. health and wildlife aid and the renamo - frelimo conflict .

recent developments and policy challenges in mozambique have the potential to draw increased congressional attention .

these include increasing u.s. private - sector stakes in the energy sector , the implications of state corruption for the government's integrity and status as a u.s. development and investment partner , u.s. government counterterrorism concerns , and recovery from two powerful cyclones that hit the country in march and april 2019 .

the devastation caused by the cyclones has prompted an ongoing u.s. assistance response—funded at a level of $74 million as of may 31—in support of humanitarian needs and longer - term recovery efforts , alongside a broader international response .

 ( on these issues , see crs report r45683 , cyclones idai and kenneth in southeastern africa: humanitarian and recovery response in brief . ) .

mozambique gained independence in 1975 , after a long frelimo - led armed struggle against portuguese colonial rule .

in 1977 , renamo , a guerrilla group initially formed as a proxy of the white minority regime in rhodesia ( now zimbabwe ) , initiated attacks against the socialist frelimo - led state , sparking a civil war .

the war caused hundreds of thousands of deaths , social displacement , a mass refugee exodus into nearby countries , and widespread destitution .

these effects were exacerbated by natural disasters , as well as by frelimo's abortive attempts to control the economy , which prompted a turn toward economic liberalization in the late 1980s .

after internationally aided peace talks , a new constitution was ratified in 1990 .

peace accords signed in 1992 ended the war and , along with u.n. - aided peacebuilding efforts , paved the way for renamo's transformation into a political party and multiparty elections in 1994 .

postwar politics mainly have centered on intra - frelimo competition and polarized rivalry between frelimo , which has held an electoral majority since 1994 , and renamo .

broad public postwar support for reconciliation and peacebuilding initially led to a system of informal bargaining among political elites over policymaking , giving renamo influence that it might not otherwise have had .

over time , however , frelimo increasingly wielded its electoral majority , aided by its strong influence over the electoral system , to marginalize renamo .

the country's constitution , which concentrates executive power in the office of the directly elected president , augmented frelimo's power , as did its influence over the economy and fdi flows .

this was notably the case under former president armando guebuza ( in office 2005-2015 ) , a frelimo hardliner who accrued substantial private wealth .

he centralized power in the presidency , appointed loyalists to state posts , and reportedly fostered an influential network of relatives and associates , many of whom used political ties to advance their business interests .

resentful of frelimo's continuous political and economic dominance and of not being allocated governorships in provinces where it claimed electoral majorities—and due to enduring bitterness over a narrow 1999 presidential election loss—renamo has routinely engaged in a politics of obstruction and protest .

it has repeatedly boycotted elections or parliament , usually citing electoral grievances , and periodically it has threatened to withdraw from the political process or resort to violence to achieve its aims .

afonso dhlakama—renamo's sole postwar leader until his death in 2018—spearheaded this approach , to mixed effect .

while renamo's approach periodically won it concessions , such as incremental electoral reforms , dhlakama often appeared to overplay his hand , making weighty demands that the frelimo government often rejected , either outright or after parliamentary debate .

renamo was also considered to be afflicted by internal divisions , poor organization , and erratic leadership under dhlakama .

he also thwarted the emergence of rivals within the party , which helped spur the formation in 2009 of the democratic movement of mozambique ( mdm ) by renamo dissidents led by daviz simango , the mayor of beira , a key city .

the mdm became the third - largest party in parliament in 2009 and nearly doubled its gains in the 2014 election .

it also won four city elections in 2013 , but lost all but beira in 2018 .

until 2013 , periodic warnings by renamo that it might resort to coercion or violence to achieve its aims remained only threats , notwithstanding many small - scale , mostly unarmed confrontations between its supporters and authorities .

its potential to employ the force of arms , however , was always a risk , as the 1992 peace accords had permitted dhlakama to maintain an armed personal protection unit with police - like powers .

renamo also has long held the loyalty of ex - fighters who were not integrated into the national military at the end of the war , some with access to civil war - era arms caches and abiding postwar reintegration grievances .

mozambique faces a growing security threat that is separate and distinct from the renamo - state conflict .

since october 2017 , members of an islamist extremist group have carried out many attacks in mostly muslim coastal districts of cabo delgado province , adjacent to tanzania .

the group is known locally as al shabaab ( "the youth" in arabic , and also the name of a separate al qaeda - linked somali group ) and as ansar al sunnah ( "defenders of the sunnah" [islamic prophetic tradition] ) or al sunnah wa jama'ah ( aswj , "adherents of the sunnah" ) .

the group , whose leadership and aims remain opaque , has targeted police stations , other state facilities and personnel , and local civilians—along with contractors working for the u.s. - based energy firm anadarko .

aswj attackers have raided provisions and arms and used arson to cause extensive destruction to village buildings and crops .

they often employ crude weapons , notably machetes , but also guns and explosives and have reportedly killed more than 300 people—often by beheading—spurring population displacements .

group members often reportedly target those they view as cooperating with the state .

several recent attacks attributed to aswj have killed significant numbers of state security forces , as well as civilians .

numerous insurgents have also been killed in clashes with security forces .

information on the group is limited and contested , as access to the affected area by journalists and researchers has been curtailed by insecurity largely viewed as attributable to the group and by systemic state obstruction and harassment of journalists in the area .

the group may include members of a violent islamist tanzanian movement and may have ties to the potentially islamic state ( is ) - linked allied democratic forces ( adf ) group in central africa ; several reported adf members from uganda with alleged links to aswj have been arrested in mozambique .

in may 2018 , several aswj members posted a social media video stating that they planned to pledge allegiance to is .

in 2019 , is has claimed responsibility for several attacks .

aswj was reportedly formed in 2014 by two or more local islamists , some of whom may have received military training abroad , and foreign african islamist extremists .

it may also have roots in a group formed by dissidents from the state - affiliated islamic council who formed a group called ansar al sunna in the late 1990s .

the group generally does not claim its attacks and has issued few statements about its goals .

some researchers report that the group espouses jihad ( armed struggle against perceived enemies of islam ) , the creation of a sharia ( islamic law ) - based state , and rejection of state institutions and services ( eg , education , taxation , and voting ) .

its ideas may be influenced by foreign islamist ideologies , and by trade and social ties to the swahili coast , a cultural - linguistic and religious region extending northward to southern somalia .

some accounts suggest that the group has been influenced , in particular , by sheikh aboud rogo mohammed , a kenyan preacher whose swahili - language teachings circulated widely in east africa .

rogo , who was subject to u.s. and u.n. sanctions for supporting somalia's al shabaab , was assassinated in 2012 .

aswj members reportedly initially proselytized locally to advance their beliefs and build a base of adherents , and later employed a mix of payments and coercion to recruit .

their activities attracted a mix of local opposition , including from the provincial officials of the national islamic council , and local support .

aswj reportedly has provided business loans and employment to locals in exchange for fealty to the group .

poor young males with limited education appear to be key targets , and aswj may sponsor the islamic education abroad of some .

some analysts contend that aswj , like many african islamist armed groups , largely comprises disaffected youth who may be influenced by islamist ideology but are driven primarily by anger over local grievances ( eg , economic disparities , limited or poor state services , and high unemployment ) .

other notably intense sources of local anger that the group may exploit include the loss of local agricultural and fishing livelihoods , the seizure of land by local and state elites , and nontransparency and corruption in compensation processes associated with the growth of the natural gas and gemstone mining industries .

other sources of local tension are rivalries , including over land and political party affiliation , between the mostly catholic makonde and mostly muslim mwani people , among other local ethnic groups .

some analysts believe that aswj is directly involved in illicit activity that is prevalent in the region .

others suggest that the group does "not control any major contraband trade" and that the "illicit economy as a whole provides varied opportunities" exploited by the group , which in the future could potentially become more deeply involved in illicit trafficking and other networks .

illicit activity in the affected region includes petty corruption ( eg , police and public services bribery ) , trafficking of heroin , persons , ivory and other poached wildlife items , gold , and gemstones , as well as illicit timber trade and an untaxed cross - border trade in consumer goods .

state officials are key reported beneficiaries of such trade .

state security forces' heavy - handed , arguably often ineffective responses to aswj violence also appear to have alienated local populations .

security forces reportedly often arrive at attack sites well after the insurgents have departed and arrest locals whom they identify as linked to the group , often on dubious grounds .

detainees have been beaten or treated inhumanely and illegally detained by military forces , or held by police without charges and beyond the legally permitted period .

some have reported torture , and there are unconfirmed reports of extrajudicial killings by security forces .

mass arrests , starting after aswj's october 2017 initiation of conflict , have been followed by mass trials of alleged perpetrators of aswj - linked crimes .

mozambique sustained rapid post - civil war growth: gdp grew by an annual average of 8.4% from 1993 , at the end of the war , through 2015 .

in 2016 , however , growth fell to 3.8% from 6.6% in 2015 , and in 2018 has slumped further , to 3.3% .

the imf has attributed this decline to weak global commodity prices , poor weather conditions , and "the issue of undisclosed loans in the spring of 2016 and the ensuing freeze in donor support. .

the renamo - government conflict also may have contributed to the slowdown , and the effects of the two cyclones in 2019 may further reduce growth in the short to medium term .

while mozambique's long period of post - civil war growth reduced extreme poverty , poverty rates generally remain high .

in 1996 , shortly after the war , 83% of the population lived on less than $1.90 a day ( the international comparative poverty line , as measured in constant 2011 dollars ) ; by 2014 ( when last measured ) 62.4% did so .

mozambicans have remained among the world's poorest people , with an estimated average gdp per capita of $476 in 2018 ( current dollars ) —the seventh - lowest globally , and down from a peak of $620 in 2014 .

in addition , income is unequally distributed .

similarly , while multiple social indicators have improved since the war ( eg , rates of child and maternal mortality and access to health care and education ) , they have advanced from a low starting point , and many remain poor by regional and global standards .

mozambique ranked 180 th among 189 countries assessed on the 2018 u.n. human development index ( hdi , a comparative statistical composite measure ) , and is making limited progress toward achieving most of the u.n .

sustainable development goals .

development gains may have remained limited due to a growth pattern in which fdi inflows have centered on large export - oriented industrial projects ( eg , bauxite smelting , power plants , mining , large - scale agriculture , and , recently , natural gas development ) .

while such projects have helped spur high aggregate gdp growth rates , they often have functioned as commercial enclaves with weak linkages to the broader economy .

many such projects have generated relatively few permanent jobs or other benefits for the general population , and some have enjoyed state policy favoritism and tax breaks that tend to benefit project investors , rather than society at large .

financial gains from such activities have strongly favored politically connected elites involved in such projects as investor intermediaries , technical experts , regulators , and local business partners .

some megaprojects , such as large mines , have resulted in loss of farmland and population displacements , sometimes to marginal areas where subsistence farming is difficult .

some large projects , however , may be starting to benefit the broader society , as with extractive sector investment in multiuse infrastructure ( eg , roads and railways ) .

the disjuncture between the local economy and megaproject activity is significant .

most mozambicans , an estimated 86% or more of the work force , make their living in the informal sector , often as subsistence and cash crop farmers , fishermen , and small - scale manufacturers and traders .

productivity within this large segment of the economy , however , is constrained by little access to credit , business training , or technical expertise .

youth unemployment is a particular challenge .

nearly 68% of mozambicans are age 25 or younger , and many young people from rural areas , home to 65% of the population in 2017 , often gravitate toward cities , where job growth has not kept up with increasing education and training rates—even though these are low .

mozambique's socioeconomic development gains have remained moderate , despite sizable inflows of net official development assistance ( oda ) .

such aid averaged $1.96 billion annually from 2008 through 2017 , making the country the 15 th - largest recipient globally in the period , during which the united states provided an average of $367 million annually ( 19% of net oda ) and was the largest bilateral donor .

the debt scandal is the highest - profile instance of corruption , but it is not unique .

corruption , both small - and large - scale , is "endemic ... particularly in the police , judiciary and civil service," but corruption prosecutions , especially of officials , are rare .

the country ranked 158 out of 180 countries on transparency international's corruption perceptions index 2018 , and its world bank worldwide governance indicators ( wgi ) rankings also have declined .

while the imf reports that mozambique has a "relatively comprehensive anti - corruption legislative framework," the institutional capacity to implement the framework has remained weak , as has judicial accountability .

heavy state involvement in multiple economic sectors , and nontransparency in state processes , contracting , and outcomes , the imf reports , also create opportunities for corruption and conflicts of interest , notably in the extractive sector .

a nexus also reportedly exists between public corruption , organized crime , and large black markets in goods .

drug trafficking has been reported to fund political party activity , and corruption may be tied to some political killings .

the analytical nonprofit global financial integrity ( gfi ) reports that illicit financial outflows ( i.e. , business bribery , tax evasion , money laundering , and trade and transfer mispricing / misinvoicing ) may have contributed as much as 48% of the country's trade with advanced economies in 2015 .

according to the state department , "[f]inancial fraud , especially tax evasion , and drug trafficking," alongside "misappropriation of state funds , kidnappings , human trafficking ... and wildlife trafficking," generate a large share of money laundering .

trafficking is facilitated by a "largely unpatrolled coastline , porous land borders , and a limited rural law enforcement presence," making the country a major corridor for flows of illicit goods .

drug trafficking is a notable challenge .

mozambique has long been and remains a transit point for illicit trafficking of heroin ( mostly from south asia , notably pakistan , via sea ) , cocaine ( from south america , via air ) , and precursor chemicals .

most narcotics are reportedly bound for south africa and other countries in the region , but some transit onward to europe and north america .

the heroin trade is especially well developed .

the volume trafficked through the country may total 40 tonnes or more a year and contribute $100 million or more to the local economy .

given the weakness of fiscal and anticorruption institutions , some observers have questioned whether the state has the political will and ability to effectively govern the large expected influx of gas revenue .

the government has taken some steps to address such challenges .

for instance , in 2009 , mozambique joined the extractive industries transparency initiative ( eiti ) , a voluntary international effort to make extractive industry revenue contracts and revenue payment and receipt data publicly accessible , and to increase related fiscal accountability .

the government plans to require beneficial ownership and business interest transparency , to establish a sovereign wealth fund to preserve and manage gas income , and to allocate a fixed share of gas revenue to fund infrastructure development , poverty reduction , and economic diversification .

bilateral relations are cordial , although the united states has expressed concern over the hidden debts affair—a concern underlined by the late 2018 u.s. doj indictment of several high - ranking mozambican officials in the matter .

stated u.s. policy goals in mozambique include democratic , transparent , and inclusive governance ; enhanced health and education ; sustainable economic growth , trade , poverty reduction , and investment ; and food security and access to nutrition .

u.s. aid programs also have sought to strengthen mozambique's ability to respond to transnational crime , including trafficking in persons , narcotics , and wildlife .

efforts to counter the growing extremist threat in an area that hosts large u.s. natural gas industrial operations are another growing priority .

the united states also is the leading bilateral donor in international efforts to address humanitarian and rebuilding needs caused by widespread destruction in central and northern areas hit by massive cyclones in early 2019 .

the state department projects that cyclone recovery may require billions of dollars in the years ahead .

the united states also supports efforts to reach a durable settlement between renamo and the government .

it is a member of the ad hoc international contact group on mozambique , which helps mediate between the two parties and includes the european union , china , botswana , the uk , norway , and switzerland ( the group's chair ) .

the united states also planned to deploy military observers to join a team that was to monitor implementation of the 2014 cease - fire , but never did , as the accord fell apart due to renamo's refusal to disarm .

cooperative bilateral ties were reflected in a five - year , $506.9 million millennium challenge corporation compact signed in 2007 and completed in 2013 .

the compact supported increased access to clean water and sanitation , transportation upgrades , land tenure improvements , and increased farmer income and production , primarily in northern mozambique .

in addition , a 196-volunteer member peace corps program supports education and health care projects .

according to the fy2020 state department budget request for mozambique , u.s. bilateral aid seeks to address key drivers of instability in northern mozambique , including ineffective local governance and government service delivery , and a pervasive lack of jobs , especially for youth .

assistance will help local institutions to transparently and effectively address citizens' basic needs ; support the government in providing high quality basic education services ; and catalyze private sector investment to help the large youth population develop workforce skills essential to participate in emerging economic opportunities .

u.s. nonemergency bilateral development aid totaled nearly $472 million in fy2018 appropriations .

of this , $428 million was for health programs , nearly $40 million for development activities , $0.7 million for international military education and training ( imet ) , and $3.6 million for food aid .

the trump administration requested $251.7 million in development aid for mozambique for fy2019 , of which it proposed to allocate 97% to health programs .

while congress has enacted fy2019 foreign aid appropriations , country allocations—which the administration and appropriators negotiate annually—have not yet been finalized .

the fy2020 request is for $403.5 million , of which health aid would compose 98.5% ( $397.5 million ) , with $5.6 million for other development activities and $0.5 million for imet .

health care programs have been the main focus of u.s. aid programs for years .

the bulk of funding has supported hiv / aids programming to address mozambique's high adult hiv prevalence rate of 12.5% ( 2017 ) .

most of this aid has been funded under the global health program ( ghp ) - state department account and administered under the u.s. president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) .

additional ghp - usaid funds support programs to combat malaria—the cause of roughly 29% of all deaths and 42% of deaths of children under the age of five—under the president's malaria initiative .

such funds also support programs to combat tuberculosis and enhance maternal and child health , family planning and reproductive health , and nutrition .

until fy2017 , agricultural development , mostly under the u.s. feed the future ( ftf ) initiative , was another priority area for u.s. aid .

ftf activities have focused on enhancing agricultural productivity , improving nutrition , and connecting farmers to markets , notably in north - central mozambique in areas with poor nutrition that contain or are near key trade corridors .

basic education was a key priority in fy2018 , with funding at $13.7 million , but requested funding for education decreased to $3.5 million in fy2019 and $3 million in fy2020 .

aid has also supported good governance programs , with a focus on building the capacity of civil society groups to engage in policy analysis and advocacy .

mozambique periodically receives some u.s .

fish and wildlife service funding , and usaid supports a range of wildlife law enforcement capacity building , conservation , and cbnrm programs .

in recent years , usaid has also supported coastal urban city governments' adaptation to rising sea levels and regional conservation and management , as in the limpopo river basin .

wildlife - centered programs aim to address widespread wildlife poaching , wildlife trafficking—both of wildlife from mozambique and that trafficked through mozambique to and from other countries—and the recovery of wildlife populations that in some areas were systematically depleted by hunting during the civil war .

in addition to being a key ivory source country , mozambique is a key regional wildlife trafficking transit country , notably of elephant ivory and rhino horn destined for asia .

other key species , including lions and other big cats , are also systematically poached in mozambique .

mozambique may enjoy substantial economic growth after expected gas exports begin in the mid - 2020s , and as coal exports rise , but the government may face significant challenges in effectively using those resources for the benefit of its people .

a range of governance challenges—including corruption , state institutional weaknesses , and an untested new system of political decentralization—may continue to hinder socioeconomic development .

the still - incomplete peace process between renamo and the government also poses a risk to stability , as does the geographically limited but extremely brutal extremist violence in the north .

the united states is providing assistance to help the country address these challenges , in addition to continuing to provide significant amounts of assistance for the health sector .

if recent - year aid allocation trends are maintained , such cooperation is likely to persist in the coming years .

