in fy2019 , an estimated 20 million veterans were living in the united states , of which 9.3 million were enrolled in care through the department of veterans affairs ( va ) .

chapter 17 of title 38 , u.s.c .

 , requires the va to provide health care services to eligible veterans through the veterans health administration ( vha ) of the va , which is one of the largest integrated health care systems in the united states .

the vha is composed of nearly 1,700 va medical facilities .

va care is not a health insurance program ; it is primarily a direct provider of care .

meeting veterans' demand for care has been challenging for the va .

some veteran patients who seek health care services from the vha experience barriers to receiving in - person care ; for example , by being unable to schedule va medical appointments in a timely manner or having to travel long distances to reach health care facilities .

in conjunction with the veterans choice program ( vcp ) , the recently enacted va maintaining internal systems and strengthening integrated outside networks act of 2018 ( va mission act ; p.l .

115-182 ) , and other measures that aim to expand veterans' access to care , the va has attempted to address barriers to in - person care using telehealth in va health care facilities .

according to the vha , telehealth refers to the use of health informatics , disease management and [t]elehealth technologies to enhance and extend care and case management to facilitate access to care and improve the health of designated individuals and populations with the specific intent of providing the right care in the right place at the right time .

to assist congress as it considers measures on va telehealth , this report provides an overview of va telehealth programs and requirements including veteran eligibility and enrollment criteria and va telehealth copayment requirements ; discusses va providers' authority to provide telehealth services anywhere ; discusses the components of va telehealth ; provides an overview of va teleconsultations ; discusses three issues that congress could choose to consider: ( 1 ) access barriers to in - person va care , ( 2 ) lack of access to the internet , and ( 3 ) conflicting guidelines for prescribing controlled substances via telehealth across state lines ; provides , in appendix a , a summary table with all abbreviations used in the report ; provides , in appendix b , the history of va telehealth and a high - level overview of at least one legislative provision that was enacted into law and aims to address va telehealth , beginning with the 109 th congress ; provides , in appendix c , a discussion on the va providers' authority to provide telehealth services anywhere ; and provides , in appendix d , the total number of veterans who received va telehealth services and the total number of telehealth encounters that transpired during each of the fiscal years fy2009-fy2018 .

on july 12 , 2016 , the va established the office of connected care ( occ ) within the vha .

the goal of occ is to "deliver [information technology ( it ) ] health solutions that increase a [v]eteran's access to care and supports a [v]eteran's participation in their health care. .

occ administers the following four va telehealth programs: 1 .

according to the va , va telehealth services "[improve] convenience to [v]eterans by providing access to care from their homes or local communities when they need it. .

2 .

my health e vetâ  is the web - based electronic health record ( ehr ) for veteran patients through which veterans can view , and download electronic protected health information ( ephi ) ; 3 .

vha innovation program is an annual competitive program that allows va staff and key stakeholders in the private sector to submit innovative ideas on enhancing va care ; and 4 .

va mobile health ( va mobile ) develops mobile apps .

for its telehealth programs , the va has requested an appropriation of $1.1 billion for fy2020 and an advanced appropriation of $1.7 billion for fy2021 .

va telehealth encompasses four general components: ( 1 ) the internet and wireless data , ( 2 ) telehealth modalities , ( 3 ) va mobile health , and ( 4 ) va teleconsultations .

each of these components is discussed below .

health informatics and data visualizations are not discussed because they are beyond the scope of this report .

the telehealth services that the va provides to veteran patients align with their respective va in - patient care services .

a va health care service does not change when a va provider delivers the service via telehealth .

for example , a veteran patient who chooses to access telemental health services via the vvc app on a mobile device would receive the same type of mental health services he or she would have received in - person .

according to the va secretary , the vha is the largest u.s. provider of telehealth services , having provided 2.29 million telehealth episodes of care to 782,000 veteran patients in fy2018 .

of those 782,000 veteran patients , 9% of them were female and 45% of them live in rural areas .

veteran patients can access a range of telehealth services through the vha .

these telehealth services can be grouped into the following seven categories , in alphabetical order: 1. consultative and evaluative telehealth services , 2. disease and illness - specific telehealth services , 3. gender - specific telehealth services , 4. preventative telehealth services , 5. rehabilitative telehealth services , 6. rural - specific telehealth services , and 7. wellness telehealth services .

according to the va , the agency will provide general va health care services to veteran patients and refer them to private health care providers for health care services that those providers provide "most effectively and efficiently. .

the va's decision to refer such services to the private sector might stem from the agency's shortage of va providers .

a veteran can access va telehealth services from various va sites of care , such as va medical facilities , mobile telehealth clinics , and non - va sites of care such as the homes , work places , and schools of veterans .

a veteran , who seeks va care , including va telehealth services at non - va medical facilities and nonfederal facilities from non - va providers , must receive prior authorization from the va before accessing such services .

the va generally authorizes a veteran to seek va care from a non - va provider when [the existing] va facilities or other government facilities are not capable of furnishing economical hospital care or medical services because of geographic inaccessibility or are not capable of furnishing care or services required .

the va continues to develop new telehealth services to meet the needs of veterans .

according to the va fy2019 funding and fy2020 advanced appropriations budget request to congress , for example , the comprehensive opioid management in patient aligned care teams ( compact ) team is "testing a telehealth - based self - management training system to promote improved care for [v]eterans receiving chronic opioid therapy. .

the va is leveraging the use of telehealth with the goal of expanding veterans' access to va care .

based on its experience with telehealth to date , the va has stated that increased access to telehealth could reduce the use of va travel benefits by veterans and reduce hospital admissions .

telehealth is not a new form of health care delivery .

it is a multibillion dollar industry in both the federal and private sectors , showing upward trends in telehealth access , utilization , innovation , and spending .

discussed below are three issues that congress may choose to examine while considering additional topics related to veterans and telehealth services: ( 1 ) access barriers to in - person va care continues to exist , ( 2 ) some veterans lack access to the internet , and ( 3 ) va providers' guidelines for prescribing controlled substances via telehealth are different .

according to the va , the agency cannot meet veterans' demand for va in - patient care .

congress and the va have considered measures and initiatives to expand veterans' access to va care using telehealth .

the expansion of va telehealth does not address the access barriers that veteran patients' face when seeking in - person va care .

instead , telehealth provides veterans with an alternate way to access health care services through the vha .

the va is predicting that the u.s. veteran population will decrease by 32%â€”from 20.0 million veterans in 2017 to 13.6 million veterans in 2037 .

this prediction does not equate to a lower number of veterans seeking , enrolling in , and accessing va care in the future .

for example , more than three - fourths of the 13.6 million veterans that the va projects will be in the u.s. veteran population in 2037 might choose to enroll in and access care through the va health care system .

congress may consider whether the va should continue to expand veterans' access to va in - person care in va brick - and - mortar buildings and / or through va telehealth services by assessing how such modes of delivery effect the cost and quality of care ( in addition to timely access ) .

the overarching goal of the mission act and va final rule on telemedicine is to expand veteran patients' access to care using telehealth .

the use of telehealth services requires that veteran patients have access to the internet to connect to va telehealth providers .

veteran patients who do not have readily accessible internet connections would likely have difficulty reaching their va providers .

according to the national center for veterans analysis and statistics ( ncvas ) , an estimated 20.1% of veterans did not have internet access in 2016 .

in april 2018 , for example , the gao found that some veterans who live on the u.s. pacific islands such as guam and american samoa , could not access the internet because of damaged cables and equipment failures that occurred during inclement weather .

the va is investigating ways to expand veteran patients' access to va telehealth services to address veterans' lack of access to the i nternet .

specifically , t he agency is evaluating the feasibility of non - va facilities ( eg , libraries , schools , and post offices ) serving as i nternet / online hotspots , and retaining va kiosks where veteran patients can access telehealth services .

congress and the president have responded to this divide by enacting measures such as the repack airwaves yielding better access for users of modern services act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ; ray baum's act of 2018 ) .

the ray baum's act of 2018 required , among other things , the federal communications commission ( fcc ) to submit a report to congress on promoting broadband internet access to veterans , particularly to rural veterans and veterans with low incomes .

the fcc submitted the report to the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation and the house committee on energy and commerce in may 2019 .

according to the fcc's report , the 2.2 million veteran households that do not have access to broadband internet experience barriers when adopting broadband such as the inability to pay for the service and the lack of broadband development in their geographic location .

in future discussions regarding this issue , congress may consider the costs associated with deploying broadband infrastructure in underserved geographic areas .

according to the va , some veteran patients are given tablets "that operate over 4g lte mobile broadband to support va video connect," where infrastructure is lacking .

congress continues to address concerns regarding the prescribing of controlled substances such as opioids .

the va mission act and the va's final rule do not address the prescribing of controlled substances to veteran patients who are not receiving services from within va medical facilities , or who are not in the same state as the prescribing physician , as permitted under the ryan haight online pharmacy consumer protection act of 2008 ( ryan haight act ; p.l .

110-425 ) .

section 311 ( h ) ( 1 ) of the controlled substance act ( csa ) , which was added by section 3 of the ryan haight act , authorized the special registration for telemedicine with the goal of increasing patients' access to practitioners that can prescribe controlled substances via telemedicine in limited circumstances .

current law defines a practitioner as a physician , dentist , veterinarian , scientific investigator , pharmacy , hospital , or other person licensed , registered , or otherwise permitted , by the united states or the jurisdiction in which he practices or does research , to distribute , dispense , conduct research with respect to , administer , or use in teaching or chemical analysis , a controlled substance in the course of professional practice or research .

the registration would enable a practitioner to deliver , distribute , dispense , or prescribe via telemedicine a controlled substance to a patient who has not been medically examined in person by the prescribing practitioner .

while the csa authorized the special registration for telemedicine , practitioners have not been able to apply for this special registration .

the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) has yet to finalize a rule on the registration's application process and procedures and the limited circumstances that warrant it .

the ryan haight act expressly exempts va providers and va - contracted providers from needing to obtain a special registration in each state where the providers choose to practice , if they meet two conditions .

first , the providers must prescribe the controlled substance within the scope of their employment at the va. second , the providers must either ( 1 ) hold at least one state registration to prescribe a controlled substance or ( 2 ) prescribe in a va health care facility while using the registration of that facility .

the special registration , though not implemented yet by the dea , the mission act , or the va's final rule on telehealth , might confuse va providers about whether they must hold a license in each state where they intend to prescribe controlled substances to veteran patients .

the special registration would allow a va provider to prescribe a controlled substance in a state where the provider is not licensed to practice .

the mission act and the va's final rule on telehealth , in contrast to the special registration , do not preempt state laws regarding the prescribing of controlled substances .

va providers must be licensed in each state where the provider intends to prescribe a controlled substance .

congress could consider encouraging the va to develop guidelines on how its providers would prescribe controlled substances to veteran patients who are not receiving telehealth services from within va health care facilities .

appendix a. abbreviations used in this report appendix b .

history of va telehealth for decades , the va has provided telehealth services to veteran patients to improve health care access and to address delivery challenges , such as shortages of in - patient beds and health care providers skilled in the delivery of veteran - centric care .

in the 1950s and 1960s , for example , the va had difficulties in recruiting psychiatrists and neurologists .

in fy1961 , there were 18,722 eligible veterans on a waiting list to receive va inpatient care for psychiatric and neurological health care conditions .

that same year , the va started testing the use of telehealth , with the goal of addressing the aforementioned challenges that veteran patients were experiencing when trying to access va in - person care for psychiatry and neurology services .

according to the va's annual report for fy1961 , the va tested the use of telehealth by using the closed - circuit television ( cctv ) technology as a telehealth modality .

the cctv technology refers to a system that "links a camera to a video monitor using a direct transmission system. .

va physicians and therapists at a va medical facility in oklahoma city , ok , had used the cctv technology to disseminate best practices and trainings on therapy and psychiatry with the goal of improving veteran patients' health care outcomes .

according to the va , its use of telehealth using the cctv technology was a success because [t]he results indicate that this form of communication can be a valuable tool in the treatment of psychiatric patients and in the training of personnel in psychiatric service .

in addition , it shows the potential in a number of other medical applications , such as , for example , an education technique in surgical training .

since then , the va has aimed to address veterans' access barriers to va in - person care using updated telehealth technologies and equipment , which are discussed under the " va telehealth components " heading in this report .

legislative history of va telehealth the congress has passed several laws that address va telehealth .

provided below is a high - level legislative history of va telehealth , to help inform any future congressional discussion on this issue .

for each congress , beginning with the 109 th ( january 3 , 2005 to january 3 , 2007 ) there is a brief narrative summarizing at least one legislative provision that aims to address va telehealth .

this list may not be comprehensive .

veterans benefits , health care , and information technology act of 2006 ( 109 th congress ) the veterans benefits , health care , and information technology act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-461 ) , among other things , required the va secretary to increase the number of va medical facilities that are capable of providing readjustment counseling services via telehealth .

veterans' mental health and other care improvements act of 2008 ( 110 th congress ) the veterans' mental health and other care improvements act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-387 ) , among other things , required the va secretary to develop a pilot program to assess the feasibility and advisability of providing certain veterans with peer outreach , peer support , readjustment counseling and other mental health services , using telehealth to the extent practicable .

caregivers and veterans omnibus health services act of 2010 ( 111 th congress ) the caregivers and veterans omnibus health services act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-163 ) , among other things , allows the va secretary to contract with community mental health centers and other qualified health entities with the goal of expanding veterans' access to va telehealth services .

honoring america's veterans and caring for camp lejeune families act of 2012 ( 112 th â  congress ) the honoring america's veterans and caring for camp lejeune families act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-154 ) , among other things , allows the va secretary to waive veteran patients' copay requirements for telehealth .

the veterans access , choice , and accountability act of 2014 ( 113 th congress ) the veterans access , choice , and accountability act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-146 ) , among other things , requires the va secretary to improve veterans' access to va telehealth via mobile vet centers and mobile medical facilities .

the faster care for veterans act of 2016 ( 114 th congress ) the faster care for veterans act of 2016 ( p.l .

114-286 ) , among other things , requires the va secretary to ensure that veteran patients can schedule their own medical appointments for va telehealth services .

john s. mccain iii , daniel k. akaka , and samuel r. johnson va maintaining internal systems and strengthening integrated outside networks act of 2018 ( 115 th congress ) the john s. mccain iii , daniel k. akaka , and samuel r. johnson va maintaining internal systems and strengthening integrated outside networks act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-182 ; va mission act of 2018 ) , among other things , removes all geographic barriers to va telehealth and therefore allows veterans to access va telehealth services in their communities from any location in the united states , u.s. territories , district of columbia , and commonwealth of puerto rico .

appendix c. va provider authority to provide telehealth services anywhere veteran patients who cannot access telehealth because of provider shortage gaps may benefit from having access to out - of - state telehealth providers in non - va health care facilities .

generally , states determine whether a health care provider can provide a health care service across state lines because states handle provider licensure .

each state has the authority to establish its own licensure requirements , and each state licensing board has its own eligibility requirements for health care providers .

due to state - specific licensing laws , a health care provider licensed and certified in one state may not be able to provide health care services to patients located in another state where the provider is not licensed .

state licensing laws can cause some health care providers to experience geographical and licensing - related barriers to providing health care services across state lines to rural and underserved populations .

on august 3 , 2017 , the white house and the va announced the anywhere to anywhere initiative , which aims to remove the geographic barriers that veterans might experience when accessing va care .

under this initiative , a veteran patient can access va telehealth services anywhere from a va provider located outside of a va health care facility .

the initiative is a joint effort between the vha , the white house office of american innovation , and the department of justice .

the va's attempt to expand veterans' access to va care via telehealth under this initiative was threatened by its providers' experiences of geographic and licensing barriers to delivering the services across state lines .

on october 30 , 2017 , a house committee on veterans affairs report found that the continued expansion of telemedicine across the va health care system is constrained by restrictions on the ability of va providers to practice telemedicine across state lines without jeopardizing their state licensure and facing potential penalties for the unauthorized practice of medicine .

on may 11 , 2018 , the va published a final rule in the federal register to exempt its providers who deliver care via telehealth from certain state licensing laws and regulations .

two major elements of the final rule changed the vha's existing practice delivery: ( 1 ) va providers may deliver telehealth services outside of va health care facilities and ( 2 ) state licensing boards may no longer deny or revoke a va provider's license if he or she provides a telehealth service in a state where the provider is not licensed to practice in non - va health care facilities .

according to the va , the prohibition addresses the concerns of some va providers that chose not to provide telehealth services across state lines in non - va health care facilities because their state licensing boards might take action against their licenses for doing so .

in march 2018 , for example , the va pacific island health care system reported to the gao that it had concerns about delivering a telehealth service to a veteran patient in his or her home because a state could require va providers to be licensed in the state where the patient resides .

the final rule does not preempt state laws regarding the prescribing of controlled substances , nor does it extend beyond the telehealth provider's employment at the va or extend to va - contracted providers .

a va - contracted provider must continue to practice under the laws and regulations of his or her state of licensure .

the rule became effective on june 11 , 2018 , five days after the enactment of the va mission act .

the va mission act , among other things , removed all geographic barriers to va telehealth and therefore , allowed veterans to access va telehealth services in their communities from any location in the united states , u.s. territories , district of columbia , and commonwealth of puerto rico .

according to chapter 17 of title 38 of the u.s. code , ( d ) relation to state law .

 ( 1 ) the provisions of this section shall supersede any provisions of the law of any state to the extent that such provision of state law are inconsistent with this section .

 ( 2 ) no state shall deny or revoke the license , registration , or certification of a covered health care professional who otherwise meets the qualifications of the state for holding the license , registration , or certification on the basis that the covered health care professional has engaged or intends to engage in activity covered by subsection ( a ) .

the va mission act codified the core principles of the above - mentioned final rule with the goal of protecting va providers against possible liability issues stemming from state licensure laws .

this authority is given only to va providers that meet the statutory requirement of a "covered health care professional. .

according to the va , nearly 10,000 va providers gained the authority to provide out - of - state telehealth services to veteran patients in non - va health care facilities in states where the provider is not licensed to practice .

appendix d. total number of veteran patients who had received va telehealth services and total number of telehealth encounters that transpired , fy2009-fy201 .

