consumer finance encompasses the financial lives of individuals and households .

americans aspire for economic advancement and wealth building , a central part of the american dream .

safe and affordable financial services are an important tool for most american households to avoid financial hardship , build assets , and achieve financial security over the course of their lives .

households use three types of financial products regularly: credit , insurance , and financial investments .

this report will focus on the first category—credit and deposit - taking financial products for personal , family , or household purposes .

most households rely on credit to finance some expenses because they do not have enough assets saved to pay for them .

mortgage debt is by far the largest type of household debt .

according to data from the federal reserve bank of new york , as shown in figure 1 , mortgages account for approximately 67% of household debt .

student loans are the second - largest type of household debt , followed by auto loans and credit cards .

these and other major consumer finance markets are discussed in more detail in this report under " overview of major consumer finance markets ," which provides a brief overview of each financial product , recent market developments , and related policy issues .

major consumer finance markets examined in this report include mortgage lending , student loans , automobile loans , credit cards and payments , payday loans and other credit alternative financial products , and checking accounts and substitutes .

in general , this report will focus on the consumer and household perspective , and consumer protection policy issues in each market .

this report also discusses two important market structures that allow these consumer financial products to be offered: ( 1 ) the consumer credit reporting system and ( 2 ) the debt collection market .

these aspects of the consumer credit system are important because they facilitate the pricing of credit offers and the resolution of delinquent consumer credit products for most consumer credit markets .

the report begins with an overview of u.s. household finances , consumer finance markets , and common policy issues in these markets .

consumer finance refers to the saving , borrowing , and investment choices that households make over time .

these financial decisions can be complex and can affect households' financial well - being both now and in the future .

understanding why and how consumers make financial decisions is important when considering policy issues in consumer financial markets .

this section provides an introduction to u.s. households' finances , including a breakdown of a household balance sheet and its components .

it then provides background on how consumer financial markets operate and general issues in these markets .

the section also describes common policy interventions and considerations when using these policy tools .

lastly , this section provides an overview of the bureau of consumer financial protection ( cfpb ) —the main regulator responsible for consumer compliance of financial products and services .

the following sections examine specific issues within major consumer debt markets: mortgage lending , student loans , automobile loans , credit cards and payments , payday loans and other credit alternative financial products , and checking accounts and substitutes .

the markets discussed are under the cfpb's jurisdiction , and sometimes that of other regulators as well .

each section briefly describes the financial product , recent market developments , and selected policy issues that may lead each market away from its efficient price or outcomes .

these sections focus on the consumer and household perspective as well as consumer protection policy issues in each market .

although each consumer credit market is unique , certain common aspects of the consumer credit system facilitate the pricing of credit offers and the resolution of delinquencies and defaults for most consumer credit markets .

this section discusses two of what this report will refer to as market support systems : the consumer credit reporting system ( which helps lenders price consumer loans ) and the debt collection market ( which helps lenders to collect upon consumer default ) .

notably , in both these market support systems , consumers do not have the ability to choose the financial institution or entity with whom they engage , and therefore are unable to take their business elsewhere if issues arise .

for this reason , when consumer abuses occur in these markets , consumer protection laws and regulations may be particularly important .

according to the cfpb , credit reporting and debt collection are the consumer finance markets with by far the most complaints , together accounting for 63% of the total complaints the agency received in 2018 ( 38% and 25% , respectively ) .

for all of the consumer financial markets described in this report , the societal goal is that each market will create a transparent and competitive price that leads to an efficient market outcome .

as described earlier in the report , government policy can potentially correct market failures , such as information asymmetries or behavioral biases , to bring the market to a more efficient outcome , maximizing social welfare .

yet , government policy can lead to unintended consequences as well .

policy changes will typically impose costs and benefits , but these effects can be difficult to calculate in advance of a new law or regulation .

it is often challenging to determine whether a policy intervention will help or harm market efficiency .

