the united states has actively pursued the development of hypersonic weapons as a part of its conventional prompt global strike ( cpgs ) program since the early 2000s .

in recent years , it has focused such efforts on hypersonic glide vehicles and hypersonic cruise missiles with shorter and intermediate ranges for use in regional conflicts .

although funding for these programs has been relatively restrained in the past , both the pentagon and congress have shown a growing interest in pursuing the development and near - term deployment of hypersonic systems .

this is due , in part , to the growing interest in these technologies in russia and china , leading to a heightened focus in the united states on the strategic threat posed by hypersonic flight .

open - source reporting indicates that both china and russia have conducted numerous successful tests of hypersonic glide vehicles , and both are expected to field an operational capability as early as 2020 .

experts disagree on the potential impact of competitor hypersonic weapons on both strategic stability and the u.s. military's competitive advantage .

nevertheless , current under secretary of defense for research and engineering ( usd r&e ) michael griffin has testified to congress that the united states does not "have systems which can hold [china and russia] at risk in a corresponding manner , and we don't have defenses against [their] systems. .

although the john s. mccain national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2019 ( fy2019 ndaa , p.l .

115-232 ) accelerated the development of hypersonic weapons , which usd r&e identifies as a priority research and development area , the united states is unlikely to field an operational system before 2023 .

however , the united states , in contrast to russia and china , is not currently considering or developing hypersonic weapons for use with a nuclear warhead .

as a result , u.s. hypersonic weapons will likely require greater accuracy and will be more technically challenging to develop than nuclear - armed chinese and russian systems .

in addition to accelerating development of hypersonic weapons , section 247 of the fy2019 ndaa required that the secretary of defense , in coordination with the director of the defense intelligence agency , produce a classified assessment of u.s. and adversary hypersonic weapons programs , to include the following elements: ( 1 ) an evaluation of spending by the united states and adversaries on such technology .

 ( 2 ) an evaluation of the quantity and quality of research on such technology .

 ( 3 ) an evaluation of the test infrastructure and workforce supporting such technology .

 ( 4 ) an assessment of the technological progress of the united states and adversaries on such technology .

 ( 5 ) descriptions of timelines for operational deployment of such technology .

 ( 6 ) an assessment of the intent or willingness of adversaries to use such technology .

this report was delivered to congress in july 2019 .

similarly , section 1689 of the fy2019 ndaa requires the director of the missile defense agency to produce a report on "how hypersonic missile defense can be accelerated to meet emerging hypersonic threats. .

the findings of these reports could hold implications for congressional authorizations , appropriations , and oversight .

the following report reviews the hypersonic weapons programs in the united states , russia , and china , providing information on the programs and infrastructure in each nation , based on unclassified sources .

it also provides a brief summary of the state of global hypersonic weapons research development .

it concludes with a discussion of the issues that congress might address as it considers dod's funding requests for u.s. hypersonic technology programs .

several countries are developing hypersonic weapons , which fly at speeds of at least mach 5 ( five times the speed of sound ) , but none have yet introduced them into their operational military forces .

there are two primary categories of hypersonic weapons hypersonic glide vehicles ( hgv ) are launched from a rocket before gliding to a target .

hypersonic cruise missiles are powered by high - speed , air - breathing engines , or "scramjets," after acquiring their target .

unlike ballistic missiles , hypersonic weapons do not follow a ballistic trajectory and can maneuver en route to their destination .

as vice chairman of the joint chiefs of staff and former commander of u.s. strategic command general john hyten has stated , hypersonic weapons could enable "responsive , long - range , strike options against distant , defended , and / or time - critical threats [such as road - mobile missiles] when other forces are unavailable , denied access , or not preferred. .

conventional hypersonic weapons use only kinetic energy—energy derived from motion—to destroy unhardened targets or , potentially , underground facilities .

hypersonic weapons could challenge detection and defense due to their speed , maneuverability , and low altitude of flight .

for example , terrestrial - based radar cannot detect hypersonic weapons until late in the weapon's flight .

figure 1 depicts the differences in terrestrial - based radar detection timelines for ballistic missiles versus hypersonic glide vehicles .

this delayed detection compresses the timeline for decision - makers assessing their response options and for a defensive system to intercept the attacking weapon—potentially permitting only a single intercept attempt .

furthermore , u.s. defense officials have stated that both terrestrial - and current space - based sensor architectures are insufficient to detect and track hypersonic weapons , with usd r&e griffin noting that "hypersonic targets are 10 to 20 times dimmer than what the u.s. normally tracks by satellites in geostationary orbit. .

some analysts have suggested that space - based sensor layers—integrated with tracking and fire - control systems to direct high - performance interceptors or directed energy weapons—could theoretically present viable options for defending against hypersonic weapons in the future .

indeed , the 2019 missile defense review notes that "such sensors take advantage of the large area viewable from space for improved tracking and potentially targeting of advanced threats , including hgvs and hypersonic cruise missiles. .

other analysts have questioned the affordability , technological feasibility , and / or utility of wide - area hypersonic weapons defense .

as physicist and nuclear expert james acton explains , "point - defense systems , and particularly [terminal high - altitude area defense ( thaad ) ] , could very plausibly be adapted to deal with hypersonic missiles .

the disadvantage of those systems is that they can only defend small areas .

to defend the whole of the continental united states , you would need an unaffordable number of thaad batteries. .

in addition , some analysts have argued that the united states' current command and control architecture would be incapable of "processing data quickly enough to respond to and neutralize an incoming hypersonic threat. .

 ( a broader discussion of hypersonic weapons defense is outside the scope of this report. ) .

as congress reviews the pentagon's plans for u.s. hypersonic weapons programs during the annual authorization and appropriations process , it might consider a number of questions about the rationale for hypersonic weapons , their expected costs , and their implications for strategic stability and arms control .

this section provides an overview of some of these questions .

although the department of defense is funding a number of hypersonic weapons programs , it has not established any programs of record , suggesting that it may not have approved requirements for hypersonic weapons or long - term funding plans .

indeed , as assistant director for hypersonics ( usd r&e ) mike white has stated , dod has not yet made a decision to acquire hypersonic weapons and is instead developing prototypes to "[identify] the most viable overarching weapon system concepts to choose from and then make a decision based on success and challenges. .

as congress conducts oversight of u.s. hypersonic weapons programs , it may seek to obtain information about dod's evaluation of potential mission sets for hypersonic weapons , a cost analysis of alternative means of executing these mission sets , and an assessment of the enabling technologies—such as space - based sensors or autonomous command and control systems—that may be required to employ or defend against hypersonic weapons .

assistant director for hypersonics ( usd r&e ) mike white has noted that dod is prioritizing offensive programs while it determines "the path forward to get a robust defensive strategy. .

this approach is reflected in dod's fy2021 request , which allocates $206.8 million for hypersonic defense programs—of a total $3.2 billion request for all hypersonic - related research .

similarly , in fy2020 , dod requested $157.4 million for hypersonic defense programs—of a total $2.6 billion for all hypersonic - related research .

although the defense subcommittees of the appropriations committees increased fy2020 appropriations for both hypersonic offense and defense above the fy2020 request , they expressed concerns , noting in their joint explanatory statement of h.r .

1158 "that the rapid growth in hypersonic research has the potential to result in stove - piped , proprietary systems that duplicate capabilities and increase costs. .

to mitigate this concern , they appropriated $100 million for dod to establish a joint hypersonic transition office to "develop and implement an integrated science and technology roadmap for hypersonics" and "establish a university consortium for hypersonic research and workforce development" in support of dod efforts .

given the lack of defined mission requirements for hypersonic weapons , it may be challenging for congress to evaluate the balance of funding for hypersonic weapons programs , enabling technologies , supporting test infrastructure , and hypersonic missile defense .

analysts disagree about the strategic implications of hypersonic weapons .

some have identified two factors that could hold significant implications for strategic stability: the weapon's short time - of - flight—which , in turn , compresses the timeline for response— and its unpredictable flight path—which could generate uncertainty about the weapon's intended target and therefore heighten the risk of miscalculation or unintended escalation in the event of a conflict .

this risk could be further compounded in countries that co - locate nuclear and conventional capabilities or facilities .

some analysts argue that unintended escalation could occur as a result of warhead ambiguity , or from the inability to distinguish between a conventionally armed hypersonic weapon and a nuclear - armed one .

however , as a united nations report notes , "even if a state did know that an hgv launched toward it was conventionally armed , it may still view such a weapon as strategic in nature , regardless of how it was perceived by the state firing the weapon , and decide that a strategic response was warranted. .

differences in threat perception and escalation ladders could thus result in unintended escalation .

such concerns have previously led congress to restrict funding for conventional prompt strike programs .

other analysts have argued that the strategic implications of hypersonic weapons are minimal .

pavel podvig , a senior research fellow at the united nations institute for disarmament research , has noted that the weapons "don't … change much in terms of strategic balance and military capability. .

this , some analysts argue , is because u.s. competitors such as china and russia already possess the ability to strike the united states with intercontinental ballistic missiles , which , when launched in salvos , could overwhelm u.s. missile defenses .

furthermore , these analysts note that in the case of hypersonic weapons , traditional principles of deterrence hold: "it is really a stretch to try to imagine any regime in the world that would be so suicidal that it would even think threating to use—not to mention to actually use—hypersonic weapons against the united states ... would end well. .

some analysts who believe that hypersonic weapons could present a threat to strategic stability or inspire an arms race have argued that the united states should take measures to mitigate risks or limit the weapons' proliferation .

proposed measures include expanding new start , negotiating new multilateral arms control agreements , and undertaking transparency and confidence - building measures .

the new start treaty , a strategic offensive arms treaty between the united states and russia , does not currently cover weapons that fly on a ballistic trajectory for less than 50% of their flight , as do hypersonic glide vehicles and hypersonic cruise missiles .

however , article v of the treaty states that "when a party believes that a new kind of strategic offensive arm is emerging , that party shall have the right to raise the question of such a strategic offensive arm for consideration in the bilateral consultative commission ( bcc ) . .

accordingly , some legal experts hold that the united states could raise the issue in the bcc of negotiating to include hypersonic weapons in the new start limits .

however , because new start is due to expire in 2021 , unless extended through 2026 , this solution is likely to be temporary .

as an alternative , some analysts have proposed negotiating a new international arms control agreement that would institute a moratorium or ban on hypersonic weapon testing .

these analysts argue that a test ban would be a "highly verifiable" and "highly effective" means of preventing a potential arms race and preserving strategic stability .

other analysts have countered that a test ban would be infeasible , as "no clear technical distinction can be made between hypersonic missiles and other conventional capabilities that are less prompt , have shorter ranges , and also have the potential to undermine nuclear deterrence. .

these analysts have instead proposed international transparency and confidence - building measures , such as exchanging weapons data ; conducting joint technical studies ; "providing advance notices of tests ; choosing separate , distinctive launch locations for tests of hypersonic missiles ; and placing restraints on sea - based tests. .

