the federal government supports the charitable sector by providing charitable organizations and donors with favorable tax treatment .

a primary source of support is allowing a tax deduction for charitable contributions made by individuals who itemize deductions , by estates , and by corporations .

for charitable organizations , earnings on funds held by such organizations are exempt from the federal income tax .

the tax revision enacted in late 2017 , popularly known as the tax cuts and jobs act ( p.l .

115-97 ) , made some temporary changes that , while not specifically aimed at charitable deductions , reduced the scope of the tax benefit for charitable giving .

these changes have caused more individuals to take the standard deduction , rather than itemizing deductions , and exempted more estates from the estate tax , eliminating the benefit of deducting charitable contributions in these cases .

these changes are expected to lead to a reduction in charitable giving .

there were other more minor changes , some enhancing the charitable deduction and some imposing more taxes on charitable organizations .

the report begins with a description of the charitable sector and tax provisions affecting the sector .

the following sections discuss the magnitude of charitable deductions , including sources and beneficiaries , with historical data .

the report then discusses the incentive effects of the deductions and the consequences for charitable giving , including potential effects of the 2017 tax revision .

the report concludes with a discussion of policy options .

the following sections describe the charitable sector .

specifically , data are presented on the size of the sector and the sector's revenues ( including charitable contributions ) .

since the potential effect of the 2017 tax revision on charitable giving is a policy issue of interest , changes in charitable giving between 2017 and 2018 are examined in more detail .

to understand how much charitable giving is induced by tax incentives , it is important to understand how donors respond to tax incentives .

individuals give for a variety of reasons ( eg , altruism ) ; research indicates that tax benefits may also influence charitable giving .

tax benefits encourage charitable giving by reducing the cost of giving , with the federal government effectively subsidizing charitable giving .

for ordinary donations during donors' lifetimes ( inter - vivos giving ) and for donors not claiming the standard deduction , their marginal income tax rate determines the incentive effect by lowering the cost of giving .

donors who do not claim itemized deductions do not receive an incentive effect from the tax code .

for gifts of appreciated property , subsidies are affected by the capital gains tax rate as well , regardless of whether itemized deductions are used .

for bequests , the tax rate is the estate tax rate , but only a small fraction of estates are subject to tax .

corporate giving is potentially affected by the corporate tax rate .

taxes also have income effects , which may be important for wealthy donors who donate large shares of income or leave large shares of their estates to charity ; taxes reduce charitable giving by reducing disposable income .

deductions for charitable contributions not only provide a tax incentive for donating or leaving bequests , but also have an income effect that increases giving .

as previously discussed , the effect of changes in tax incentives on giving depends on the behavioral response to changes in tax rates .

the measure is a price elasticity , which is the percentage change in charitable contributions divided by the percentage change in the tax price ( in the case of individual cash giving , the tax price is one minus the tax rate ) .

given the large changes in tax price that have occurred over time , it is useful to examine some historical data .

figure 5 above shows the pattern of giving as a percentage of gdp over the period 1978-2018 .

there is little indication of significant shifts in giving due to tax rate changes .

contributions after 1981 , despite pronounced tax price increases at higher incomes , remained relatively stable as a percentage of gdp .

the small peak around 1986 is generally attributed by most researchers to a temporary rise in deductions reflecting a timing shift as tax cuts for 1987 and 1988 were preannounced in the tax reform act of 1986 ( tra86 ; p.l .

99-514 ) , but by 1989 contributions had returned to their previous levels .

contributions following enactment of the 1993 tax increase fell rather than increased .

thus , there is little in the historical record to suggest a significant response to changes in tax incentives .

economists have employed a variety of statistical methods to try to formally estimate the effects of tax incentives on charitable giving .

the effects can be measured by estimating a price elasticity , which is the percentage change in charitable contributions divided by the percentage change in tax price .

since increasing the price of giving will reduce the amount of giving ( and vice versa ) , the price elasticity is a negative number .

for example , if the elasticity is - 0.7 , a 10% increase in the tax price ( 1-t ) will result in a 7% decrease in the amount of charitable contributions .

some proposals to revise the tax treatment of charitable giving are aimed at increasing the incentive to give or changing the distribution of incentives across donors , while others are aimed at what may be perceived as abuses .

as mentioned previously , tax incentives for giving are largely confined to higher - income households because these taxpayers are more likely to itemize their deductions ( largely deductions for state and local taxes , mortgage interest , and charitable contributions ) , which tend to rise with income , or choose the standard deduction of a fixed dollar amount .

this concentration of tax benefits on higher - income individuals also tends to favor the charities they favor , such as those pertaining to health , education , and the arts , while disfavoring religion and charities aimed at human services .

the concentration of charitable giving incentives to those with higher incomes has increased as a result of the 2017 tax revision .

nonitemizers were able to claim a deduction for charitable contributions in the early 1980s .

a temporary charitable deduction for itemizers was adopted in the economic recovery tax act of 1981 ( p.l .

97-34 ) , initially allowing a deduction for 25% of contributions in 1982-1984 , 50% in 1985 , and a full deduction in 1986 , with the provision then expiring .

the deduction was also capped in the first three years , at $100 in the first two years and $300 in the third year .

over time , policymakers have continued to propose policies that would extend charitable tax benefits to all taxpayers , either by allowing a deduction for nonitemizers ( often termed an above - the - line deduction , reflecting its position on the tax form ) or by replacing the itemized deduction with a credit available to all taxpayers .

in the 116 th congress , representative danny davis has introduced legislation that would allow an above - the - line deduction for charitable giving h.r .

1260 ) , as have representatives henry cuellar and christopher smith ( h.r .

651 ) .

 ( a similar bill was introduced in the 115 th congress as h.r .

5771 . ) .

earlier proposals for an above - the - line charitable deduction include the universal charitable giving act of 2017 ( h.r .

3988 / s. 2123 ) in the 115 th congress , introduced by representative mark walker in the house and senator james lankford in the senate .

in the 116 th congress , representative danny davis has introduced legislation that would allow an above - the - line deduction for charitable giving ( h.r .

1260 ) , as have representatives henry cuellar and christopher smith ( h.r .

651 ) .

 ( a similar bill was introduced in the 115 th congress as h.r .

5771 . ) .

different models have been used to estimate the budgetary cost of a nonitemizer deduction .

using the penn - wharton budget model , the indiana university lilly family school of philanthropy estimates a nonitemizer deduction would cost between $14.4 billion and $16.1 billion in 2020 ( see table 5 for a summary of the revenue and charitable giving effects of the policy options evaluated in the study ) .

building on the open source policy center's tax calculator , brill and choe estimated such a change would cost $25.8 billion at 2018 levels ( the revenue and charitable giving effects of the policy options in the study are summarized in table 6 ) .

these studies also estimated the effect of the proposals on charitable giving .

one concern is whether further encouraging charitable contributions is an efficient way of achieving the benefits such charitable giving might bring .

in general , if the price elasticity of giving is less than 1.0 , the induced charitable giving will be less than the revenue cost , and more charitable giving could be obtained by making direct expenditures .

if the elasticity is greater than 1.0 , charitable giving will be greater than the revenue loss .

 ( this argument also applies to existing charitable deductions. ) .

brill and choe used a unitary elasticity ( an elasticity of - 1.0 ) in their study , but found a smaller increase in charitable contributions ( $21.5 billion ) than the lost revenue ( the absolute value of lost revenue ) when evaluating an above - the - line or nonitemizer deduction .

presumably some additional revenue beyond the amount of induced giving is lost because some itemizers would move to the standard deduction , causing a loss of revenue unrelated to the charitable incentive .

 ( even very - high - income individuals who had no mortgages might be better off moving to a standard deduction because of the $10,000 cap on state and local tax deductions ; the standard deduction for a married couple is $24,000 ) .

the indiana university study looks at giving under a "low - elasticity" scenario ( an elasticity of - 0.5 ) , a high - elasticity scenario ( an elasticity of - 1.0 ) , and an income - based elasticity scenario .

the increase in giving in 2020 under each scenario was $8.4 billion , $16.8 billion , and $24.9 billion , respectively .

under the low - elasticity scenario , an above - the - line deduction for giving would reduce revenues by $15.0 billion in 2020 , while generating $8.4 billion in additional charitable giving .

under the high - elasticity scenario , the revenue reduction in 2020 is estimated at $15.5 billion , with additional charitable giving estimated at $16.8 billion .

in the income - based elasticity scenario , the revenue reduction in 2020 is $16.1 billion , while additional charitable giving is $24.9 billion in 2020 .

thus , if elasticities are less than 1.0 , as the survey of studies accounting for transitional effects in appendix a indicates , charitable deductions would likely be smaller than the revenue cost .

in evaluating the trade - off between revenue loss and charitable contributions , the charitable contributions from an above - the - line deduction would tend to go to charitable causes favored by lower - and middle - income taxpayers .

these include religion , youth and family services , community improvement , and directly providing basic necessities .

if the desired objective is to increase resources devoted to these activities , additional resources could be provided directly by the federal government , instead of induced via charitable giving incentives ( which result in a loss in federal revenue ) .

the indiana university study also looks at a scenario that would provide an enhanced nonitemizer deduction .

in this policy , single filers with less than $20,000 in income ( $40,000 for joint filers ) would be able to deduct 200% of their charitable contributions .

taxpayers making less than $40,000 ( $80,000 for joint filers ) would be able to deduct 150% of their contributions .

under this policy , revenue losses would be between $15.9 billion and $18.2 billion in 2020 , depending on the elasticities assumed .

charitable giving would increase by an estimated $9.2 billion to $27.7 billion , with the rise in giving greater than the loss in revenue in both the high - elasticity and income - based - elasticity case .

this policy would tend to encourage additional giving by lower - income taxpayers .

adding a deduction for nonitemizers ( or replacing the existing itemized deduction with a credit , as discussed below ) would increase the complexity of the tax code for the individuals now taking the standard deduction .

charitable deductions require various types of substantiation and recordkeeping , and it is difficult for the irs to monitor these contributions , especially with respect to small contributions where audit and investigation by the irs are not cost effective .

charitable deductions are among the items with no third - party reporting , which makes enforcement more costly and difficult .

allowing a charitable deduction or credit to be taken regardless of whether a taxpayer itemizes or takes the standard deduction would further increase the share of taxpayers who take the standard deduction rather than itemizing deductions .

the remaining major itemized deductions are state and local taxes and mortgage interest .

such a move would , for example , reduce the incentives for owner - occupied housing even further than the effects of the 2017 tax revision , which some might see as desirable and others as undesirable .

an alternative to a nonitemizer deduction is to provide for a nonrefundable tax credit .

it could either be as a substitute for or an addition to the current itemized deduction .

both the indiana university and brill and choe studies estimate revenue effects and increased charitable contributions for a 25% credit .

indiana university considers a credit as an addition to the current itemized deduction , with an estimated revenue cost in 2020 of $20.6 billion to $24.6 billion , depending which elasticity is assumed .

brill and choe consider a 25% credit that replaces the current itemized deduction , costing $31.1 billion at 2018 levels .

brill and choe estimate the credit would ( at their assumed - 1.0 price elasticity ) increase charitable giving by $23.3 billion .

the indiana university study estimates increased contributions in 2020 of $35.1 billion for the higher income - based elasticities , $22.8 billion for the elasticity of - 1.0 , and $11.4 billion for an elasticity of - 0.5 .

the induced contributions associated with the elasticities of - 1.0 and - 0.5 are smaller than the revenue losses and raises the basic concerns about the tradeoff between revenue loss and contributions .

if the credit replaced the itemized deduction , it would shift more of the incentive to lower - and middle - income individuals by creating the same tax price for all taxpayers and thus to their preferred beneficiaries .

expanding the scope of the benefit for charitable contributions would , like a deduction , tend to increase complexity in compliance and tax administration , as well as potentially reduce the incentive for home ownership by reducing the number of itemizers .

if a credit substituted for the itemized deduction , it would be possible to set the credit so as not to lose revenue while equalizing the treatment of the charitable contribution incentive across taxpayers .

for example , in a 2011 report by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , an option of a 15% credit was considered , which , compared to a 25% credit , would have cost $20.4 billion less in 2006 dollars , and a larger amount at current income levels .

some proposals would cap expanded deductions .

for example , the universal charitable giving act of 2017 ( h.r .

3988 / s. 2123 ) in the 115 th congress would have limited the nonitemizer deduction to be one - third of the standard deduction that was available at that time .

when a nonitemizer deduction was available in the early 1980s , it was limited to a certain percentage of contributions in the first three years of the temporary policy .

proposals have also been made to provide a floor , either under nonitemizer deductions or all deductions .

a cap for a deduction that provides a desired incentive could be inefficient , as the cap eliminates the incentive for those with giving above the cap while still resulting in a revenue loss .

nevertheless , a cap may be useful for a deduction for nonitemizers or a credit that does not replace the itemized deduction , as it would reduce the number of current itemizers who would switch to the standard deduction .

the indiana university study finds that imposing a cap of $8,000 for a joint return ( and $4,000 for a single return ) applied only to the nonitemizer deductions would have , depending on what giving elasticity is assumed , a revenue cost in the range of $5.6 billion to $16.6 billion in 2020 ( less than the $8.4 billion to $24.9 billion estimate for a nonitemizer deduction without a cap ) .

this cap is generous compared the one proposed in the universal charitable giving act of 2017 ( one - third of the standard deduction in 2017 , which was $12,700 for a married couple and $6,350 for a single return ) .

the $8,000 / $4,000 cap is about a third of the current standard deduction under the new law ( $24,000 for married couples and $12,000 for singles in 2018 ) .

the indiana university study found an itemized deduction with this cap would increase charitable giving in 2020 by $16.6 billion assuming their high income - based elasticities , $11.2 billion at the elasticity of - 1.0 , and $5.6 billion at the elasticity of - 0.5 .

with this cap , induced contributions are less than the revenue loss in all but the high income - based elasticity case ( induced contributions are less than the revenue loss in all cases over the 10-year period ) .

caps for itemized deductions could also be set at a certain rate , instead of a fixed dollar amount .

for example , the obama administration's fy2010 and fy2011 budgets proposed limiting the value of itemized deductions to 28% ( a rate below the top individual income tax rate at the time of 35% ) .

by limiting the amount of the deduction , the value of the charitable tax incentive would decrease for taxpayers in tax brackets above 28% .

however , the subsidy would become more equal across taxpayers in different tax brackets .

the policy would also raise additional revenue and result in a decline in charitable giving .

floors would allow charitable deductions in excess of a given amount , either a dollar amount or a percentage of income .

as opposed to a cap , a floor could increase the efficiency of the incentive ; to the extent that contributions are above the floor in the absence of the incentive , the floor does not affect the incentive at the margin , even though it reduces revenue loss .

the floor would also , if applied only to the nonitemizer deduction , reduce the attractiveness of this deduction and thus reduce the number of taxpayers who shift to a standard deduction .

a 2% floor was included in the 2014 major tax reform proposal by then - chairman of the house ways and means committee dave camp ( the tax reform act of 2014 , h.r .

1 in the 113 th congress ) .

the brill and choe study estimated the revenue effect of a nonitemizer above - the - line deduction and the 25% credit with a floor of $1,000 for married couples and $500 for singles .

for the above - the - line deduction , they found a substantial fall in the revenue loss from $25.8 billion to $14.6 billion , but a relatively small effect on charitable contributions ( at their - 1.0 price elasticity ) , which were estimated to fall from $21.5 billion to $19.1 billion .

thus , at their unitary price elasticity , the induced contributions were expected to be larger than the revenue loss .

looking at the same dollar floor for the 25% credit , the revenue loss was reduced even more , from $31.1 billion to $15.4 billion , presumably because the floor would apply to existing itemizers as well .

the induced contributions ( at the - 1.0 price elasticity ) fell from $23.3 billion to $20.0 billion .

the indiana university study examined a modified percentage - of - income floor where contributions below 1% of agi would receive a 50% deduction and the remainder a full deduction .

the estimates of revenue loss and induced giving depend on the elasticity that is assumed .

in the high - elasticity case , giving in 2020 would increase by $23.7 billion , while the revenue loss would be $13.4 billion .

at the elasticity of - 1.0 , induced giving would be $15.9 billion , while the revenue loss would be $12.8 billion .

with an elasticity of - 0.5 , induced giving would be $7.9 billion , with a revenue loss of $12.3 billion .

in addition to potentially creating more "bang for the buck," a floor ( as long as it completely excluded contributions below a dollar amount or percentage of income ) would simplify administration and compliance by having no deductions for small contributions .

in considering a percentage of income versus a dollar floor , a dollar floor would be more transparent and serve the purpose of excluding deductions for minor contribution amounts , but the percentage - of - income floor would be more efficient because it could provide a meaningful floor for wealthy taxpayers .

as noted previously , in the past congress has passed legislation eliminating the percentage of agi limit for charitable contributions made for disaster - relief purposes following certain disaster events .

senator tim scott has introduced legislation that would temporarily increase the limitation on charitable contributions made for relief efforts related to hurricane dorian ( s. 2476 ) .

other proposals in the 116 th congress would temporarily increase charitable giving limits following disaster events generally ( the tax relief and expedited assistance for disasters act of 2019 ( tread act ) ( h.r .

3287 ) , introduced by representative tom rice ) , or for disasters in 2019 ( the disaster tax relief act of 2019 , introduced by representative adrian smith [ h.r .

2284 ] and senator deb fischer [ s. 1133 ] ) .

other legislation introduced earlier in the 116 th congress would have increased the limitation on charitable contributions made for relief efforts for disasters in 2018 ( the 2018 natural disasters tax relief act [ h.r .

1148 ] , introduced by representative rice ) .

gifts of appreciated property , as noted above , receive a double benefit: a deduction for the fair market value and an exclusion of the gain from tax .

these benefits also create an incentive to overvalue a gift so as to maximize the value of the charitable deduction .

charities may also incur costs to maintain or sell the property and may not even want the contribution but will accept it so as not to antagonize a wealthy donor .

several options could be considered for gifts of appreciated property .

first , only contributions made in cash could be deductible , which would force the taxpayer to sell the property and then donate the proceeds to charity ( thus incurring a capital gains tax and valuing the deduction at market value ) .

a similar approach would be to allow a deduction equal to the basis in the property ( usually , the amount originally paid for it ) .

taxpayers might still donate property with little appreciation , but that approach would also eliminate the double benefit and address the valuation issue .

one difficulty with this option is that it would require either a loss of deduction or limit the optimal recipient in cases where the property was particularly desired to be used by the recipient , such as a contribution of a work of art to a museum .

an option that would eliminate the double benefit but not address the valuation problem would be to allow the contribution of appreciated property but to tax the appreciation as if it were a realized capital gain .

this approach would address the problem of donating an artwork to a museum .

the tax reform act of 2014 ( h.r .

1 ) had provisions aimed at limiting the problems attached to valuation .

the deduction would have been limited to basis except for property related to the purpose of the charitable institution , certain property receiving special treatment such as conservation easements , and publicly traded stock as long as it was no more than 10% of the total shares .

another option is to allow a deduction only for the amount that the charity receives from a sale .

one analyst has suggested ( presumably to address property used by the charity ) that the deduction be limited to the lesser of the benefit from sale , or the donor's tax basis plus one - half of the untaxed appreciation .

there are proposals to address concerns about inflated values of easements that may be associated with the use of syndicated partnerships to donate conservation easements .

one proposal would limit the value of these deductions to 2.5 times the partnership adjusted basis ( the charitable conservation easement program integrity act of 2019 , introduced by senator steve daines [ s. 170 ] and representative mike thompson [ h.r .

1992 ] ) .

charitable organizations can reimburse volunteers ( without income tax consequences ) for miles driven for charitable purposes .

nontaxable reimbursements by charities can be made up to the charitable mileage rate of 14 cents per mile .

this rate was set in 1997 , and has not been adjusted since .

the irs has the authority to adjust the business mileage rate ( 58 cents per mile for 2019 ) and the medical and moving expense mileage rate ( 20 cents per mile for 2019 ) .

the charitable mileage reimbursement rate is set in statute .

legislation in the 116 th congress , the charity act of 2019 ( s. 1475 / h.r .

3259 ) , would align the charitable mileage reimbursement with the rate used for medical and moving expense purposes .

other legislation , the volunteer driver tax appreciation act of 2019 ( h.r .

2072 ) , introduced by representative collin peterson , and the nonprofit relief act of 2019 ( h.r .

3323 ) , introduced by representatives carolyn maloney and james clyburn , propose increasing the charitable rate to match the business mileage rate .

the delivering elderly lunches and increasing volunteer engagement and reimbursements ( deliver ) act of 2019 , introduced by representatives joseph morelle and ron wright ( h.r .

2928 ) and senators angus king and john cornyn ( s. 1603 ) , would raise the standard charitable mileage rate for delivery of meals to homebound individuals who are elderly , disabled , frail , or at - risk .

increasing the charitable mileage reimbursement rate could encourage charitable activity , such as meal delivery , and help adjust for the increase in the cost of automobile use since the late 1990s .

a concern with increasing the charitable mileage rate , particularly to the business mileage rate , is that a higher rate could overcompensate volunteers for their automobile - related expenses ( i.e. , allow taxpayers to take a deduction that exceeds actual driving / vehicle use costs ) .

some proposals relate to the treatment of the charitable organizations .

certain types of tax - exempt or charitable organizations may have specific or additional requirements .

several policy options are related to entities that receive charitable contributions , but do not immediately use these contributions for a charitable purpose .

these entities include dafs , supporting organizations , and university endowments .

one option could be to subject these organizations to rules similar to private foundations and type iii non - fiso supporting organizations , and require a minimum payout .

another option is to require all funds in a daf account to be distributed within five to seven years .

a proposal has been made to not allow foundations to make donations to dafs , or require that if they do , the funds be spent immediately and with full disclosure .

this option might address the concern that dafs can be used to avoid transparency that is otherwise required of private foundations .

the new york state bar association ( nysba ) tax section , commenting on an advance version of treasury notice 2017-73 , addressing certain issues relating to dafs , suggested that foundations could give to dafs if the dafs agree to distribute the funds immediately .

the nysba also recommends applying the same rules as applied to foundations in cases where a pledge is made and daf distributions satisfy it .

a proposal to encourage greater use of dafs would allow ira rollover contributions to charity to go to dafs ( generally these contributions must go to public charities but cannot go to supporting organizations or dafs ) .

this proposal was included in the charities helping americans regularly throughout the year ( charity ) act of 2019 , introduced by senator john thune ( s. 1475 ) and representative earl blumenhauer ( h.r .

3259 ) .

several policy options that relate to university endowments might be considered .

these could include payout requirements , or measures to address offshore sheltering of earnings from the ubit .

another proposal is to modify or repeal the tax on endowment net investment income enacted in the 2017 tax revision .

the reducing excessive debt and unfair costs of education ( reduce ) act of 2018 ( h.r .

5916 ) would have imposed an excise tax on undistributed required payouts from college and university endowments , with payout requirements designed to direct support lower - and middle - income students .

also in the 115 th congress , the don't tax higher education act ( h.r .

5220 ) would have repealed the endowment excise tax .

another proposal would eliminate the provision that reduces the excise tax rate on private foundations contingent on distributions and directly reduce the excise tax rate to 1% .

this proposal is included in the proposed charity act of 2019 .

a nonprofit hospital applying for , or seeking to maintain , tax - exempt status as a "charitable" organization under irc section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) must meet the "community benefit standard. .

broadly , and as previously discussed , this standard requires the hospital to show that it has provided benefits that promote the health of a broad class of persons to the community .

one way hospitals can demonstrate that they have met the community benefit standard is by providing charity care .

the potential for increased coverage of health care for low - income individuals in the affordable care act may have reduced the need for charity care and has raised questions about the need for the tax benefits for nonprofit hospitals .

disallowing tax - exempt bond financing was an option discussed during debates leading up to the 2017 tax revision .

in addition , concerns have been raised about the enforcement of the community benefit standard .

some proposals reconsider the ubit provisions adopted in the 2017 tax revision ( p.l .

115-97 ) .

one proposal would eliminate the separate business calculation of the ubit ( see the nonprofit tax relief act of 2019 ; h.r .

3323 ) .

requiring that unrelated business taxable income be computed separately for each trade or business activity treats nonprofits differently from for - profit businesses , and it complicates administration and compliance because of the difficulties of classifying businesses .

this provision may have been motivated by concerns about improper allocation of expenses across 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) colleges' and universities' unrelated business activities .

a 2013 irs compliance report found that some colleges and universities were misallocating expenses between nonprofit and for - profit activities ( which was already disallowed ) and underpaying ubit .

criticisms have also arisen about a change in the 2017 tax revision that subjects transportation benefits for employees to the ubit .

the purpose of this provision was to treat nonprofit business like for - profit businesses ( where deductions are denied ) .

this provision includes free parking , which would require nonprofits ( including churches ) that provide parking for their employees to determine the value of this benefit and file a tax return , in some cases for the first time .

the house committee on ways and means has approved legislation ( the economic mobility act of 2019 ; h.r .

3300 ) that would , among other things , repeal the inclusion of certain fringe benefits in ubit .

other legislation that would repeal the inclusion of nonprofit fringe benefits in ubit includes representative james clyburn's stop the tax hike on charities and places of worship act ( h.r .

1223 ) ; the lessen impediments from taxes ( lift ) for charities act ( s. 632 ) , introduced by senators james lankford and christopher coons ; the stop the tax hike on charities and places of worship act ( s. 501 ) , introduced by senator sherrod brown ; and legislation introduced by representative mark walker ( h.r .

1545 ) .

the preserve charities and houses of worship act ( s. 1282 ) , introduced by senator ted cruz , and the nonprofits support act ( h.r .

513 ) , introduced by representative michael conaway , would repeal both of the tcja provisions discussed above .

several proposals have been made to provide administrative reforms .

one such proposal is to require electronic filling of 990 forms .

this proposal is included in the charity act of 2019 .

another proposal , considering the task of monitoring a large number of charities , would be to provide more funds to the irs or even to create a separate regulatory authority , given that the irs is a revenue collection agency , not a nonprofit regulator .

for that reason the irs has few incentives to devote resources to enforcing the rules regarding nonprofits .

appendix a .

evidence on elasticities for charitable giving lifetime ( inter - vivos ) giving table a - 1 reports the results of seven different studies ( with a number of specifications that attempt to measure both permanent and transitory effects of changes in price and income on charitable giving ) .

two of these studies ( bakija 2000 , and bakija and mcclelland 2002 ) also provided some critiques of other studies and some sensitivity analysis that is useful in understanding the studies and their strengths and weaknesses .

results that are not statistically significant have an asterisk .

lack of statistical significance means that , although a relationship that most closely fits the data is estimated , there is such deviation from that relationship in the observations that there is not a clear causal effect .

estimates that are not statistically significant are usually , although not always , associated with very small values that are close to zero .

while the studies differ in methodology , as discussed below , one difference is the type of data used .

tax return data are available for general use only to researchers in the treasury department and the joint committee on taxation .

 ( the congressional budget office [cbo] has access to taxpayer data but must have uses approved by the joint committee on taxation. ) .

the data on giving and tax rates are probably superior in these studies and contain a larger sample of high - income taxpayers ; however , such research cannot be replicated or subjected to any sensitivity analysis by others .

other researchers have to use public - use data constructed from other sources .

of the seven studies in table a - 1 four ( randolph 1995 , auten et al .

2002 , and bakija and heim 2008 and 2011 ) used taxpayer data , and all had as authors or coauthors a treasury employee .

the bakija and mcclelland ( 2002 ) study , with a cbo coauthor , included a sensitivity analysis for the auten et al .

study , but used a public - use file , not the tax data .

the other two studies also used a public - use file .

many of the studies listed below report multiple results using different specifications and , in general , an attempt is made to report the results that appear to be preferred by the author ( s ) .

in the case of the bakija and heim ( 2011 ) report , the preferred estimate for the permanent elasticity is associated with variations in the state tax rate , and estimates from other specifications ( such as allowing coefficients to vary across incomes ) are even larger ( see the discussion of that study ) .

for comparison with this table and to illustrate the importance of dealing with transitory effects , bakija and mcclelland ( 2002 ) , who presented a range of strategies , also estimated a standard pooled cross - section estimate , the type that had been done prior to the evidence shown by the 1980s tax cuts that did not deal with transitory effects .

that estimate showed results that are typical of past cross - sectional studies , a price elasticity of - 1.22 and an income elasticity of 0.84 .

in general , the theoretical expectation is that transitory price effects are large and transitory income effects are small ( due to the permanent income hypothesis or consumption smoothing ) .

price elasticities and income elasticities in cross - section studies are a combination of permanent and transitory effects .

thus , a lower permanent price elasticity and a higher permanent income elasticity would be expected than those observed in cross - section studies .

only two studies , randolph ( 1995 ) and bakija and heim ( 2008 ) find these results , and the bakija and heim income elasticity is only marginally higher .

randolph ( 1995 ) was the first study to focus on the problem of transitory effects , and the technique used a 10-year panel that treated deviations from average income ( and the resultant deviations from tax rates ) as transitory .

permanent tax rates varied through changes in the tax law ( and years around the 1981 and 1986 changes were excluded ) .

this study allowed a long period of time to be transitory ; therefore , it is possible that some of the permanent price and income effects are reflected in the transitory estimates , as the author acknowledges .

other studies tend to allow much shorter - term transitory effects , which might go too far in the other direction .

randolph's model allowed the price elasticity to vary by the share of giving , and he reports two measures: one unweighted with a price elasticity of - 0.08 , which is not statistically significant , and one weighted more heavily toward large contributors , which randolph appears to prefer .

the results in the randolph study are consistent in general magnitude with the expectations based on the aggregate data discussed in the text: a small permanent price elasticity , a large transitory price elasticity , an income elasticity of around 1.0 , and a smaller transitory income elasticity .

bakija ( 2000 ) , who among other things replicates the randolph results with public - use data , argues that the second weight , which yields an insignificant price elasticity , is more appropriate ( although he criticizes other aspects of the model ) .

in his own replications with public - use files he finds effects similar to randolph's unweighted results but suggests the appropriate measure of the aggregate elasticity evaluated over the full sample .

these results are similar to randolph's unweighted results: he also finds similar results for the elasticity when confined to incomes over $100,000 .

based on the specification he prefers and his replication , this approach basically finds no evidence of a permanent price response .

the randolph study differs from the other studies in some important ways .

by using average income over the panel as permanent income and estimating transitory effects based on deviations , he allows a broad scope for shifting over time , whereas other studies use shorter periods .

this choice may be influenced by experience with capital gains realizations studies , where using short periods to control for transitory effects was not successful in producing reasonable results .

barrett et al .

 ( 1997 ) allow limited intertemporal shifting variation and also a lagged value of giving to deal with adjustment .

they focus particularly on how quickly adjustment takes place , which they find to be very rapid .

their panel also does not include tax rate changes after 1986 , which are an important exogenous source of variation .

they find a lower price elasticity than a standard cross section , but also a small income elasticity .

like the other studies , this study includes individual fixed effects that are designed to control for heterogeneity among taxpayers ( eg , a taste for philanthropy , religiosity ) .

 ( randolph could not employ individual fixed effects because he used an average over the entire panel for permanent income , which was then indistinguishable from a fixed effect. ) .

one drawback , however , of fixed effects , as barrett et al .

acknowledge , is that the fixed effect could also be picking up permanent income effects , and so suppressing the value of that elasticity .

the barrett et al .

study also allowed a more limited scope for intertemporal substitution .

auten et al .

 ( 2002 ) also use fixed effects and more limited intertemporal substitutions .

as pointed out by bakija and mcclelland ( 2002 ) , they also did not address known changes in the tax law ( that is , 1986 was a higher - tax year than 1987 , even though the high realizations in 1989 were associated with a preannounced drop in tax rates ) , which would tend to bias their price elasticities upward .

this was a particular problem for panels that included 1986 , and bakija and mcclelland reestimated their model using a public data file and found a much lower elasticity .

bakija ( 2000 ) mainly contrasted his model with randolph's by using legislated transitory changes in tax rates as the way to determine the transitory component of taxes .

bakija and mcclelland base their analysis off auten et al. , and while they introduce a number of innovations , their main changes are to model expected tax changes and introduce adjustment lags .

bakija and heim ( 2008 ) use a panel approach with tax data , with fixed effects , with more limited substitution frameworks than randolph , and with attention to expectations of tax changes .

they characterize intertemporal substitution mainly through those preannounced tax changes and allow shorter substitution periods .

the main source of determining the price elasticity is the difference in response across taxpayers who had different changes in their tax rates .

they also examine separate estimates for higher - income individuals .

they obtain different estimates depending on how they deal with fixed time effects ( variables meant to control for changes that affect all observations in a given year ) , which cannot be introduced into the higher income levels because they are so closely correlated across the sample with legislated changes in tax rates .

the first one they reported , which did not use fixed time effects but incorporated a time trend , is included in the assessment .

bakija and heim ( 2011 ) is similar to their 2008 study but reports effects for using the state tax rate alone , the federal tax rate alone , and the combined federal and state rate .

the authors believe the state tax rate provides a more reliable measure of response because state tax rates allow a comparison of people with the same income but living in different states , and thus is less likely to reflect the effects of omitted variables .

the federal rate or combined rate ( where the federal rate would dominate ) captures the effects of changes in income and the effects of exogenous federal tax changes .

the study also reports effects when coefficients of nonprice variables ( i.e. , other than the tax variables ) differ across income , finding higher permanent price elasticities ( a permanent elasticity of - 1.53 ) .

when the study allows price elasticities to vary across income , there is some indication that elasticities increase with higher incomes , but some estimates are statistically insignificant ( including estimates for some high - income individuals ) .

statistically significant estimates of - 1.19 are found for the $200,000-$500,000 class and of - 1.71 for the over $1 million class ; but estimates for the other classes were not statistically significant .

ultimately no study is perfect , and thus it is difficult to choose a central elasticity from among these .

excluding the high elasticities in auten et al .

for the panel that covers 1986 and that are likely overstated , the elasticities range from essentially 0 to 1.2 .

it seems likely that the unweighted randolph estimate may be biased downward , but some others may be biased upward because of fixed effects or short periods for intertemporal substitution .

in addition , the response to the 1986 tax revision suggests a higher transitory price elasticity than permanent price elasticity , and intuition would suggest that charitable giving is a luxury that would tend to have an income elasticity above 1.0 .

only the randolph study finds effects consistent with these expectations , suggesting an elasticity of around 0.5 .

table a - 2 reports the results of seven different studies that attempt to estimate both the price and wealth elasticities of charitable bequests .

although these studies find a diverse set of estimated elasticities , they reach two common general conclusions: ( 1 ) the price elasticity dominates the wealth elasticity and ( 2 ) charitable bequests , generally , respond elastically to changes in the tax price of bequests .

the exception to this second conclusion is provided by greene and mcclelland ( 2001 ) and is likely explained by their focus on the portion of the tax price related to the exemption level .

appendix b .

history of the tax treatment of charitable contributions and organizations charitable contributions the charitable deduction was added by passage of the war revenue act of 1917 ( p.l .

65-50 ) .

senator henry hollis , the sponsor , argued that high wartime tax rates would absorb the surplus funds of wealthy taxpayers , which were generally contributed to charitable organizations .

the deduction was originally limited to individuals .

a deduction for trusts and estates was added in the revenue act of 1918 ( p.l .

65-254 ) , and a deduction for corporations was added in the revenue act of 1936 ( p.l .

74-740 ) .

the deduction allowed in 1917 was limited to 15% of taxable income .

most of the revisions in the early tax law related to this limit .

in 1944 , it was changed to 15% of adjusted gross income .

the corporate deduction was limited to 5% of income when introduced .

in 1952 , the individual limit was increased to 20% .

the limit was increased to 30% in 1954 , but the additional 10% had to go to specified charities ( churches or religious orders , educational institutions , and hospitals ) .

thus , the 20% limit was retained for foundations and other charities .

a carryover of unused deductions for two years was first allowed for corporations in 1954 .

in 1964 , the carryover was increased to five years and extended to individuals .

the percentage limit on individual contributions to charities was increased to 50% by the tax reform act of 1969 ( p.l .

91-172 ) but was restricted to 30% for gifts of appreciated property .

the percentage limit on corporate charitable contributions was increased to 10% of taxable income in the economic recovery tax act of 1981 ( p.l .

97-34 ) .

the limit on contributions to private foundations was increased to 30% for cash contributions by the deficit reduction act of 1984 ( p.l .

98-369 ) .

the economic recovery tax act of 1981 also allowed a temporary deduction for nonitemizers , but this provision was not extended by the tax reform act of 1986 ( p.l .

99-514 ) .

concerns about abuse led to provisions requiring greater substantiation of gifts .

the deficit reduction act of 1984 ( p.l .

98-369 ) required written substantiation of contributions in excess of $2,000 , and the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 ( p.l .

103-66 ) lowered that amount to $250 .

the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-357 ) increased reporting requirements for donors of noncash gifts .

the pension protection act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-280 ) provided for some temporary additional benefits ( part of the "extenders" ) that were effective through 2007 at that time .

the 2006 act also added restrictions on dafs and certain supporting organizations .

the 2006 law also tightened rules governing charitable giving in certain areas , including gifts of taxidermy , contributions of clothing and household items , contributions of fractional interests in tangible personal property , and recordkeeping and substantiation requirements for certain charitable contributions .

temporary charitable giving incentives were further extended through 2009 by the economic emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-343 ) , enacted in october 2008 , and through 2011 by the tax relief , unemployment insurance reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-312 ) .

some provisions were extended through 2013 by the american taxpayer relief act ( p.l .

112-240 ) .

these provisions were made permanent in the consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

the 2017 tax change , p.l .

115-97 , popularly known as the tax cuts and jobs act , increased the percentage - of - income limit for contributions of cash to public charities to 60% and eliminated the phase - out of itemized deductions on a temporary basis ( through 2025 ) .

charitable organizations corporations or associations organized for religious , charitable , or educational purposes were defined as exempt from tax in the original 1913 law establishing the income tax .

these organizations could earn exempt income from activities related to their mission and also from unrelated business activities whose profits were used for the exempt purpose .

the revenue act of 1950 ( p.l .

81-814 ) established the unrelated business income tax ( ubit ) on the income from commercial activities ( other than on churches ) .

the ubit also applied to rents from real estate sale - leaseback arrangements that relied on debt finance .

the tax reform act of 1969 ( p.l .

91-172 ) defined private foundations , established a series of restrictions on them , imposed a 4% excise tax on their investment income ( to share the cost of enforcement ) , and established a minimum payout requirement of 6% of assets to avoid a penalty .

the 1969 legislation also expanded the ubit to all tax - exempt organizations ( including churches ) , and applied it to all debt - financed income .

the tax reform act of 1976 ( p.l .

94-455 ) changed the minimum distribution requirement to 5% of assets .

the revenue act of 1978 ( p.l .

95-600 ) reduced the net investment income excise tax to 2% .

the deficit reduction act of 1984 ( p.l .

98-369 ) exempted certain operating foundations from the excise tax and reduced the tax to 1% for foundations making improvements in their distributions .

the 2017 tax reduction ( p.l .

115-97 ) imposed an excise tax of 1.4% on investment income of certain private colleges and universities ( excluding smaller ones ) , added certain fringe benefits ( such as parking ) to the ubit base , and required ubit to be calculated separately for each business activity .

