t he united states has created vast federal loan programs offering to millions of students alternatives to private educational loans .

according to the u.s. department of education's ( ed's ) office of federal student aid ( fsa ) , nearly 43 million borrowers owed money on federal student loans as of the second quarter of 2019 , and the total amount of outstanding federal student loan debt currently exceeds $1.4 trillion—a figure that has nearly tripled since 2007 .

in recent years , a significant number of these borrowers have experienced difficulty repaying their student loans .

moreover , borrowers who lack financial experience may need guidance to navigate the student loan repayment process , which some borrowers find daunting or confusing .

student loan servicers —with whom the united states has contracted to assist with the administration of its sizable student loan portfolio —are a key source of guidance and assistance for borrowers struggling to understand and repay their federal student loans .

under its contract with the federal government , a servicer may be responsible for ( among other things ) communicating with borrowers regarding repayment ; disclosing information about student loan terms to borrowers ; applying payments to outstanding loan balances ; processing applications for enrollment in repayment plans ; processing applications for loan forgiveness or discharge ; and processing requests for loan forbearance or deferment .

some maintain that at least some of these federal student loan servicers have engaged in various forms of undesirable conduct , such as steering borrowers away from beneficial repayment options or providing inaccurate or incomplete information .

representatives from the servicing industry deny these accusations .

these allegations of servicer misconduct have drawn the attention of both federal and state policymakers .

at least two congressional subcommittees have conducted hearings on student loan servicing within the past few months , and the house committee on financial services conducted another hearing on the topic on september 10 , 2019 .

additionally , several state legislatures have enacted new laws to regulate student loan servicers within the past few years .

a number of state attorneys general and individual borrowers have also tried to pursue civil litigation against servicers of federal student loans based on alleged violations of state statutory and common law .

the states' involvement has raised questions involving the appropriate interaction between federal and state law , as well as the respective roles of the federal and state governments with respect to regulating student loan servicers .

significantly , ed has taken the position that the existing regime of federal regulation of student loan servicers leaves no room for state regulation on the topic .

while some courts have agreed with this position , others have concluded that current federal law permits the state to regulate servicers with whom the federal government contracts .

this report analyzes the regulation of servicers of federal student loans .

after providing necessary background information regarding the federal student loan programs , the report describes federal law governing student loan servicers .

the report then discusses how some states and borrowers have tried to enact or enforce state laws to regulate servicers of federal student loans .

then , the report analyzes the legal issues implicated by the interaction of federal and state servicing laws , including whether ( and , if so , to what extent ) federal servicing regulation preempts the states from creating or enforcing servicing laws of their own .

the report concludes by identifying relevant legal considerations for congress .

the federal government's roles with respect to the operation , supervision , and administration of federal student loan programs have evolved over time .

around the turn of the millennium , for instance , most ( though not all ) federal student loans were issued under the now - discontinued federal family education loan program ( ffelp ) , under which private lenders extended loans to borrowers that the federal government guaranteed against the risk of loss .

although the federal government set the terms and conditions of ffelp loans and subsidized the ffelp program , various entities other than the federal government also helped operate the ffelp .

for example , private lenders ( or third parties with which those lenders contracted ) bore the responsibility of servicing ffelp loans .

several recent developments , however , have shifted the federal government's role in the student loan system .

in 2008 , for instance , congress enacted the ensuring continued access to student loan act ( ecasla ) , which authorized ed to purchase outstanding ffelp loans from private lenders .

thus , for the nearly 4 million loans that ed purchased from private lenders under ecasla , "the federal government is now the 'lender.' .

then , in 2010 , congress enacted the student aid and fiscal responsibility act ( safra ) , which , among other things , terminated the authority to make new ffelp loans .

as a result of safra , the united states now issues most new federal student loans through the federal direct loan program ( fdlp ) , under which the government itself—rather than a private lender—extends loans directly to students .

these developments have thereby expanded the federal government's direct involvement in the student loan industry , which in turn has prompted the united states to rely increasingly on servicers to administer aspects of the federal student loan programs .

a variety of federal statutes and regulations—as well as contractual provisions—bear on the servicing of federal student loans .

as described below , some claim that the aforementioned federal requirements and oversight mechanisms have not deterred federal student loan servicers from engaging in misconduct .

significantly , the hea does not provide litigants with a private right of action—that is , the hea does not authorize borrowers to directly pursue civil litigation against servicers of federal student loans .

instead , only the secretary may enforce the hea .

states , however , have developed their own laws empowering entities other than the federal government—such as state officials or individual borrowers—to pursue legal action against servicers .

these state laws fall into two broad categories: ( 1 ) statutes that specifically target servicers for regulation and ( 2 ) statutes and common law causes of action that apply more generally to a broad range of entities , including servicers of federal student loans .

legal debates over the preemptive effect of federal law—both within the student loan servicing context and without—implicate a variety of considerations .

on the one hand , replacing state law with a single uniform national standard can sometimes be advantageous .

when each state remains free to enact its own laws on a given topic , the requirements of those laws may differ—perhaps irreconcilably—from jurisdiction to jurisdiction .

preempting those state laws can thereby release regulated parties from the "administrative and financial burden[s]" of learning and complying with the "laws of 50 states. .

moreover , freeing federal contractors from the burden of complying with state laws could mitigate the risk of state intrusions upon federal prerogatives .

on the other hand , however , when federal law does not go far enough in policing a particular industry , preemption can prevent the states from filling those regulatory gaps with their own laws .

preempting state law may also deprive the states of opportunities to experiment with novel methods of regulating particular industries and behaviors , which might ultimately prove more effective than methods devised by the federal government .

depending on how congress weighs these competing considerations , it may enact legislation clarifying or modifying the preemptive effect of federal law in the student loan servicing context .

for example , a section of the prosper act introduced in the 115th congress , if enacted , would have provided that the servicing of student loans under title iv of the hea would "not be subject to any law or other requirement of any state or political subdivision of a state with respect to" "disclosure requirements" ; "requirements or restrictions on the content , time , quantity , or frequency of communications with borrowers , endorsers , or references with respect to such loans" ; or "any other requirement relating to the servicing .

 .

 .

of a loan made" under title iv of the hea .

alternatively , if congress instead intends to limit the preemptive scope of federal law , it could enact a savings clause specifying that federal law does not preempt any state law that imposes more restrictive requirements on federal student loan servicers than federal statutes and regulations .

for instance , one section of the student loan borrower bill of rights ( s. 1354 , 116th cong .

 ) —which , among other things , proposes to subject servicers to more expansive federal regulation—explicitly would not "preempt any provision of state law regarding postsecondary education loans where the state law provides stronger consumer protections. .

if congress ultimately decides to displace state servicing laws , it may consider preempting state law either narrowly or broadly .

for instance , a federal statute that displaces state servicing regulations could expressly preempt all state laws that implicate the servicing of federal student loans in any fashion , or it could preempt only specified categories of state statutes ( such as servicer licensing requirements ) and thereby preserve some regulatory role for the states .

instead of expressly specifying the preemptive effect and scope of federal laws pertaining to federal student loan servicing , congress could implicitly preempt state laws by changing the substantive standards governing servicers .

several members of the 116th congress have introduced legislation that , if enacted , would clarify or broaden servicers' duties and responsibilities under federal law or subject servicers to increased levels of federal oversight .

depending on their content and scope , new federal laws governing the conduct , obligations , and oversight of federal loan servicers could raise legal questions regarding ( 1 ) how those federal standards interact with state servicing laws and ( 2 ) the respective roles of federal and state law in regulating federal student loan servicers .

the preemptive effect that courts will provide to a given federal law largely depends on the specific statutory text that congress enacts .

one other substantive change that could affect the preemptive scope of federal law is altering how the hea is enforced .

as discussed , the hea does not presently create a private right of action ; instead , the hea contemplates that ed alone will enforce the statute's mandates .

as noted above , however , some observers claim that ed has not diligently policed the servicers with whom it contracts .

if congress agrees with that assessment , it could expressly empower other entities—such as states , individual borrowers , or other federal agencies like the cfpb—to wield a greater level of enforcement authority over federal student loan servicers .

for instance , granting borrowers or states a private right of action under federal law against contractors that violate federal servicing standards could provide an additional means to deter , correct , and punish alleged servicer misconduct .

that said , subjecting servicers to litigation and regulation by multiple entities could increase federal contractors' costs .

rendering servicers answerable to multiple stakeholders—be they federal agencies , states , or individual borrowers—might also undermine the uniformity that some have argued is a central goal of federal student loan servicer regulation , which could in turn undercut arguments that preemption is necessary to preserve the federal government's predominant role in regulating its contractors .

several bills pending in the 116th congress propose to subject servicers to increased litigation or regulation by entities other than ed .

section 3 o f the student loan borrower bill of rights , for example , would allow individuals to sue federal student loan servicers under the truth in lending act's private right of action provision .

by contrast , the cfpb student loan integrity and transparency act of 2019 ( h.r .

2833 , 116th cong. ) .

would ( among other things ) ( 1 ) require federal student loan servicers to provide the cfpb with any information requested by specified cfpb officials and ( 2 ) reinstate the aforementioned mous between ed and the cfpb that ed terminated in 2017 .

unless and until congress specifies the intended preemptive effect of federal servicing laws , however , legal questions regarding preemption in the loan servicing context will be left to the courts to resolve .

depending on their content , the courts' rulings may affect the uniformity of servicing regulations across jurisdictions and the degree and type of oversight to which federal student loan servicers are subject .

