congress plays an overarching role in shaping outdoor recreation throughout the nation through legislation and oversight .

congress's role in outdoor recreation resources , policies , and programs often involves the agencies that manage recreation resources on federal lands and waters .

however , congress also has supported crosscutting legislative , analytic , and planning efforts dedicated to outdoor recreation broadly , and it has established programs that facilitate recreation on nonfederal lands .

legislation , hearings , and congressional reports have indicated the significance of outdoor recreation economic activity as a decisionmaking consideration in many contexts , not just those involving federal lands .

as congress continues to debate outdoor recreation issues—including provision of federal resources , planning efforts , and funding—data on the size , distribution , and relative importance of the outdoor recreation economy may inform these debates .

in april 2016 , the secretary of the interior announced that the department of the interior would sign a memorandum of understanding with the department of commerce to undertake a feasibility study to analyze outdoor recreation's impact on the u.s. economy .

the secretary noted that "credible data on the tangible economic benefits of public lands" would be a valuable resource for stakeholders , including congress , and that the study would count the contributions of the outdoor recreation economy in a "comprehensive and impartial" way .

later that year , congress explicitly authorized these efforts through passage of the outdoor recreation jobs and economic impact act .

in addition to ensuring the availability of economic data on outdoor recreation , the act ensured methodological uniformity with other statistical activities of the bureau of economic analysis ( bea ) that analyze the economic impact of private industries .

the act directed the secretary of commerce , acting through bea , to assess and analyze the outdoor recreation economy of the united states and its contributions to the economy generally .

the act required the secretary to consider employment , sales , and contributions to travel and tourism , in addition to any other items the secretary considered appropriate .

consequently , bea developed the outdoor recreation satellite account ( orsa ) , an account using the same data and methods as bea's gross domestic product ( gdp ) statistics .

bea released the first orsa prototype statistics for comment in february 2018 , and it released the first official orsa statistics in september 2018 .

bea released the most recent orsa statistics on september 20 , 2019 .

congress has indicated general approval of the orsa and directed bea to develop regional statistics in future years ; bea included state - level prototype statistics in the 2019 release .

the house appropriations committee also directed the department of commerce , in coordination with the agencies of the federal recreation council , to continue to refine the account and to report on the feasibility of identifying amounts allocated by the federal government to outdoor recreation efforts .

the orsa statistics measures the state of the outdoor recreation economy generally .

from the standpoint of public lands management , there is often congressional interest in how the government's provision of recreational opportunities translates into economic activity in communities around federal recreation resources .

legislation , hearings , and congressional reports have indicated the significance of this economic activity as a policy consideration in contexts involving federal lands .

in the past decade , federal agencies and interagency groups have conducted studies measuring economic contributions specific to federal lands .

because these studies examine multiple agencies under a single framework , and because they report value added , the results are comparable to one another .

in the sense that value added is a consistent concept , they also may be generally comparable to other measures of value added , such as the orsa results , although differences in methods , data , and assumptions mean any comparison can be , at best , highly general .

according to these studies , in fy2017 dollars , visitors spent approximately $54 billion in the local economies of federal recreation areas in fy2012 and $49.8 billion in fy2016 , generating $55 billion in value added in fy2012 and $53.9 billion in value added in fy2016 ( see table 2 ) .

the studies indicate that outdoor recreation on federal lands directly supported 880,000 jobs in fy2012 and 826,000 jobs in fy2016 .

the authors of the studies in table 2 limited their studies of visitor spending to areas within 50 miles of the federal recreation site .

the authors state that this limitation provides a conservative estimate .

although research suggests that many visits to federal recreation sites do indeed originate from nearby , the nationwide estimates discussed above ( see " the national outdoor recreation economy " ) indicate that a large proportion of economic activity derives from travel - related expenses .

if the travel - related portion of economic activity related to federal sites is not being captured in these results because that activity occurs more than 50 miles from the federal recreation site , these studies may undercount the true value .

similarly , results of national studies indicate that activities requiring major purchases ( eg , vehicles ) account for a large proportion of the outdoor recreation economy .

if visitors do not report such expenditures , it also may result in undercounting .

the agencies used different methods to measure visitation and economic activity ; thus , estimates may be only generally comparable .

federal lands comprise approximately 640 million acres in the united states , about 28% of the total land area .

approximately 92% ( 573 million acres ) of federal lands are located in 11 western states and alaska , with over one - third ( 224 million acres ) of all federal land in alaska alone .

the forest service ( fs ) and the bureau of land management ( blm ) manage the majority of federal land .

nearly all federal land is open and available to the public for recreation .

although there is considerable overlap in the recreation opportunities across agencies , some agencies could be considered to have dominant niches .

fs and blm offer a range of opportunities , from camping , picnicking , and birdwatching in developed settings to activities in undeveloped backcountry , motorized recreation , and others .

opportunities on fish and wildlife service land emphasize wildlife , fish , and birds .

the national park service ( nps ) is associated with "iconic natural and cultural resources. .

opportunities on land owned by the bureau of reclamation , national oceanic and atmospheric administration , and u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) tend to center on water and underwater resources .

although some agencies' resources are used mostly by locals , all agencies have resources with regional , national , or international markets .

 table 3 presents information from various sources on recreation visits to federal lands from fy2012 to fy2017 .

in general , these statistics are not comparable to the nsre estimates given above due to differences in measurement .

the statistics indicate that , in general over this period for agencies with complete data , fs and nps had the most visits .

these statistics underscore that size and location are imperfect predictors of recreation resource use ; usace , for example , has higher visitation than several agencies that manage more federal land area .

these differences may be due to proximity to population centers , the types of resources available on different lands , and other factors .

