funding for new border barrier construction became the focal point of a partial government shutdown that began on december 22 , 2018 , and lasted 34 days , the longest on record .

congress ultimately did not accept president donald trump's demand for $5.7 billion in new funding for the construction of a proposed border wall , providing instead $1.375 billion for additional pedestrian fencing as part of the consolidated appropriations act of 2019 ( caa ) .

unsatisfied with the negotiated agreement , the trump administration issued a presidential proclamation on february 15 , 2019 , declaring a national emergency at the southern border of the united states , a move that , among other things , allowed the president to invoke special authorities for redirecting military construction appropriations .

concurrently , the white house released a plan for reprogramming or transferring $6.7 billion to southwest border barrier projects , of which $6.1 billion would come from unobligated department of defense ( dod or department ) appropriations .

congress , noting the president's attempt to secure more funding than provided in the caa , and concerned over a potential violation of its constitutional prerogatives to manage appropriations , acted quickly in an attempt to terminate the national emergency declaration .

a joint resolution , h.j.res .

46 , relating to a national emergency declared by the president on february 15 , 2019 , was passed by both houses on march 14 , 2019 , but was subsequently vetoed by the president one day later .

on march 26 , 2019 , an attempt to override the veto fell short of the required two - thirds majority in the house by a vote of 248-181 .

in september 2019 , congress again attempted to terminate the state of national emergency with a joint resolution ( s.j.res .

54 ) passed by both chambers .

the legislation has yet to be considered by the president .

the national emergency remains in effect .

this report outlines the administration's fy2020 border barrier funding plans using defense funds , describes the various authorities involved , details the process for each budgetary action , indicates the status of appropriated funds , identifies recent congressional actions , and identifies potential issues for congress .

the report does not include a comprehensive overview of dhs funding for border barriers , or describe that agency's fy2020 request for related projects .

it also does not address the deployment and concomitant expense of mobilizing active and reserve military personnel for service on the border .

on february 15 , 2019 , president trump issued a proclamation declaring a national emergency at the southern border that required use of the armed forces .

concurrent with the announcement , the white house released a fact sheet entitled , president donald j. trump's border security victory ( hereafter referred to as the border security factsheet ) that described steps the administration intended to take in order to provide $6.7 billion in appropriations outside of the regular legislative process for new border barrier projects .

drawing on both emergency and nonemergency authorities , the administration outlined a number of steps it stated would be "used sequentially and as needed. .

in march 2019 , the administration delivered its annual budget to congress .

the fy2020 proposal included an additional $7.2 billion in army overseas contingency operations ( oco ) military construction funding , half of which ( $3.6 billion ) would replenish accounts affected by the administration's b order security factsheet plan .

the remainder , $3.6 billion , would fund future border barrier projects .

according to deputy under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) elaine mccusker: we have $3.6 billion - - up to $3.6 billion to backfill any milcon projects that we end up having to fund in '20 instead of '19 .

and then we also have $3.6 billion for potential new construction for the border , and the reason we've done this is to reflect the fact that we have a presidential priority that has a macro funding level and we want to help get to that funding level .

overall , funding actions the administration described between february and march 2019 included a complex mixture of realigned dod program savings and unobligated military construction funds from past years ( $6.1 billion ) , as well as a request for new defense appropriations in fy2020 ( $7.2 billion ) .

in its b order security factsheet plan , the administration cited an additional $2 billion in non - dod appropriations ; $1.375 billion in previously enacted fy2019 department of homeland security ( dhs ) appropriations ( included in the caa ) , and $601 million in contributions from a treasury forfeiture fund ( tff ) that manages seized assets .

altogether , these defense and non - defense funds would total $15.3 billion , of which 87% would be dod funds .

the table 1 indicates all such actions .

although the secretary of the dhs is charged with preventing the entry of terrorists , securing the borders , and carrying out immigration enforcement functions , funding to carry out those missions may be supplemented in part by resources from other agencies .

within dhs , u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , is chiefly responsible for securing the borders of the united states , preventing terrorists and their weapons from entering the country , and enforcing hundreds of u.s. trade and immigration laws .

because border security lies primarily within the jurisdiction of dhs , congress has not generally provided dod with significant funds to address that mission .

congress has instead authorized the military to support dhs ( or local authorities ) in certain situations , such as to assist with drug interdiction or with terrorist incidents involving weapons of mass destruction .

according to dod officials: active - duty and national guard personnel have supported federal and state counterdrug activities ( eg , detection and monitoring of cross - border trafficking , aerial reconnaissance , transportation and communications support , and construction of fences and roads ) beginning in the early 1990s .

most recently , u.s. northern command's joint task force - north executed 53 counterdrug support missions in fiscal year ( fy ) 2017 and 23 missions in fy2018 .

when the secretary of defense approved the four border states' plans for drug interdiction and counterdrug activities , dod committed $21 million in funds in fy2017 and $53 million in fy2018 .

congress has also permitted dod special flexibility for undertaking military construction projects during periods of national crisis , such as when the president declares a national emergency .

 ( the national emergencies act , or nea , establishes procedures for how a president may declare a national emergency but does not explicitly define that term. ) .

historically , emergency military construction has been used to support troops engaged in contingency operations overseas at locations that include iraq and afghanistan .

the following two subsections contain a detailed examination of dod's proposed use of statutory and non - statutory authorities espoused in the trump administration border security factsheet .

these include: 10 u.s.c .

2808 , which would make $3.6 billion available , and ; 10 u.s.c .

284 , which would transfer $2.5 billion of defense program savings in concert with the non - statutory authority section 8005 ( general transfer authority ) .

the final subsection addresses the use of treasury forfeiture funds , which would provide $601 million for the administration's border funding plan .

congressional response to the administration's b order security factsheet plan has generally split by chamber , with the house armed services and appropriations committees moving swiftly to pass legislative language that would block the president's actions and the senate armed services and appropriations committees expressing some support .

in late july 2019 , news outlets reported congressional leadership had come to an informal understanding as part of a settlement of the annual budget caps for fy2020 and fy2021 that might exclude legislative language restricting the use of federal funds for border barriers from annual appropriations measures .

the deal would specifically prohibit legislative provisions limiting the use of transfer authority—a key part of the president's border security factsheet plan—unless such language was adopted on a bipartisan basis .

the effect of such language is still unclear as is how it may otherwise be used to modify ongoing legislative activity .

at the highest level , the president's statements regarding the use of emergency powers to supplement the congressional appropriations process have raised questions for some about the reach of the executive branch's lawful authority .

"i could do the wall over a longer period of time .

i didn't need to do this [national emergency] .

but i would rather do it much faster. .

– president trump , february 15 , 2019 critics also assert the president's actions risk violating the constitutional separation of powers .

article i , section 9 of the u.s. constitution states , "no money shall be drawn from the treasury , but in consequence of appropriations made by law. .

supporters have argued the president has lawfully reallocated funds to address a national crisis .

on june 3 , 2019 , in a lawsuit brought by the house of representatives that argued the administration's actions to fund a border wall represented a breach of the appropriations clause of the constitution , a federal judge ruled the legislature had no standing to sue .

in the 116 th congress , house authorizers and appropriators have inserted provisions into annual legislation that would broadly prohibit the use of defense funds for construction of a wall , fence , border barrier , or other security infrastructure along the southern border .

some of these prohibitions would appear to apply retroactively to all appropriations since fy2015 .

dod's recent decision to undertake general and special reprogramming transfers ( in conjunction with 10 u.s.c .

284 ) , "without regard to comity - based dod policies that prescribe prior approval from congressional committees" has introduced uncertainty into a historically uncontroversial process .

for some , dod's disregard for long - standing reprogramming agreements with congressional defense committees has signaled a challenge to the legislative branch's ability to conduct oversight of approximately $6 billion in annual defense appropriations .

consequently , the department's actions have generated new congressional interest and actions ( particularly in the house ) that would sharply limit the annual budget flexibility provided to the department in authorizations and appropriations acts .

others view dod's recent reprogramming notifications in support of border wall construction as a justifiable anomaly in an otherwise unbroken agreement supported by the department's own internal directives .

in cases where dod reprogramming actions do not reflect congressional intent ( or adhere to dod directives ) , congress may consider what legislative recourse might be available to prohibit future violations .

in some cases , decreasing the department's budgetary flexibility may potentially undermine dod's ability to effectively execute congressionally directed policies and programs .

the emergency military construction statute ( 10 u.s.c .

2808 ) does not limit the types of military construction projects that may be deferred based on a set of criteria , including , for example , whether such delays will affect military readiness .

nevertheless , dod has stated it will apply its own criteria to the 10 u.s.c .

2808 pool of eligible projects in order to preserve readiness .

congress may evaluate whether dod's guidelines are sufficient and whether they serve as a sound basis for governing future decisions .

appendix a .

selected communications and documents the tables below contains a chronology of selected communications , correspondence , and documents relevant to the use of 10 u.s.c .

section 2808 and section 284 , drawn primarily from court records .

this section is intended to identify milestones in the decision - making process .

appendix b .

10 u.s.c .

284 reprogramming requests dod has submitted two reprogramming notifications to defense committees transferring a total of $2.5 billion to the drug interdiction and counterdrug activities account .

the department's first action , on march 25 , 2019 , used general transfer authority to reallocate $1 billion .

approximately 82% of this total was taken from the active duty army pay and allowances ( for officers and enlisted personnel ) , savings realized from service recruiting shortfalls .

dod's second action , on may 9 , 2019 , used a mix of $818.465 million in general transfer authority ( base ) and $881.535 in special transfer authority ( oco ) ; a total of $2.5 billion .

in the table below , reprogramming actions that use special transfer authority are indicated parenthetically with the ( oco ) designation .

together , both reprograming actions reallocated $1.8 billion from base and $.7 billion from oco defense funds .

the majority of these funds were derived from army personnel accounts and programs supporting the afghanistan security forces .

the department's two actions were sourced exclusively from appropriations that began in fy2019 and had a one - to three - year lifespan , or period of availability .

when these program savings were transferred to the drug interdiction and counter - drug activities fy2019 appropriations , they became one - year appropriations .

following additional transfer actions , all appropriations were merged with an fy2019 army operations and maintenance appropriations account , another one - year account .

appendix c. wall projects requested by dhs pursuant to 10 u.s.c .

284 on february 25 , 2019 , dhs formally requested dod support its ability to impede and deny illegal entry and drug smuggling activities along the southwest u.s. - mexico border by assisting with the construction ( or replacement ) of fences , roads , and lighting .

dhs summarized the work required: the new pedestrian fencing includes a linear ground detection system , which is intended to , among other functions , alert border patrol agents when individuals attempt to damage , destroy or otherwise harm the barrier .

the road construction includes the construction of new roads and the improvement of existing roads .

the lighting that is requested has an imbedded camera that works in conjunction with the pedestrian fence .

the lighting must be supported by grid power… .

dhs will provide dod with more precise technical specifications as contract and project planning moves forward .

dhs requested dod undertake a total of 11 projects on federal lands , which the agency identified by geographic location and unique numeric id .

the border patrol divides responsibility for its operations along the southwest border into nine geographic sectors .

four of these were included as part of the dhs request: yuma sector arizona .

composed primarily of desert terrain with vast deserts , mountain ranges , and sand dunes , the area encompasses 126 miles of u.s. - mexico borderland ( 181,670 square miles ) between california and arizona .

dhs requested dod undertake 36 miles of vehicle barrier replacement , 6 miles of pedestrian fencing , and lighting in this sector .

el paso sector texas .

this sector covers the entire state of new mexico and two counties in western texas ; 268 miles of u.s. - mexico borderland ( 125,500 square miles ) .

dhs requested 70 miles of vehicle barrier ( with pedestrian fencing ) and lighting in this sector .

el centro california .

located in southern california , the sector is characterized primarily by agricultural lands , eastern desert areas ( where summer temperatures can exceed 120 degrees ) , and western mountain ranges .

the sector stretches for 71 miles along the u.s. - mexico border .

dhs requested dod undertake a mix of projects along 15 miles in this sector ( vehicle , pedestrian , and lighting ) .

tucson sector arizona .

encompassing nearly all of arizona , this area—a particularly active one for illegal alien apprehension and marijuana seizures—covers 262 miles .

dhs requested road construction , 86 miles of vehicle barrier ( with pedestrian fencing ) , and lighting in this sector .

between march and april 2019 , dod approved seven of the eleven requested projects , funding them in two tranches .

one of the approved projects , yuma 2 , was subsequently terminated due to contract complications .

in august 2019 , dhs notified dod of anticipated contract savings and requested surplus 10 u.s.c .

284 funds be applied to the execution of three additional projects ( yuma 3-5 ) .

after evaluating the request , dod agreed to undertake a modified set of projects ( yuma 4-5 , tucson 4 ) .

in september , the department terminated the new projects after new estimates revealed the anticipated contract savings would be insufficient to undertake additional construction .

the list below shows projects initially requested by dhs and those added by dod in subsequent modified requests .

the geographic sector is indicated in the "project name" column , along with the project's numeric designation .

several projects not funded by the use of 10 u.s.c .

284 funds were later funded by 10 u.s.c .

2808 .

for those approved for action by dod , the funding tranche is also indicated .

in a letter to acting dhs secretary kirstjen nielsen , acting secretary of defense shanahan stated the u.s. army corps of engineers would undertake the planning and construction of approved projects and , upon completion , would hand over custody of all new infrastructure to dhs .

court injunctions temporarily suspended construction on may 24 , 2019 , the u.s. district court for the northern district of california issued a temporary injunction in sierra club v. trump , barring use of dod's first funding tranche of $1 billion .

in compliance with the court's order , usace immediately suspended ongoing operations for the two active border barrier projects .

at the time of the suspension , $423,999,999 remained unobligated ( of the original $1 billion ) : el paso 1: an undefinitzed contract was awarded on april 9 , 2019 .

at the time of the court's injunction , $389,999,999 remained unobligated .

yuma 1: an undefinitized contract was awarded on awarded may 15 .

at the time of the court's injunction , $35,000,000 remained unobligated .

on may 25 , 2019 , dod executed a second reprogramming action of $1.5 billion .

on june 28 , 2019 , the california district court issued a second injunction that prohibited dod from using either of the two funding tranches ( $2.5 billion total ) .

again , usace project managers suspended ongoing operations .

at the time of the new suspension , approximately $752,750,000 remained unobligated from the second funding tranche ( $1.5 billion ) : tucson sector projects 1-3: an undefinitzed contract was awarded on may 15 , 2019 .

at the time of the court's injunction , $646,000,000 remained unobligated .

el centro sector project 1: an undefinitzed contract was awarded on may 15 , 2019 .

at the time of the court's injunction , $106,750,000 remained unobligated .

project delays have resulted in some additional costs to the government .

dod financial regulations recognize contractors are entitled to compensation for unreasonable contract suspensions , since costs continue to be incurred by idling equipment , site security , contract labor , material storage , or market fluctuations .

the government is charged additional penalties for late payment ( 3.625% per annum ) .

in the event an active contract is terminated , dod would be held responsible for compensating contractors for sunk costs .

on july 26 , 2019 , the u.s. supreme court lifted the lower court injunctions , allowing construction to proceed .

appendix d. wall projects requested by dhs pursuant to 10 u.s.c .

2808 on september 3 , 2019 , the secretary of defense , having determined that border barrier construction would serve as a "force multiplier" for reducing dhs's demand for dod personnel and assets , directed the acting secretary of the army to proceed with the construction of 11 border barrier projects .

in a memorandum to the department , the secretary stated: based on analysis and advice from the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff and input from the commander .

u.s. army corps of engineers , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , and the department of the interior and pursuant to the authority granted to me in section 2808 , i have determined that 11 military construction projects along the international border with mexico with an estimated total cost of $3.6 billion , are necessary to support the use of the armed forces in connection with the national emergency .

these projects will deter illegal entry , increase the vanishing time of those illegally crossing the border , and channel migrants to ports of entry .

they will reduce the demand for dod personnel and assets at the locations where the barriers are constructed and allow the redeployment of dod personnel and assets to other high - traffic areas on the border without barriers .

in short , these barriers will allow dod to provide support to dhs more efficiently and effectively .

in this respect , the contemplated construction projects are force multipliers .

of the eleven projects dod selected for execution , seven were located ( in whole or in part ) on land under the jurisdiction of the department of the interior ( doi ) that required an administrative transfer to the department of defense before construction could proceed .

on september 18 , 2019 , doi issued public land orders that temporarily transferred jurisdiction of land required for five of these projects for a period of three years .

in the table below , doi - transferred lands have been indicated with an asterisk ( see column marked "jurisdiction" ) .

two of the eleven projects selected by dod ( el centro 5 and laredo 7 ) were located on non - public lands that will require either purchase or condemnation before construction may proceed .

usace representatives have stated that such a process would not be completed before april 2020 .

the remaining two projects ( yuma 2 and yuma 10 / 27 ) , are located exclusively on the barry m. goldwater range ( bmgr ) , a military installation under the jurisdiction of the u.s. navy where construction may begin immediately .

the table below indicates the eleven projects dod has agreed to fund using 10 u.s.c .

2808 funds , and describes the estimated cost of construction , the jurisdiction of associated lands , and a description of the parcel .

appendix e. military construction projects deferred pursuant to 10 u.s.c .

2808 on september 3 , 2019 , dod delivered to congressional defense committees a list of ongoing military construction projects the department had selected for deferral pursuant to 10 u.s.c .

2808 .

the list had been preceded by two additional notifications that identified potential military construction projects that might be affected by use of the statute .

the first of these three lists of military construction projects , delivered to defense committees in march 2019 , identified all military construction projects that had not yet received contract awards—making them vulnerable for selection under 10 u.s.c .

and the department's independent internal criteria .

a second list , which dod delivered to defense committees in late may 2019 , selectively updated the contract award dates of some military construction projects .

the final list , comprised of approximately 127 projects ( $3.6 billion ) , updated the contract award dates for six projects ( $209 million ) located outside of the united states , making them newly eligible for selection .

additionally , the department's final list included one planning and design project ( $13.6 million ) not included in previous notifications .

the table below summarizes this final list .

