the k - 12 teacher workforce is relatively large—each year , nearly 4 million teachers are employed in u.s. elementary and secondary schools .

turnover in these schools is high relative to earlier periods—about 1 in 10 teachers left his or her job in 2018 .

this figure follows federal statistical trends that show a steady growth in teacher attrition since the 1980s .

the problem of teacher turnover raises a number of recruitment and retention issues of interest to policymakers .

the higher education act ( hea ) is the main federal law containing policies designed to address these issues .

title ii of the hea authorizes grant support for schools that prepare new teachers .

title iv of the hea authorizes financial support to encourage people to stay in the teaching profession in the form of loan forgiveness and other benefits .

the hea was last comprehensively amended in 2008 by the higher education opportunity act ( heoa , p.l .

110-315 ) .

although the authorities have expired , the associated programs continue to receive appropriations .

congressional consideration of potentially reauthorizing the hea is ongoing , with the introduction of numerous bills to amend current law and address teacher recruitment and retention .

this report describes ( 1 ) the history of federal teacher recruitment and retention policy , ( 2 ) current policies in this area , and ( 3 ) related issues that may arise as congress considers reauthorizing the hea .

teacher recruitment and retention have been the focus of federal policy since the hea was first enacted in 1965 .

this section briefly describes the history of federal policy in this area .

the hea , as amended by the heoa , addresses current k - 12 teacher issues through programs supporting the improvement of teacher preparation and recruitment .

title ii of the hea authorizes grants for improving teacher education programs , strengthening teacher recruitment efforts , and providing training for prospective teachers .

this title also includes reporting requirements for states and ihes regarding the quality of teacher education programs .

title iv of the hea authorizes teacher education assistance for college and higher education ( teach ) grants to encourage more students to prepare for a career in teaching and student loan forgiveness for individuals teaching in certain high - need subjects .

teachers may also be eligible for loan relief through the title iv public service loan forgiveness program .

the 116 th congress is expected to consider reauthorizing the hea .

thus far , numerous bills have been introduced to amend current law and address teacher recruitment and retention .

this section discusses issues that may arise as the potential reauthorization process unfolds .

the policy issues discussed here are based on existing and prior legislative proposals and are intended to provide some context for their consideration .

these issues include modifying the title ii grant partnership structure , targeting support to specific teacher shortage areas or non - instructional staff , expanding teacher preparation program accountability requirements , reforming administration of the teach grant program , and expanding or consolidating teacher loan forgiveness programs .

currently , ihes are a required partner in the tqp program and often serve as the sponsor of a partnership .

with the rise of alternatives to traditional routes into the teaching profession , some proposals would eliminate the requirement that ihes be a partner by allowing non - ihe - based teacher preparation providers to serve as tqp grantee sponsors as well .

current law defines a "partner institution" as a four - year ihe .

policymakers may consider amending this definition to allow two - year ihes or other nonprofit teacher preparation programs to serve as a tqp partner institution or partnership sponsor .

to be a partner in a tqp grant , leas and schools must be designated as "high - need" according to definitions in title ii of the hea .

those definitions attempt to direct support , in part , toward low - income leas and schools .

some feel the thresholds set by the hea are too low and that funds should be reserved for very low - income leas and schools .

current federal teacher recruitment and retention programs often direct support to certain instructional areas that are considered hard - to - staff , such as mathematics , science , and special education .

some feel these provisions should be broadened to include additional subject areas ( eg , english language learner instruction ) or certain hard - to - staff schools ( eg , rural and / or native american schools ) .

others have proposed that the targeted position types should be broadened to include non - instructional staff such as school counselors , librarians , literacy specialists , and coaches .

there are also proposals focused on staff who serve in leadership roles ( eg , establishing principal residency programs similar to the current teacher residencies ) .

some have pushed for title ii amendments that would support teacher advancement into leadership through the creation of career ladders and incentives for master teachers .

still others would like to allow the secretary to set aside title ii funds for a state grant for leadership training activities .

under current hea provisions , ihes that operate teacher preparation programs are required to report information on their performance including pass rates and scaled scores on teacher certification exams .

states are required to report these data in aggregate as well as the results of program evaluations and any programs designated as "low - performing. .

thirty states have never identified a program as low - performing and fewer than 3% of all programs nationwide have ever been identified as low - performing or at - risk of such designation .

some policymakers have argued that current accountability provisions are inadequate .

some have asserted that non - ihe - based programs in particular are not sufficiently scrutinized .

others think that all teacher preparation programs should be subject to outcome measures beyond passage of certification exams and that programs should be judged by their graduates' professional readiness , ability to find employment , and retention in teaching , as well as the performance of their students .

the teach grant program has reportedly encountered significant administrative challenges and has been the subject of increasing congressional scrutiny .

changes that have been suggested to alleviate these issues include providing grant recipients additional time to complete the service requirement , the option to pay back part of their grant if they are unable to complete the service requirement in full , and a better process by which to appeal the conversion of their grant to a loan .

some observers are concerned that students in the first year or two of college are not fully aware of what profession they want to go into , and they have advocated that teach grants be made available to student in their junior and senior years of college and / or to master's degree candidates .

others have sought to limit teach grants to programs with a proven ability to prepare individuals effectively for the teaching profession .

teachers may access several separate loan relief options under current federal law .

in many cases , these options serve similar purposes , but benefit requirements may conflict with or not complement one another ( i.e. , exercising eligibility for one program may nullify or forestall eligibility for another ) .

the existence of multiple programs may lead to borrower confusion as well as administrative complexity .

policymakers might consider consolidating programs or targeting them to a narrower set of borrowers .

some argue that the requirements teachers must meet to qualify for loan relief are too difficult to understand and / or fulfill .

these requirements caused the loan forgiveness programs to encounter administrative problems similar to those in the teach grant program .

policymakers may consider whether to simplify these requirements to improve the effectiveness of loan forgiveness as a teacher retention tool .

