this report provides an overview of the judiciary's fy2020 budget request , as well as information about congress's consideration of the judiciary's request .

the first section of this report includes subsections covering each major action involving the judiciary's fy2020 budget request , including the initial submission by the president of the judiciary's request on march 11 , 2019 ; a hearing held on march 7 , 2019 , by the house financial services and general government appropriations subcommittee on the budget request for the u.s. supreme court ; the house subcommittee markup on june 3 , 2019 ; the house appropriations committee markup on june 11 , 2019 ; passage by the house on june 26 , 2019 ; the senate subcommittee markup on september 17 , 2019 ; the senate appropriations committee markup on september 19 , 2019 ; enactment of a continuing resolution on september 27 , 2019 ( p.l .

116-59 ) ; enactment of a second continuing resolution on november 21 , 2019 ( p.l .

116-69 ) ; and enactment of fy2020 appropriations for the judiciary in the fy2020 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

116-93 , december 20 , 2019 ) .

the second section of the report provides information about the specific discretionary appropriations requested by the judiciary for fy2020 , as well as information about the mandatory appropriations and administrative provisions included in the appropriations process .

the third section provides information about the various courts , judicial entities , and judicial services that are covered by appropriations for the judiciary .

the report also identifies some of the courts and judicial services that are not covered by such appropriations ( but are covered by other appropriations bills ) .

finally , the report provides information about ongoing policy issues affecting the judiciary that may be of interest to congress during fy2020 .

this section provides an overview of the major actions involving congressional consideration of fy2020 judiciary appropriations .

the final status of fy2020 judiciary appropriations is summarized in table 1 .

three specialized courts within the federal court system are not funded under the judiciary budget: the u.s. court of appeals for the armed forces ( funded in the department of defense appropriations bill ) , the u.s. court of appeals for veterans claims ( funded in the military construction , veterans affairs , and related agencies appropriations bill ) , and the u.s. tax court ( funded under independent agencies , title v of the fsgg bill ) .

additionally , federal courthouse construction is funded within the general services administration account under independent agencies , title v of the fsgg bill .

congress determines through legislative action both the size and structure of the federal judiciary .

consequently , the creation of any new permanent or temporary u.s. circuit and district court judgeships must be authorized by congress .

the judicial conference of the united states , the policymaking body of the federal courts , makes biennial recommendations to congress that identify any circuit and district courts that , according to the conference , require new permanent judgeships to appropriately administer civil and criminal justice in the federal court system .

in evaluating whether a court might need additional judgeships , the judicial conference examines whether certain caseload levels have been met , as well as court - specific information that might uniquely affect a particular court .

the judicial conference's most recent recommendation , released in march 2019 , calls for the creation of five permanent judgeships for the u.s. court of appeals for the ninth circuit ( composed of california , eight other western states , and two u.s. territories ) .

the conference also recommends creating 65 permanent u.s. district court judgeships , as well as converting 8 temporary district court judgeships to permanent status .

according to the judicial conference , since the enactment of the most recent omnibus judgeship bill in 1990 ( p.l .

101-650 ) , the number of u.s. circuit court judgeships has remained at 179 while appellate court case filings increased by 15% through the end of fy2018 .

during this same time period , congress enacted legislation that increased the number of permanent and temporary district judgeships by 4% ( from 645 to 673 ) while district court case filings increased by 39% .

in terms of specific types of cases , civil cases increased by 34% during the same period , and cases involving criminal felony defendants increased by 60% .

the house appropriations committee , in its report that accompanied the committee's passage of the fsgg funding bill , noted that the judicial conference recently recommended the creation of a "significant number of new article iii judgeships" for the nation's circuit and district courts .

the committee also expressed its concern that , "absent executive and congressional action to fill existing judicial vacancies and the passage of comprehensive bipartisan legislation to create new judgeships , the ability of the federal courts to administer justice in a swift , fair , and effective manner could be compromised. .

there is ongoing congressional interest in the safe conduct of court proceedings and the security of federal judges .

congress has , in the past , appropriated funds specifically to enhance the personal security of judges .

for example , an fy2005 supplemental appropriations act included a provision providing funds for home intrusion detection systems for federal judges .

additionally , the court security improvement act of 2007 included various measures to enhance security for judges and court personnel , as well as courtroom safety for the public .

the act , for example , amended 18 u.s.c .

â§930 ( e ) ( 1 ) to prohibit the possession of dangerous weapons ( other than firearms , which were already prohibited ) in federal court facilities .

the judiciary works closely with the u.s .

marshals service ( usms ) to ensure that adequate protective policies , procedures , and practices are in place for the federal courts .

as discussed in the text above , the marshals are largely responsible for protecting federal courthouses , judges , and other judicial employees .

in fy2018 , after the usms assessed the level of danger in explicit threats and inappropriate communications directed at judges and other court officers , there were 531 predicated protective investigations opened "based on the presence of or potential for criminal activity. .

the house appropriations committee , in the report accompanying its markup of the fy2020 judiciary budget , stated that the committee considers it a priority to improve the physical security of federal judicial facilities and "to ensure the integrity of the judicial process. .

the judiciary continues the cost containment initiatives that it began in 2004.â specific areas of focus for containing costs include office space rental , personnel expenses , information technology , and operating costs .

the senate report that accompanied the appropriations committee's markup addressed the issue of cost containment , stating that the "judicial branch is subject to the same funding constraints facing the executive and legislative branches .

it is imperative that the federal judiciary devote its resources primarily to the retention of staff .

further , it is also important that the judiciary contain controllable costs such as travel , construction , and other expenses. .

of particular focus by the judiciary is an effort to cut costs associated with office space and rental payments .

the administrative office of u.s. courts ( ao ) announced in december 2018 that the federal judiciary "has succeeded dramatically in its five - year quest to reduce building space and rent costs , exceeding its original reduction goals by nearly 30 percent. .

additionally , ao noted that "rent has been cut more than $36 million a year," with additional savings anticipated in the future .

in its fy2020 budget summary , the administrative office of u.s. courts ( ao ) emphasized that , as of september 30 , 2018 , approximately 1.1. million usable square feet had been removed from the judiciary's rent bill .

examples of the judiciary's space reduction campaign include the following: the bankruptcy court for the district of new hampshire "was relocated from leased space in manchester into the district court in concord , nh .

savings: 20,000 square feet. .

in new york , the bankruptcy court in buffalo "relocated into the district courthouse .

in manhattan , the bankruptcy court reduced space by digitizing paper records .

combined savings: 39,000 square feet. .

the bankruptcy court in san francisco "saved over 25,000 square feet and $1.5 million in annual rent by moving into the phillip burton federal building and u.s .

courthouse. .

courthouse "library reductions in camden , nj ; wilmington , de ; harrisburg , pa ; philadelphia ; and u.s. virgin islands saved over 18,000 square feet. .

the sixth circuit's library headquarters in cincinnati "relocated to space formerly used for clerk's office file storage .

total savings: 15,000 square feet. .

courthouses for which there was no permanently assigned judge , that is , non resident courthouses , "were closed in bryson city , nc ; wilkesboro , nc ; beaufort , sc ; and parkersburg , wv .

total savings: over 35,000 square feet. .

"in miami , 33,000 square feet and $900,000 in annual rent were saved by relocating the bankruptcy court into the c. clyde atkins u.s .

courthouse .

two magistrate judges were relocated , and a circuit library and jury assembly area were vacated. .

the administrative office of u.s. courts also noted that , in addition to space reduction , the judiciary has "undertaken significant efforts to develop alternative organizational models that may result in cost savings , including expanding shared administrative services within and among" district courts .

the house appropriations committee noted in its report that it recognizes the judiciary's "cost containment efforts over the past 12 years and is pleased with the [its] savings and cost avoidance. .

the committee noted , specifically , that the reduction of usable square feet from the judiciary's rent bill "equates to an annual cost avoidance of nearly $36,000,000 and $105,000,000 over the past five years. .

