according to freedom house , the extent of allowed religious freedom and activity among china's estimated 350 million religious practitioners varies widely by religion , region , and ethnic group , depending on "the level of perceived threat or benefit to [communist] party interests , as well as the discretion of local officials. .

the party's sinicization policy and the 2018 amendments to the government's regulations on religious affairs have affected all religions to varying degrees .

new policies further restrict religious travel to foreign countries and contacts with foreign religious organizations and tighten bans on religious practice among party members and state employees and the religious education of minors .

religious venues are required to raise the national flag and teach traditional chinese culture and "core socialist values," and online religious activities now need approval by the provincial religious affairs bureau .

human rights conditions in the prc have been a recurring point of friction and source of mutual mistrust in u.s. - china relations , particularly since the tiananmen square crackdown in 1989 and the end of the cold war in 1991 .

china's persistent human rights violations , as well as its authoritarian political system , often have caused u.s. policymakers and / or the american public to view the prc government with greater suspicion .

chinese officials may in turn view expressed human rights concerns by u.s. policymakers , and the broader u.s. democracy promotion agenda , as tools meant to undermine ccp rule and slow china's rise .

frictions over human rights may affect other issues in the relationship , including those related to economics and security .

in engaging china on human rights issues , the united states has often focused on china's inability or unwillingness to respect universal civil and political rights , while china prefers to tout its progress in delivering economic development and well - being , and advancing social rights for its people , including ethnic minorities .

in the period following the 1989 tiananmen square crackdown , the united states sought to leverage china's desire for "most favored nation" ( mfn ) trade status by linking its annual renewal to improvements in human rights conditions in china .

the clinton administration ultimately abandoned this direct linkage , however , in favor of a general policy of engagement with china that it hoped would contribute to improved respect for human rights and greater political freedoms for the chinese people .

president bill clinton , in his 1999 state of the union address , summed up the long - term aspirations of this approach , stating , "it's important not to isolate china .

the more we bring china into the world , the more the world will bring change and freedom to china. .

in the following more than two decades , u.s .

administrations and congresses employed broadly similar strategies for promoting human rights in china , combining efforts to deepen trade and other forms of engagement to help create conditions for positive change , on the one hand , with specific human rights promotion efforts , on the other .

presidents bill clinton , george w. bush , and barack obama held that u.s. engagement with china and encouraging china to respect international norms , including on human rights , would result in mutual benefits , including china's own success and stability .

policy tools for promoting human rights have included open censure of china ; quiet diplomacy , such as closed - door discussions ; congressional investigations , hearings , legislation , statements , letters , and visits ; funding for human rights and democracy foreign assistance programs in the prc ; congressionally - mandated reports on human rights in china ; support for human rights defenders and pro - democracy groups in china , hong kong , and the united states ; economic sanctions ; efforts to promote internet freedom ; support for international broadcasting ; and coordination of international pressure , including through multilateral organizations .

in addition , some u.s. officials and members of congress have regularly met with chinese dissidents and with the dalai lama and exiled tibetan officials , in both washington , d.c. and dharamsala , india , where the headquarters of the central tibetan administration ( sometimes referred to as the tibetan government - in - exile ) is located .

beijing opposes such meetings as encouraging tibetan independence and contravening the u.s. policy that tibet is part of china .

in recent years , policy analysts have increasingly debated the effectiveness of aspects of the u.s. engagement strategy with china , including , in light of china's deepening domestic political repression , its results in securing improvements in beijing's respect for human rights and political freedoms .

under president trump , u.s. policy documents have declared that china's international integration has not liberalized its political or economic system , and the united states has begun to place less emphasis on engagement .

the trump administration has referred to china as a "revisionist power," a strategic competitor , or even an adversary , and curtailed some government - to - government cooperation .

some critics of the administration's china policy argue that u.s. effectiveness and credibility on human rights is strengthened when the united states works with allies and within international organizations to promote human rights and democracy globally and in china , while maintaining openness to engaging china's government and society , where appropriate .

a u.s. policy approach that is less concerned with maintaining broad engagement with china may afford greater space and opportunity to push the prc on human rights concerns .

trump administration efforts in this area arguably have been uneven to date , with some commentators criticizing the administration for inconsistency in its commitment to human rights issues as it pursues other priorities with china , particularly on trade .

more broadly , the administration has placed less emphasis on existing multilateral institutions and on multilateral diplomacy in its foreign policy , including with regard to human rights .

the forcefulness of the administration's public rhetoric on prc human rights issues has differed between the president and some senior administration officials .

since 2018 , some administration officials have used increasingly sharp language on china's human rights abuses .

vice president mike pence's october 2018 speech on the administration's china policy , which was critical of china across a broad set of policy areas , cited concern over china's "control and repression of its own people" and referenced "an unparalleled surveillance state. .

at the announcement of the department of state's 2019 release of its annual report on human rights practices around the world , secretary of state michael pompeo stated that china was in a "league of its own" in the area of human rights violations .

in july 2019 , pompeo described the situation in xinjiang in particular as "one of the worst human rights crises of our time," and "the stain of the century. .

president trump generally has not publicly raised the issue of human rights in china and reportedly remains focused largely on trade issues .

in july 2019 , president trump met with survivors of religious persecution around the world , including four individuals from china: a uyghur muslim , a tibetan buddhist , a christian , and a falun gong practitioner .

in september 2019 at a united nations event on religious freedom , the president issued a broad statement calling for an end to religious persecution , but did not mention religious freedom issues in china specifically ; his later remarks to the u.n. general assembly , as they related to china , emphasized trade issues .

the trump administration has not attempted to restart the u.s. - china human rights dialogue , which beijing suspended in 2016 .

many other operative elements of u.s. human rights policy toward china , however , reflect continuity with prior administrations ; many are statutorily mandated and / or continue to be funded by congress ( as described below ) .

the state department's most recent "integrated country strategy" for china , released in august 2018 , includes an objective to "advocate for and urge china to adhere to the rule of law , respect the individual rights and dignity of all its citizens , and ease restrictions on the free flow of information and ideas to advance civil society. .

since 2001 , u.s. foreign assistance programs have sought to promote human rights , civil society , democracy , rule of law , and internet freedom in china .

in addition , some programs also have addressed environmental and rule of law issues and focused upon sustainable development , environmental conservation , and preservation of indigenous culture in tibetan areas of china .

u.s. - funded programs do not provide assistance to prc government entities or directly to chinese non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) , and are predominantly awarded in the form of grants to u.s. - based ngos and academic institutions .

the state department's bureau of democracy , human rights , and labor ( drl ) has generally administered programs to promote human rights and democracy in china , while the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) has administered the aforementioned programs in tibet and some additional programs in the areas of the environment and rule of law .

drl programs across china have generally supported rule of law development , civil society , labor rights , religious freedom , government transparency , public participation in government , and internet freedom .

between 2001 and 2018 , the u.s. government provided approximately $241 million for drl programs in china , $99 million for tibetan programs , and $72 million for environmental and rule of law efforts in the prc ( see figure 2 above ) .

since 2015 , congress has appropriated additional funds for tibetan communities in india and nepal ( $6 million in fy2019 ) .

since 2018 , congress also has provided $3 million annually to strengthen institutions and governance in the tibetan exile communities .

established in 1983 , the national endowment for democracy ( ned ) is a private , nonprofit foundation "dedicated to the growth and strengthening of democratic institutions around the world. .

funded primarily by an annual congressional appropriation , ned has played an active role in promoting human rights and democracy in china since the mid - 1980s .

a grant - making institution , nedâ has supported projects in china carried out by grantees that include its four affiliated organizations ; chinese , tibetan , and uyghur human rights and democracy groups and media platforms based in the united states and hong kong ; and a small number of ngos based in mainland china .

program areas have included efforts related to prisoners of conscience ; rights defenders ; freedom of expression ; civil society ; the rule of law ; public interest law ; internet freedom ; religious freedom ; promoting understanding of tibetan , uyghur , and other ethnic concerns in china ; government accountability and transparency ; political participation ; labor rights ; public policy analysis and debate ; and rural land rights , among others .

ned currently describes china as a priority country in asia in light of the "significant and systemic challenges to democratization" there .

ned grants for china ( including tibet and hong kong ) totaled approximately $7 million in 2017 and $6.5 million in 2018 .

this support is provided using ned's regular congressional appropriations .

the u.s. agency for global media ( usagm ; formerly the broadcasting board of governors ) utilizes international broadcasting and media activities to "advance the broad foreign policy priorities of the united states , including the universal values of freedom and democracy. .

it targets resources to areas "most impacted by state - sponsored disinformation" ( as well as by violent extremism ) , and identifies people in china as a key audience .

usagm - supported voice of america ( voa ) and radio free asia ( rfa ) provide external sources of independent or alternative news and opinion to chinese audiences .

the two media services play small but unique roles in providing u.s. - style broadcasting , journalism , and public debate in china .

voa , which offers mainly u.s. and international news , and rfa , which serves as an uncensored source of domestic chinese news , often report on important world and local events , including human rights issues .

the prc government regularly jams and blocks voa and rfa mandarin , cantonese , tibetan , and uyghur language radio and television broadcasts and internet sites , while voa english services generally receive less interference .

voa and rfa have made efforts to enhance their internet services , develop circumvention or counter - censorship technologies , and provide access to their programs on social media platforms .

usagm increasingly emphasizes digital and social media content in china , arguing that these are "effective channels for information - seeking people to evade government firewalls. .

the agency describes rfa uyghur as the "only uyghur language news outlet for the xinjiang uyghur autonomous region," and states that the outlet's social media content is popular among the uyghur exile community , which shares the content with uyghurs in xinjiang .

china is subject to some u.s. economic sanctions in response to its human rights conditions .

the sanctions' effects have been limited , however , and arguably largely symbolic .

many sanctions imposed on china as a response to the 1989 tiananmen crackdown ( including restrictions on foreign aid , military and government exchanges , and export licenses ) are no longer in effect .

remaining tiananmen - related sanctions suspend overseas private investment corporation programs and restrict export licenses for u.s .

munitions list ( usml ) items and crime control equipment .

the united states also limits its support for international financial institution ( ifi ) lending to china for human rights reasons .

for example , u.s. representatives to ifis may by law support projects in tibet only if they do not encourage the migration and settlement of non - tibetans into tibet or the transfer of tibetan - owned properties to non - tibetans , due in part to the potential for such activities to erode tibetan culture and identity .

relatedly , china also has been subject to potential nonhumanitarian and nontrade - related foreign assistance restrictions as a result of its state department designation as a "tier 3" ( worst ) country for combating human trafficking in recent years .

the global magnitsky human rights accountability act , enacted as part of the national defense authorization act for fy2017 ( p.l .

114-328 , subtitle f , title xii ) , authorizes the president to impose both economic sanctions and visa denials or revocations against foreign individuals responsible for "gross violations of internationally recognized human rights. .

the trump administration has thus far sanctioned one chinese security official , gao yan , pursuant to the global magnitsky act .

according to the treasury department , gao headed the public security bureau branch in beijing at which human rights activist cao shunli was held and denied medical treatment ; cao died in march 2014 .

the executive branch may also utilize section 7031 ( c ) of the department of state , foreign operations , and related appropriations act , 2019 ( division f of p.l .

116-6 ) or the broad authorities under section 212 of the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) to impose visa sanctions on individuals responsible for human rights abuses .

numerous human rights advocates and members of congress have called on the trump administration to sanction chinese government officials responsible for the human rights abuses occurring in xinjiang ; many have argued for global magnitsky sanctions against xuar party secretary chen quanguo , in particular .

press reports suggest the trump administration has been considering sanctions under the global magnitsky act against xinjiang officials , but has delayed actions in the midst of the u.s. - china bilateral trade negotiations .

in october 2019 , the state department announced visa restrictions against an unspecified number of "chinese government and communist party officials who are believed to be responsible for , or complicit in , the detention or abuse of uighurs , kazakhs , or other members of muslim minority groups" in xinjiang , and stated that the officials' family members may also be subject to visa restrictions .

the international religious freedom act of 1998 ( irfa , p.l .

105-292 ) mandates that the president produce an annual report on the status of religious freedom in countries around the world and identify "countries of particular concern" ( cpcs ) for "particularly severe violations of religious freedom," and prescribes punitive actions in response to such violations .

the law provides a menu of potential sanctions against cpcs , such as foreign assistance restrictions or loan prohibitions , but provides the executive branch with significant discretion in determining which , if any , actions to take .

u.s. reports under irfa have been consistently critical of china's religious freedom conditions , and the u.s. government has designated china as a cpc in each of its annual designation announcements since irfa's enactment .

consistent with prior administrations , the trump administration has to date chosen not to take new actions against the chinese government pursuant to irfa and instead referred to existing , ongoing sanctions to satisfy the law's requirements .

these existing sanctions relate to the above - mentioned restrictions on exports of crime control and detection equipment adopted following the tiananmen crackdown .

the reciprocal access to tibet act ( rata , p.l .

115-330 ) , enacted in december 2018 , requires that , absent a waiver by the secretary of state , no individual determined to be "substantially involved in the formulation or execution of policies related to access for foreigners to tibetan areas" may receive a visa or be admitted to the united states while prc policies restricting foreigners' access to tibetan areas of china remain in place .

the state department is to report to congress annually for five years following rata's enactment , identifying the individuals who had visas denied or revoked pursuant to the law , and , "to the extent practicable," provide a broader list of the "substantially involved" individuals .

on october 7 , 2019 , the u.s. department of commerce announced that it would add 28 prc entities to the bureau of industry and security ( bis ) "entity list" under the export administration regulations ( ear ) , asserting that the entities "have been implicated in human rights violations and abuses in the implementation of china's campaign of repression , mass arbitrary detention , and high - technology surveillance against uighurs , kazakhs , and other members of muslim minority groups in the xuar. .

the entities to be added include eight technology companies , the xuar public security bureau ( psb ) and eighteen subordinate psbs , and the psb - affiliated xinjiang police college .

the action imposes licensing requirements prior to the sale or transfer of u.s. items to these entities .

for each entity , the commerce department indicated that there would be a presumption of license denial for all items subject to the ear , with the exception of certain categories to be subject to a case - by - case review .

secretary of commerce wilbur ross stated that adding the entities would "ensure that our technologies , fostered in an environment of individual liberty and free enterprise , are not used to repress defenseless minority populations. .

previously , members of congress had written to secretary ross and other senior administration officials urging them to expand the entity list "to ensure that u.s. companies are not assisting , directly or indirectly , in creating the vast civilian surveillance or big - data predictive policing systems being used in [xinjiang]. .

some observers believe the decision could result in significant adverse business impacts for some of the chinese technology companies .

the united states also has engaged in multilateral diplomacy to advocate for improved human rights conditions in china .

for example , in march 2016 , the united states joined 11 other countries to deliver a joint statement at the united nations human rights council criticizing china's human rights record and calling on china to uphold its human rights commitments .

the trump administration has curtailed u.s. participation in some multilateral human rights organizations , most prominently by announcing the u.s. withdrawal from the unhrc in june 2018 , and arguably has placed less emphasis on multilateral diplomacy .

the united states reportedly did not sign a 2018 joint letter by 15 foreign ambassadors in beijing requesting a meeting with xuar party secretary chen quanguo to raise concerns over human rights abuses in xinjiang .

on july 8 , 2019 , 22 nations issued a joint statement to the unhrc president and the u.n. high commissioner on human rights calling on china to "refrain from the arbitrary detention and restrictions on freedom of movement of uighurs , and other muslim and minority communities in xinjiang," and to "allow meaningful access to xinjiang for independent international observers. .

the statement , which was signed by numerous countries that are not current members of the unhrc , was not signed by the united states .

the trump administration has sought some new venues through which to issue multilateral statements on certain prc human rights issues , particularly on religious freedom .

the state department convened a ministerial to advance religious freedom in july 2018 and july 2019 , with participation from foreign delegations and civil society leaders , and each time released a joint statement expressing concern over religious freedom conditions in china .

the united states was joined in the 2019 statement by canada , kosovo , the marshall islands , and the united kingdom .

more broadly , the administration is also working to establish an "international religious freedom alliance" comprised of governments "dedicated to confronting religious persecution around the world," presumably including in china .

despite its withdrawal from the unhrc , the united states has also continued to participate in some council activities in its capacity as a u.n. member state , such as the universal periodic review ( upr ) process , including china's most recent upr .

during china's review in november 2018 , over one dozen countries , including the united states , raised questions and concerns about china's treatment of tibetans , uyghurs , and other minorities , as well as over freedom of religion in china .

the united states made four recommendations , including for china to "abolish all forms of arbitrary detention , including internment camps in xinjiang , and immediately release the hundreds of thousands , possibly millions , of individuals detained in these camps. .

