traditional macroeconomic theory addresses two main questions .

first , macroeconomic theory and policy seek to mitigate short - term economic fluctuations ( or stabilize the economy ) that leave productive resources idle for a time .

second , macroeconomists seek to recommend public policies that maximize living standards ( economic growth ) over the long term , while keeping debt at sustainable levels .

the role of monetary policy and the maintenance of a stable price level are embedded in both issues .

in the past few years , the u.s. economy has experienced persistently low interest rates despite near - full employment and federal deficits and debt significantly above their historical averages .

these characteristics have led to debate over the optimal trajectory of long - term federal debt in an economic environment with relatively low borrowing costs .

recently , an economic theory outside of mainstream economic views , called modern monetary theory ( mmt ) by its proponents , has been receiving attention in the public debate .

interest in this theory may in part reflect concerns about the deficit financing needed for new spending programs in health , education , infrastructure , and other areas .

mmt suggests that deficit financing can be used without harmful economic effects in circumstances of low inflation rates and low interest rates , conditions that currently exist despite indications that the country is at full employment .

this report first explains mainstream macroeconomic theory .

it then surveys the available mmt literature to provide a basic understanding of the differences ( or lack thereof ) between the defining relationships established in mmt and mainstream economics .

it next discusses whether mmt can be used to justify deficit financing .

finally , it discusses how existing government institutions may present barriers in adopting the prescriptions of mmt for managing the economy .

unlike mainstream macroeconomic theory , where consensus has been reached on how core relationships translate into mathematical equations , there is no comparative mathematical statement of mmt .

some academic economists have translated mmt into a mathematical framework , and the explanation of the differences between mainstream and mmt theory are based on those discussions .

proponents of mmt do not necessarily accept that framework , however .

although basic macroeconomic models vary in many ways , any macroeconomic model that allows for fiscal and monetary policy to influence the economy has three relationships in the economy that must be in balance: ( 1 ) the asset market where investment equals saving ( called the is curve ) , ( 2 ) the money relationship where the supply and demand for money must equate ( commonly called the lm curve ) , and ( 3 ) the economy - wide relationship where aggregate demand equals aggregate supply .

the first two of these equations compose what is referred to as the is - lm model .

these three relationships , in turn , determine output , prices , and the interest rate in the economy .

macroeconomic models formalize the relationship between economic variables , allowing researchers to quantify the effect of a change in one variable on the rest of the system ( also called comparative statics ) and to observe how economic patterns align with model predictions .

the is - lm model is characterized by a limited role of expectations of future economic conditions and sticky prices .

while there are a number of different macroeconomic models , especially those that add expectations , this section uses the simplified model , which forms the core of forecasting models as well as models used by government agencies in projecting the economy .

more sophisticated forecasting models of the economy have many equations that capture variation in types of goods , investments , and assets , but this simplified model can be used to explain the standard model and provide a foundation for interpreting mmt .

most academic research is directed toward more complex models ( sometimes referred to as modern macroeconomic s ) , which are discussed briefly below .

the basic is - lm model is useful for illustrating the differences in mmt and mainstream models .

this section explores mmt's basic macroeconomic principles and distinctive characteristics and discusses how to interpret the model into the more conventional is - lm framework .

because mmt is an emerging ideology , definitively identifying the research that encapsulates it can be difficult .

publications and other works from both proponents of mmt and mainstream economists used in this report are listed in the references section .

though some mmt proponents have expressed caution in viewing mmt through a traditional macroeconomic framework , this approach is consistent with work found both elsewhere in the mmt literature and in mainstream economic analysis , including research with theoretical elements aligning with some of mmt's central assertions .

mmt's theory does not take into account self - imposed constraints ( i.e. , those other than resource constraints ) , such as lack of a sovereign currency , or of other institutions , such as independence of the monetary authority ( the federal reserve in the united states ) and the treasury that allows the creation of money to finance government spending .

as will be discussed subsequently , u.s. institutions may limit the application of mmt to the management of the economy .

as with all macroeconomics , some of the theory is about description and some about prescription , but mmt varies by including prescriptive points that restrain monetary policy to keep a fixed interest rate ( this policy will leave fiscal policy as the only tool to address the business cycle ) .

according to the model , when fiscal stimulus produces no inflation , there are still unused resources in the economy , and when fiscal stimulus leads to inflation , the stimulus will be reduced or reversed , thereby reducing the deficit or converting it to a surplus .

much of the analysis in mmt literature and related research focuses on its application in the short - term , or in managing business cycles .

less discussed is how the mmt model applies to long run economic variables , including growth and debt sustainability .

this section discusses mmt's generally short - term view of deficit financing and contrasts it with mainstream economics , which is usually focused on the longer term .

mainstream economics does not call for balanced federal budgets , and is broadly supportive of deficit financing in managing sufficiently large economic shocks .

it does , however , recognize limits on the amounts that the federal government ( or any economic actor ) may borrow: constraints determined by the availability and willingness of investors to finance its borrowing needs at normal interest rates .

in the mainstream view , this borrowing is constrained by the total amounts available for investment ( savings in dollars ) at a given point in time and the attractiveness of other borrowing options available on the market .

in the long term , this constraint means that the amount of federal debt relative to output cannot rise indefinitely .

in a basic macroeconomic model this constraint is violated when the long - term interest rate exceeds the long - term economic growth rate , as the general return on investments generated from expansionary policy will be smaller than the interest payments required to finance that activity .

mmt proponents have generally called for a more active fiscal policy role in managing negative economic shocks .

moreover , the mmt claim that sovereign governments that issue debt in their own currency ( like the united states ) cannot be forced to default leads to the general perception that an mmt - driven economic structure would involve larger deficits and higher debt levels than those experienced in an economic structure shaped by mainstream economic thinking .

this belief is supported by the call for a central bank that consistently sets interest rates near or at zero , which , all else equal , would support deficit financing at lower economic growth rates rather than with higher interest rates if mainstream economic thinking was applied .

the notion that a sovereign government cannot be forced to default appears to be a central tenet of mmt because of the view that money creation can substitute for taxes or borrowing to finance government .

there have been , however , many instances of sovereign governments defaulting explicitly , or implicitly either by inflating the currency , renegotiating terms , or using other measures to address a difficulty in financing debt .

these other options might be considered default by another name .

while the united states does not appear to face any current concerns about the ability to sell its debt , were a collapse in the market to occur , it might be impossible or at least extremely costly to undertake the needed measures ( higher taxes to stem the inflation appearing with money creation ) .

in meeting its statutory mandate of minimizing long - run federal borrowing costs , treasury may redeem and reissue debt at levels that far exceed the amounts required strictly from new deficit - financing activity .

for example , treasury issued $11.7 trillion in marketable debt in fy2019 , which represented more than 70% of the federal marketable debt portfolio .

any dramatic increase in interest rates accompanying a debt crisis would thus likely generate higher interest rates not only for debt generated by new federal deficits , but also for a significant portion of the existing debt stock that is redeemed and reissued .

for example , net interest payments during the greek debt crisis ( described below ) increased by amounts equivalent to roughly $200 billion in fy2019 dollars , which would require significant tax rate increases , base broadening , or both if needed to meet a sudden change in interest obligations .

if the federal debt position were viewed by the market to be unsustainable , it could lead to a collapse in the demand for treasury securities that would cause a "debt cycle. .

in this case , an observation by some investors to sell or avoid federal debt issuances before they defaulted would raise federal interest rates , which would require more federal borrowing and could lead to further investor avoidance and interest increases .

beyond the significant effects on the federal borrowing position , such a process could also have ramifications elsewhere in the financial markets , as federal securities are often used as a currency substitute for overnight interbank lending and other activities central to general financial operations .

mmt proponents also claim that government deficits must be small enough to limit inflation .

it is unclear how this claim distinguishes mmt in a practical sense from the mainstream view , as mainstream macroeconomics would also support fiscal or monetary intervention to avoid significant increases in interest rates in response to rising debt .

in the mainstream and mmt case , there is concern that by the time actors identify an urgent debt sustainability problem , it may be difficult to address .

such a situation would likely be accompanied by a negative economic shock that would make immediately raising taxes ( net of spending ) difficult , while increasing the money supply risks entering a debt spiral .

in the mmt case , such a concern does not arise because of the assumption that the federal reserve could finance spending ( an assumption at odds with institutional constraints discussed in the next section ) .

further questions arise when examining the applicability of mmt policies to the united states and other nations that already have relatively high real debt levels .

in its most recent long - term budget outlook , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimated that federal debt held by the public would rise from 78% of gdp in fy2019 to 92% of gdp in fy2029 and 144% of gdp in fy2049 , well beyond the historical peak .

it is possible that a high existing debt stock could practically restrict the availability or effectiveness of mmt - supported fiscal policies in managing business cycles , given the institutional constraints discussed in the next section .

however , currently there are no signs that the federal borrowing capacity is near exhaustion in the short term or medium term , as interest rates remain below fed - targeted levels .

recent international experiences speak to the complexity of borrowing capacity .

both greece and japan experienced rapid growth in government debt in the past decade .

organisation for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) data on general government debt ( including municipal government debt ) indicate that greek debt rose from 115% of gdp in 2006 to 189% of gdp in 2017 , while japanese debt rose from 180% of gdp to 234% of gdp over the same time period .

a loss in market confidence in greek debt led to a severe recession there , with gdp contracting by 9 percentage points in 2011 , and long - term interest rates reaching 22% in 2012 .

japanese borrowing was viewed to be more sustainable despite being higher , with relatively flat gdp levels and long - term interest rates close to zero in recent years .

barro , robert j .

"on the determination of the public debt. .

journal of political economy 87 , no .

5 ( october 1979 ) : 940 .

bell , stephanie .

the hierarchy of money .

the jerome levy economics institute , working paper series 231 , april 1998. —— .

"do taxes and bonds finance government spending ? ," journal of economic issues 34 , no .

3 ( september 2000 ) : 603 .

blanchard , oliver j .

public debt and low interest rates .

national bureau of economic research , nber working paper no .

25621 , february 2019 .

chick , victoria .

the theory of monetary policy , vol .

5 .

london: gray - mills publishing limited , 1973 .

chinn , menzie d. notes on modern monetary theory for paleo - keynesians , spring 2019 , at https: / / www.ssc.wisc.edu / ~mchinn / mmt_add2.pdf .

fullwiler , scott .

"functional finance and the debt ratio - part i. .

new economic perspectives ( blog ) , december 2012 , at http: / / neweconomicperspectives.org / 2012 / 12 / functional - finance - and - the - debt - ratio - part - i.html .

lerner , abba p. "functional finance and the federal debt. .

social research , no .

1 ( february 1943 ) : 38 .

palley , thomas k. money , f iscal p olicy and i nterest r ates: a c ritique of modern monetary theory .

the hans boeckler foundation , imk working paper no .

109 , january 2013 .

rachel , lukasz , and lawrence h. summers .

on falling neutral real rates , fiscal policy , and secular stagnation .

brookings papers on economic activity , march 2019 , at https: / / www.brookings.edu / bpea - articles / on - falling - neutral - real - rates - fiscal - policy - and - the - risk - of - secular - stagnation / .

rogoff , kenneth .

"modern monetary nonsense. .

project syndicate , march 2019 , at https: / / www.project - syndicate.org / commentary / federal - reserve - modern - monetary - theory - dangers - by - kenneth - rogoff - 2019-03 ? barrier=accesspaylog .

rowe , nick .

"reverse - engineering the mmt model. .

a worthwhile canadian initiative ( blog ) , 2011 , at https: / / worthwhile.typepad.com / worthwhile_canadian_initi / 2011 / 04 / reverse - engineering - the - mmt - model.html .

sharpe , timothy p. "a modern money perspective on financial crowding - out. .

review of political economy 25 ( november 2013 ) : 586 .

shiller , robert .

"modern monetary theory makes sense , up to a point. .

the new york times , march 29 , 2019 , at https: / / www.nytimes.com / 2019 / 03 / 29 / business / modern - monetary - theory - shiller.html .

tcherneva , pavlina r. "the role of fiscal policy. .

international journal of political economy 41 , no .

2 ( summer 2012 ) : 5 .

wray , l. randall .

modern monetary theory: a primer on macroeconomics for sovereign monetary systems .

2 nd ed .

new york: palgrave macmillan , 2015 .

