committee investigations in the house of representatives can serve several objectives .

most often , an investigation seeks to gather information either to review past legislation or develop future legislation , or to enable a committee to conduct oversight of another branch of government .

these inquiries may be called legislative investigations because their legal authority derives implicitly from the house's general legislative power .

much more rarely , house committee investigations have been carried out to determine whether there are grounds to impeach a federal official—a form of inquiry known as an impeachment investigation .

an impeachment investigation has typically been one of the house's first steps in the exercise of its constitutional impeachment power , and may conclude with the investigating committee recommending articles of impeachment to the full house .

while the labels "legislative investigation" and "impeachment investigation" provide some context to the objective or purpose of a house inquiry , investigations may not always fall neatly into one of these categories .

to the contrary , distinguishing between legislative and impeachment investigations might sometimes be difficult , especially when an investigation focuses on alleged misconduct by an official subject to impeachment by the house .

this ambiguity is reflected in the various ongoing house committee investigations concerning president trump .

on september 24 , 2019 , speaker pelosi announced that these investigations constitute an "official impeachment inquiry. .

while these committee investigations into allegations of presidential misconduct are proceeding , in the words of the speaker , under the "umbrella of [an] impeachment inquiry," most appear to blend legislation , oversight , and impeachment purposes .

however labeled , many of the house investigations have been hindered by refusals to comply with committee subpoenas for documents or testimony .

various legal explanations have been provided for these refusals , including that federal law prohibits the disclosure of grand jury materials to congress , that the relevant committee subpoenas lack a required legislative purpose , and that the information sought is protected by executive privilege .

these interbranch disputes over information access have raised interest in whether invocation of the impeachment power will improve the house's ability to acquire withheld information .

this report addresses that question , with a focus on presidential impeachment investigations .

specifically , the report considers whether the impeachment power may strengthen the house's investigative authorities in a manner that would improve the chamber's ability to obtain information , especially through the courts .

compared to a typical legislative investigation , an impeachment investigation may be more likely to acquire certain categories of information , including grand jury materials , documents and testimony related to either the president's exercise of his exclusive constitutional powers or his conduct occurring prior to taking office , and communications covered by executive privilege .

but congress's right of access to relevant information in a more typical legislative investigation is also substantial .

thus , partly because the line between legislative and impeachment investigations is sometimes blurred , but primarily because both impeachment and legislative investigations constitute an exercise of significant constitutional power , house committees may have adequate authority and tools to obtain much of the information they seek regardless of whether they are engaged in a legislative investigation or one relying on the impeachment power .

the constitution provides the house with the "sole power of impeachment," but neither that document , federal statutes , nor house rules define impeachment investigations .

nor have the courts asserted "any role" in addressing the impeachment power generally or impeachment investigations specifically .

in fact , the rules of proceeding and speech or debate clauses of the constitution , along with political question doctrine , all generally prevent the courts from "questioning congress about actions taken in the impeachment process. .

the manner by which the house chooses to implement its impeachment powers appears therefore to be textually and historically committed to the discretion of the house .

the house , however , has adopted no explicit definition of what constitutes an impeachment investigation .

left with gleaning a definition from the various constitutional provisions governing impeachment and the house's historical practice—which includes 19 impeachments ( 15 of which were federal judges ) arising from over 90 past impeachment investigations —an impeachment investigation may be defined as an investigation carried out to aid the house in its "constitutional responsibility" of determining whether "sufficient grounds" exist to charge an impeachable official ( "[t]he president , vice president and all civil officers of the united states" ) with an impeachable offense ( "[t]reason , bribery , or other high crimes and misdemeanors" ) .

nor has the house established a single , uniform approach to starting impeachment investigations .

instead , the process has evolved , generally along with changes to the house's committee structure and the investigative authorities with which those committees have been vested .

although impeachment investigations have often been authorized by a resolution of the house , there have also been impeachment investigations conducted ( and articles of impeachment recommended by the judiciary committee and approved by the house ) without an explicit authorization .

for example , the house explicitly directed the judiciary committee to "investigate fully and completely whether sufficient grounds exist for the house" to impeach president clinton , but in the1980s provided no authorization for investigations into allegations of impeachable conduct against judges walter nixon , alcee hastings , and harry e. claiborne , who were ultimately impeached by the house .

there are still other examples in which a resolution of authorization was provided only after a committee had engaged in a "preliminary" impeachment investigation .

for example , although the house eventually authorized the impeachment investigation of president nixon , the judiciary committee began the "preliminary phases of an inquiry into possible impeachment" months earlier .

the somewhat inconsistent house practice on the use of authorizing resolutions may be due to any number of practical , procedural , or political factors .

for example , at least until the second half of the 20th century , an authorizing resolution from the house was often a practical necessity for an effective impeachment investigation .

this is because in the period before standing committees existed an investigating committee needed to be created and authorized .

even after standing committees were established , the house typically still needed to provide the committee with both investigative jurisdiction and compulsory investigative tools such as the power to issue a subpoena to force the disclosure of information .

indeed , although the house often adopted resolutions providing individual committees with limited subpoena powers following the legislative reorganization act of 1946 , it was not until 1975 that the house granted its committees standing investigative and subpoena powers under house rules .

even after 1975 , there was still practical value in authorizing resolutions , which typically provided the investigating committee with additional investigative tools beyond what the committee may have otherwise possessed , such as the ability to conduct staff depositions or issue written interrogatories .

thus , for a good portion of the house's history , authorizing resolutions were generally needed to give a committee the tools necessary to carry out an effective and expeditious investigation .

use of an authorizing resolution has also provided the house with the opportunity to assert control over the scope , direction , and conduct of a committee's impeachment investigation .

addressing the scope of the house's access to information during an impeachment inquiry requires some brief comparison of impeachment and legislative investigations .

to begin , the two types of investigations have much in common: both represent exercises of the house's constitutional power ; both act as essential checks on executive overreach and help ensure preservation of the separation of powers ; and both are unique and consequential powers characterized by their mix of judicial , legislative , and political features .

in addition , whether engaged in an impeachment or legislative investigation , the tools used to gather information are now mostly the same , especially given recent changes to the house rules that provide committees with authority to carry out investigations in an increasingly prompt manner and without the full participation of the committee .

in any investigation , a committee would likely obtain most information through requests for information , voluntary interviews , hearings , subpoenas for documents or testimony , and depositions .

but the two investigations arguably contrast in a few notable ways .

for example , the frequency with which each is exercised differs greatly .

while the house has conducted myriad legislative investigations of the executive branch , there have been comparatively few impeachment investigations of executive branch officials .

in addition , the house has previously granted the subject of an impeachment investigation certain procedural rights that are not seen in legislative investigations .

for example , during both the nixon and clinton impeachment investigations , the house judiciary committee adopted resolutions affording the president and his counsel the right to respond to evidence gathered by the committee , raise objections to testimony , and cross - examine witnesses , among others .

in another distinguishing feature , the judiciary committee's power to issue subpoenas in impeachment investigations has previously been altered in an effort to encourage "a fair , impartial and bipartisan" investigation .

in both the nixon and clinton investigations , the power to subpoena was provided to "the chairman and the ranking minority member acting jointly , or , if either declines to act , by the other acting alone...." even so , "[i]n the event either [the chair or the ranking member] so declines," the provisions continued , "either shall have the right to refer to the committee for decision the question whether such authority shall be so exercised …" thus , in the case that the chairman and the ranking member disagreed on issuing a subpoena , the question would be settled by vote of the judiciary committee .

the functioning of the provision was described by some members of the judiciary committee as "practically nullif[ying] any truly independent subpoena power for the ranking minority member …," as the chairman's position would likely be upheld by the committee .

significantly , there may be some ways in which the house's investigative authority is either amplified or broadened during an impeachment investigation .

the precise extent of any legal advantage , however , is not entirely clear .

while there is a reservoir of historical—and to a much more limited extent judicial—precedents that can be used to analyze the house's authority to obtain information from the executive branch in traditional legislative investigations , the same cannot be said for impeachment investigations .

there have been relatively few impeachment investigations of executive branch officials , and none that have been presented to the courts for resolution of constitutional questions of information access .

despite the limited historical precedent , early statements from all three branches support the house's robust and expansive right of access to information pertinent to an impeachment investigation .

since nearly its inception , the house has viewed its impeachment power as including "the right of inquiry … to the fullest and most unlimited extent," and "certainly impl[ying] a right to inspect every paper and transaction in any department. .

neither the executive nor judicial branches , the house has asserted , can "seek to impede the house in the exercise of its sole power to impeach. .

and while the supreme court has little to no role in reviewing the impeachment power generally , it has compared the house's right to information in an impeachment investigation to that of a court of law , stating that the house may obtain information "in the same manner and by the use of the same means , that courts of justice can in like cases. .

as one district court has stated about presidential impeachment investigations , [i]t should not be forgotten that we deal in a matter of the most critical moment to the nation , an impeachment investigation involving the president of the united states .

it would be difficult to conceive of a more compelling need than that of this country for an unswervingly fair inquiry based on all the pertinent information .

the executive branch appears to have similarly acknowledged the breadth of impeachment investigations , although usually in the context of denying congress's right of access in a legislative investigation .

in an oft - quoted example , president james k. polk stated that the authority of the house in an impeachment investigation "would penetrate into the most secret recesses of the executive department" and would include the authority to "command the attendance of any and every agent of the government , and compel them to produce all papers , public or private , official or unofficial , and to testify on oath to all facts within their knowledge. .

"if the house of representatives , as the grand inquest of the nation … should think proper to institute an inquiry," polk continued , "every facility in the power of the executive [would] be afforded to enable them to prosecute the investigation. .

the need for the house to obtain access to relevant information in an impeachment investigation may also be underscored by the essential role impeachment plays in ensuring presidential accountability .

for instance , given the department of justice's ( doj's ) position that a sitting president is not subject to indictment or criminal prosecution while in office , impeachment and removal may be one of the few available mechanisms to hold a president immediately accountable for criminal conduct .

broad access to evidence either supporting or refuting allegations of presidential misconduct could be seen as essential if the house is to exercise its "right of accusing" and if the impeachment power is to maintain its envisioned role as an "essential check" on the executive branch generally and the president specifically .

while these statements and principles establish a general proposition that the house enjoys broad access to information in an impeachment investigation , this access may be subject to certain constitutional limitations that generally attach to congressional investigative activity .

for example , provisions of the bill of rights that have been found to apply in legislative investigations , including the first amendment , fourth amendment , and the fifth amendment's privilege against self - incrimination , may also apply in impeachment investigations .

other constitutional principles that may limit committee access to information in legislative investigations , for example considerations arising from the separation of powers such as executive privilege , may prove less of an obstacle and apply with less strength in an impeachment investigation .

an impeachment investigation is a substantial exercise of constitutional power vested exclusively in the house of representatives .

invocation of the power likely strengthens the house's existing investigative authorities in ways that may allow the house ( through its committees ) to obtain more information from the executive branch than might otherwise be received through more traditional legislative investigations .

even so , reliance on the impeachment power may not always be necessary for congress to obtain sensitive categories of information , including grand jury materials , evidence of private misconduct , or information protected by executive privilege .

whether investigating to inform itself for purposes of legislating , to conduct oversight of the executive branch , or to determine whether there is adequate reason to impeach a federal official , the house has broad authority to access relevant and needed information .

