the federal individual income tax is structured so that the poor owe little or no income tax ( although they may pay other federal taxes , like payroll taxes as well as state and local taxes ) .

in addition , the federal income tax increases the disposable income of many poor families via refundable tax credits .

these tax credits—primarily the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) and the refundable portion of the child tax credit , called the additional child tax credit ( actc ) —increase the disposable income of many low - income taxpayers who work and have children , and have been shown to reduce poverty .

p.l .

115-97 , commonly referred to as the tax cuts and jobs act ( tcja ) , made numerous temporary changes to the federal income tax system , including many that affect individuals and families .

preliminary analyses of the tcja found that the law provides larger benefits to higher - income individuals and families .

this report's analyses find that overall the law had a relatively small impact on poverty compared to the pre - tcja federal individual income tax .

recent tax legislation considered in the 116 th congress—including the economic mobility act of 2019 ( h.r .

3300 ) ordered reported by the house ways and means committee on june 20 , 2019—would target additional tax benefits to lower - income families .

h.r .

3300 would temporarily increase the amount of the eitc for "childless" workers , allow all eligible taxpayers to receive the full amount of the actc , irrespective of a taxpayer's earned income , and make the child and dependent care tax credit refundable .

to provide context for the consideration of new tax legislation , this report examines the relationship between the federal individual income tax and poverty .

given some policymakers' continued interest in using the tax system to reduce poverty and boost the incomes of low - income working families with children , understanding the impact of the income tax in reducing poverty—pre - and post - tcja—may help inform future policy debates and legislative proposals .

this report is structured to first provide a brief overview of the major federal income tax provisions that affect lower - income individuals and families , including a comparison of how these provisions changed under the tcja .

the report then provides an analysis of how the pre - tcja federal income tax affected poverty , followed by a comparison of how the post - tcja federal income tax affected poverty .

the report concludes with some observations on the benefits and limitations of the federal income tax system and refundable tax credits in reducing poverty .

the federal income tax can increase or decrease a taxpayer's disposable income , which may affect a family's poverty status .

broadly , when a taxpayer receives refundable tax credits greater than the income taxes they owe , they have a negative tax liability , and an increase in disposable income , all else being equal .

conversely , if a taxpayer owes federal income tax , they have a positive tax liability , and reduced disposable income , all else being equal .

 ( if a taxpayer has zero tax liability , their disposable income is unchanged by the income tax. ) .

unless otherwise mentioned , the term tax liability will refer to federal income tax liability in this report .

in order to understand how the individual income tax can affect tax liabilities , it can be helpful to broadly understand how income taxes are calculated , and in particular , how major components of the income tax affect poor taxpayers .

importantly , the description below summarizes only the major aspects of the federal income tax calculation that are particularly relevant for poor families .

for a more detailed overview of the federal income tax calculation , see crs report r45145 , overview of the federal tax system in 2018 ; and crs infographic ig10014 , the u.s .

individual income tax system , 2019 .

for a more detailed description of the tax provisions summarized below , how they affect income tax liability , and how they were modified by the tcja , see crs report r45092 , the 2017 tax revision ( p.l .

115-97 ) : comparison to 2017 tax law .

the tcja substantially modified the federal tax code , including changing many provisions that affect individuals .

most of these changes are temporary , and are scheduled to expire ( "sunset" ) at the end of 2025 .

the major changes made by the tcja that are likely to affect many low - income taxpayers are highlighted below .

under the pre - tcja income tax , many poor families did not owe federal income taxes , and a significant proportion received a net benefit from refundable credits .

as previously discussed , the combination of personal exemptions and the standard deduction—subtracted from gross income to determine income subject to the tax—generally reduced most poor families' taxable income to zero .

additionally , some poor families with little or no income tax liability—particularly those with children and earned income—received refundable tax credits that resulted in their after - tax income being greater than their before - tax income .

 ( crs estimates that before the income tax was subtracted from [or added to , in the case of negative tax liabilities] a family's resources , there were approximately 21.4 million families—equaling an estimated 46.5 million individuals—in poverty .

for more information , see appendix b . ) .

under the post - tcja income tax—similar to the pre - tcja income tax—many poor families did not owe federal income taxes ( i.e. , had zero tax liability ) , and a significant proportion owed no income tax and received a net benefit from refundable credits ( i.e. , had a negative tax liability ) .

the impact of the post - tcja income tax system on poverty rates and the poverty gap suggests the tcja provided relatively small benefits to poor families .

 ( crs estimates that before the income tax was subtracted from [or added to , in the case of negative tax liabilities] a family's resources , there were approximately 21.4 million families—equaling 46.5 million individuals—in poverty .

for more information , see appendix b . ) .

the income tax provides significant monetary benefits to many low - income families .

these benefits reduce the overall poverty rate .

the analysis in this report suggests , however , that the income tax is less effective , in comparison to many needs - tested programs , in helping the poorest families move out of poverty , as measured by its impact in reducing the aggregate poverty gap .

overall , the impact of the income tax on poverty was marginally changed by the tcja .

specifically crs estimates that before taxes , the poverty rate was 14.5% .

after the pre - tcja income tax , the poverty rate fell to 12.5% , while after the post - tcja income tax it fell to 12.3% .

crs estimates that before taxes , the aggregate poverty gap was $150.8 billion .

after the pre - tcja income tax it fell to $138.1 billion , while after the post - tcja income tax it fell to $136.9 billion .

these benefits went almost exclusively to individuals who lived in families with workers and children .

this analysis highlights both the importance of the tax system in reducing poverty , and also some of its limitations .

as discussed in this report , the main mechanism by which the income tax reduces poverty is through refundable tax credits , primarily the eitc and the refundable portion of the child tax credit , the actc .

these credits are available only to families who include a worker ( and who generally have children ) since their value is based in part on a taxpayer's earned income .

hence these credits provide little if any benefit to those who do not or cannot work , and who are more likely to be poor .

there are other limitations to using refundable tax credits to reduce poverty that are not discussed in this report .

notably , the eitc and child tax credit are received once a year as part of a taxpayer's refund after they file their federal income tax return , and are not paid out on a more periodic basis ( i.e. , monthly ) to help families meet their basic needs .

addressing this limitation , the national academy of sciences , in its most recent report on reducing child poverty , proposed converting the child tax credit into a monthly child allowance .

however , the internal revenue service ( irs ) may be ill - equipped to accurately and efficiently pay out tax benefits like the eitc and the child tax credit on a more periodic basis .

even on an annual basis , as they are currently paid out , these credits can be difficult for the irs to administer and for taxpayers to comply with .

the complexity of these tax credits is often cited as the main factor driving their high rate of erroneous claims .

despite these limitations , and the limitations highlighted in this report , the income tax remains a popular ( and near - universal ) mechanism to provide aid to the working poor , especially those with children .

recent legislative proposals , including the economic mobility act of 2019 ( h.r .

3300 ) , would expand refundable tax credits , increasing the size of the eitc for workers without custodial children ( the "childless eitc" ) , and increasing the actc to $2,000 ( $3,000 for young children ) for all low - income taxpayers irrespective of earned income .

the stated purpose of this legislation is to help working families with children .

and yet , by eliminating the phase - in for the actc , h.r .

3300 ( and the american family act of 2019 ; s. 690 / h.r .

1560 ) also represents a shift in the target population of refundable tax credits , expanding eligibility to poor families with children that do not include a worker .

similarly , the proposed increase in the eitc for taxpayers without custodial children also reflects a shift from providing benefits only to workers with children ( although childless eitc recipients may live in families with other children and / or have noncustodial children who do not live with them ) .

insofar as eligibility and the amount of refundable tax credits are expanded , the antipoverty effects of the income tax may increase .

appendix a .

methodology and data sources to examine how the federal individual income tax affects poverty , this report uses estimates from the transfer income model , version 3 ( trim3 ) and data from the census bureau's annual social and economic supplement ( asec ) to the current population survey .

trim3 is a static microsimulation model that estimates federal and state taxes and certain benefit transfer programs .

trim3 is primarily funded by the u.s. department of health and human services and maintained by the urban institute .

the measure of poverty used is the census bureau's supplemental poverty measure ( spm ) .

the annual social and economic ( asec ) supplement to the current population survey the asec is a household survey of the noninstitutionalized population conducted by the census bureau in march of each year .

there are approximately 94,000 households in the asec .

the asec includes questions related to household members' demographic characteristics and family living arrangement at the time of the survey , and work experience and income in the prior year .

this report's estimates are based on the 2017 asec , which captures information on work experience and income in the prior year—2016 .

the asec is used by the u.s. census bureau to estimate both the official poverty measure and spm poverty in its reports .

the sample of the asec is large enough to make reliable estimates for the nation as a whole and , sometimes , for some of the larger states .

however , the sample is not large enough to make state - level estimates for all states .

estimates discussed in this report were weighted from the sample information to make the asec representative of the population of u.s. households .

since the estimates in this report come from a sample , they are subject to sampling error .

additionally , the information on the asec is based on respondents' answers to the survey questions , and nonresponse or incorrect responses can result in nonsampling error .

the asec itself does not ask survey respondents about taxes paid or refundable credits received in the prior year .

that information—important for determining a family's or an individual's spm poverty status—must be estimated .

this report uses estimates from the trim microsimulation model for these estimates .

the census bureau uses a different microsimulation model in its reports on spm poverty .

the trim3 microsimulation model microsimulation models of tax and transfer programs are composed of computer code that mimics the rules of the tax code and benefit programs .

the models determine whether an individual , family , or other unit is eligible to be subject to a tax or eligible for a benefit and then estimates the amount of the tax ( or benefit ) .

trim assumes that all taxpayers fully comply with the requirements and rules of the tax code .

federal income tax module for 2016 trim3 applies policy rules in effect during the year to the population for that year .

the estimates in this report use information from the trim3 federal income tax module for 2016 .

the 2016 federal income tax module makes "baseline estimates" of the tax code as it existed for 2016 .

the model uses data from the asec's information on family structure at the time of the survey to place individuals into federal tax filing units ( eg , taxpayer and , for those married filing jointly , the spouse ) .

it also identifies "extended" tax filing units , which include dependents , and identifies "qualifying children" for the purpose of the eitc and the child tax credit .

trim3 creates tax units not only for tax filers , but also for all potential filers .

the model then uses information on the earnings and other income sources reported on the asec for 2016 to determine a tax filing unit's federal income tax liability .

additionally , expense and income items not available on the asec but required to compute federal income taxes were obtained through a statistical match with the irs statistics of income public use file , which is based on a sample of tax returns .

trim3 estimates of the elderly and disabled tax credit and the child and dependent care tax credit are aligned to target amounts based on irs data .

in terms of estimating federal income taxes , there are a number of caveats and limitations of the trim3 estimates .

these limitations are not idiosyncratic to trim3 estimates .

they generally result from limitations on the underlying asec data and are also present in estimates from the census bureau .

these limitations include the following: estimates are not reliable for very - high - income taxpayers .

the estimates of federal income tax liability are not likely to be reliable for very - high - income taxpayers because the asec oversamples lower - income populations , rather than higher - income populations .

thus , trim3 / asec estimates are most often used in reports ( such as this report ) that focus on lower - income populations .

amounts of refundable tax credits tend to be underestimated .

the estimates from trim3 ( as well as the census bureau's microsimulation model ) underestimate refundable tax credits .

for example , the trim3 estimate of the eitc for 2016 ( pre - tcja ) was $39.2 billion .

the total amount of the eitc claimed in 2016 according to the irs was $66.7 billion .

this discrepancy has long been known by researchers , but has yet to be fully explained .

potential reasons for the discrepancy include the information on the asec family structure perhaps not adequately representing that used for filing tax returns ; the underreporting of certain forms of earnings ( such as self - employment earnings ) ; and the high rates of error made by taxpayers claiming the eitc .

a revised federal income tax module for estimating rules under the tcja the urban institute , in partnership with the congressional research service ( crs ) , modified trim3's federal income tax module to account for the major provisions of the tcja affecting individual taxpayers .

thus , the information in the model was revised to reflect the new tax brackets and marginal tax rates that apply to them , the suspension of the personal exemption and the increases in the standard deduction , limitations on itemized deductions , including the limitation on the deductibility of state and local taxes ( salt ) , revised rules for the child tax credit , and other changes to the federal individual income tax code .

tcja changes not modeled a number of changes to the federal income tax were not modeled .

these include changes to the treatment of alimony , the mortgage interest deduction , and elimination of the individual mandate for health insurance .

the treatment of alimony was not modeled because the changes will apply only to new or revised orders and will not affect many cases in the near term .

limits on interest qualifying for the mortgage interest deduction were not modeled since there are no data to inform the impact of these changes .

additionally , certain smaller changes are not present in the simulation , such as the elimination of the deduction for bicycle commuting .

inflation adjustment the post - tcja tax code parameters were deflated to 2016 dollars to answer the question , "what if the 2018 tcja parameters were in place in 2016 and 2016 was the first year of their enactment ? .

the adjustment was done using the chained consumer price index for all urban consumers ( c - cpi - u ) , since the tcja requires the use of that price index rather than the cpi - u for future price adjustments .

specifically , the 2018 amounts were adjusted to 2016 dollars using the chained cpi ; see .

hence the estimates in this report reflect the impact of the post - tcja tax code as if the first year of its enactment were 2016 ( it actually went into effect in 2018 ) .

the supplemental poverty measure the spm was created to address some of the limitations of the official poverty measure .

particularly relevant for this analysis , the official poverty measure does not take into account taxes ( and tax benefits , like refundable credits ) and their impact on disposable income .

it also does not take into account certain noncash government benefits , such as food benefits from snap or the value of housing benefits .

the measure of total income in this analysis is computed similarly to the way the u.s. census bureau computes total financial resources , though there are a few differences .

this analysis uses the trim3 estimates for tanf , ssi , and snap , rather than amounts reported on the asec , to address the underreporting of these income sources on the asec .

additionally , the measure of child care—deducted as a work expense for the spm—differs .

this analysis uses trim3's estimate of child care expenses , which includes estimated copayments for families receiving child care subsidies from the child care and development block grant ( ccdbg ) .

the census bureau also caps child care expenses at the earnings of the lower - earning parent when determining net financial resources .

this analysis deducts all child care expenses as a work - related expense of the family .

appendix b .

estimated number of individuals and families in poverty before the income tax , 2016 below are estimates of the number of individuals in poverty before the federal income taxes are subtracted from ( or added to ) financial resources using the trim3 microsimulation model .

the individual types used in this table are also found in table 1 and table 3 of this report .

below are estimates of the number of families in poverty before federal income taxes are subtracted from ( or added to ) financial resources , estimated using the trim3 microsimulation model .

the family types used in this table are also found in table 2 and table 4 of this report .

appendix c. how the major federal income tax provisions that affect low - income taxpayers were modified by the tcja below are descriptions of how the major federal income tax provisions that affect low - income taxpayers—deductions , exemptions , tax rates , and refundable credits—were changed by the tcja .

stylized examples included at the end of each section help illustrate the impact of these changes for a hypothetical family .

standard deduction and personal exemptions the standard deduction and personal exemption , when combined , represent the minimum amount of income of a tax unit that is not taxed under the federal income tax .

the standard deduction is a fixed dollar amount that taxpayers can subtract from their income when determining the amount of their income subject to taxation ( eg , "taxable income" ) .

the tcja nearly doubled the standard deduction .

specifically , in 2018 the standard deduction for unmarried single filers , head of household filers , and married joint filers increased from $6,500 , $9,550 , and $13,000 to $12,000 , $18,000 , and $24,000 , respectively .

the tcja suspended the personal exemption , effectively reducing it from $4,150 per person in 2018 to $0 .

these changes are in effect from 2018 through the end of 2025 .

the combination of the standard deduction and personal exemption is sometimes referred to as the 0% bracket since that income is not taxed .

it is also referred to as the tax entry point since every dollar above this amount is generally taxable ( and hence considered taxable income ) .

the increase of the standard deduction combined with the effective elimination of the personal exemption result in a similar or higher tax entry point for some families ( unmarried individuals with no children , unmarried individuals with one child , and married couples with no children , as illustrated in table c - 1 ) , while larger families , including many with children , will have a lower tax entry point under the new tax law .

for these families , more of their income will potentially be subject to the federal income tax .

stylized example for example , as illustrated in table c - 1 , a married couple with two children would have had a tax entry point in 2018 pre - tcja of $29,600 .

if this family had $36,000 of income , only the amount above $29,600—$6,400—would have been taxable .

post - tcja this tax entry point is now $24,000 for this same family .

hence , of their $36,000 of income , $12,000 would now be taxable income .

marginal tax rates / tax brackets a marginal tax rate is the percentage that a taxpayer pays on an additional dollar of taxable income .

the federal individual income tax code has seven marginal tax rates ranging from 10% to 37% .

the income ranges over which these marginal rates apply , often referred to as tax brackets , differ based on the taxpayer's filing status .

the federal income tax is considered a progressive tax by economists because as taxable income increases , income above a given bracket threshold is taxed at a higher marginal rate .

once a tax unit has determined how much—if any—of their income is taxable ( i.e. , after subtracting the standard deduction from their income post - tcja ) , they then apply marginal tax rates to this amount .

if poor families have any taxable income , most if not all of it is subject to the lowest marginal tax rate , although some of their income may be subject to the second - lowest bracket ( the second - lowest bracket was the 15% bracket pre - tcja , and is now 12% under the tcja ) .

the lowest marginal tax rate—10%—was unchanged by the tcja .

changes to marginal tax rates are presented in table c - 2 .

these changes are in effect from 2018 through the end of 2025 .

stylized example for example , for a married couple with two children and $36,000 in income , their taxable income pre - tcja would have been $6,400 in 2018 .

that income would have been subject to a 10% marginal rate , for a tax liability—before accounting for tax credits—of $640 .

post - tcja , this same family would have had $12,000 of taxable income , all subject to the 10% marginal rate , which would result in $1,200 of income tax liability before subtracting any tax credits .

the child tax credit after taxpayers calculate their income tax liability before credits , they can subtract the value of any tax credits for which they may be eligible .

taxpayers with little or no tax liability—which includes most of the poor—can still receive the refundable credits , including the refundable portion of the child tax credit ( the actc ) .

the actc is calculated as a percentage of earnings ( the refundability rate ) above the refundability threshold up to the maximum amount of the refundable portion of the credit .

the actc plus the amount of the credit that offsets any income tax liability cannot be greater than the maximum credit per child .

 ( low - income families who do have a positive tax liability will first reduce their income tax liability by the nonrefundable portion of the child tax credit , and then claim the actc. ) .

tcja made several changes to the child tax credit and actc , as outlined in table c - 3 .

in addition to modifying the credit formula , tcja also enacted a new id requirement for the credit .

prior to tcja , taxpayers could provide the taxpayer identification number for the child in order to claim the credit .

the most common taxpayer id is a social security number ( ssn ) , but other taxpayer identification ids included individual taxpayer identification numbers ( itins ) .

post - tcja , taxpayers will now need to provide the ssn for the child in order to claim the credit .

these changes are in effect from 2018 through the end of 2025 .

how much a taxpayer's child tax credit changed following the tcja depends on their income level .

as a result of the changes made in the tcja , the child tax credit doubled for many middle - income families .

with the higher income phaseout thresholds , middle - and higher - income families became child tax credit eligible , as illustrated in figure c - 1 .

however , many low - income families received a smaller increase , as illustrated in figure c - 2 .

stylized example for example , for a married couple with two children and $25,000 of income , their child credit as a result of the tcja would increase from $2,000 to $2,900 ( $800 of the increase from the refundable portion and $100 from the nonrefundable portion ) .

for this family , once income was $36,000 , their child tax credit would increase from $2,000 to $4,000 ( with $800 of that increase from the refundable portion and $1,200 from the nonrefundable portion ) .

other changes the law did not directly change the largest antipoverty program in the tax code , the eitc .

however , the law did change the measure of inflation used to adjust numerous provisions in the tax code , including the eitc , beginning in 2018 .

this new inflation index , the c - cpi - u price index , is projected to grow more slowly than the previous inflation index , the cpi - u .

hence , over time the eitc will grow more slowly .

in 2018 , the differences in the eitc from the adoption of this new measure will be relatively small , reducing the maximum amount of the credit by $1 for recipients with no children , $7 for recipients with one child , $12 for those with two children , and $13 for those with three or more children .

however , as the effects of the slower inflation adjustment compound over time , these changes will grow larger .

in addition , the income cutoff points of marginal tax rates will grow more slowly .

over time , if wages grow faster than c - cpi - u , some of the income of low - income taxpayers currently subject to the 10% marginal tax rate may become subject to higher marginal rates .

