when a non - u.s. national ( alien ) enters the united states illegally or overstays a temporary visa , her presence in the country violates the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) .

she is subject to removal from the country on that basis alone , regardless of whether she has a criminal history or other factors , and there are few circumstances in which she can legalize her presence to extinguish the statutory basis for her removal .

the population of aliens in this situation—that is , aliens whose presence in the united states violates the ina , referred to here as "unlawfully present aliens" —currently numbers between ten million and twelve million , according to some recent estimates .

about 80% of unlawfully present aliens have been in the united states for more than ten years , according to a study by the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

the issue of whether and to what extent to legalize or provide other relief from removal to unlawfully present aliens is a frequent topic of debate in congress .

the issue is sometimes called the "third leg of the stool" of immigration reform , after the issues of border enforcement and legal admissions .

many ( but not all ) proposals for comprehensive immigration reform include provisions that would create pathways to lawful permanent residence for unlawfully present aliens in significant numbers .

these bills generally follow a model for one - time legalization programs exemplified by the immigration reform and control act of 1986 , which offered the prospect of lawful permanent resident ( lpr ) status to much of the unlawfully present population in the united states at that time .

other bills would create legalization programs for discrete segments of the unlawfully present population ; the various dream act proposals , for example , would offer relief to many childhood arrivals .

these legislative proposals contemplate ad hoc legalization measures: they would offer relief to extant populations of unlawfully present aliens , but the proposals would not change generally applicable law concerning legalization going forward .

the version of the dream act recently passed by the house of representatives , for example , would create a pathway to lpr status for some unlawfully present childhood arrivals who entered the united states at least four years before enactment ; the bill would not , however , change the ina's approach to future childhood arrivals .

this report covers the current law that underlies the ad hoc legalization debate .

it reviews the limited extent to which , under the ina , an unlawfully present alien can obtain a legal immigration status that extinguishes the statutory basis for removal .

in other words , the report explains the narrow circumstances in which unlawfully present aliens can legalize under current law .

as used here , "legalization" means the acquisition of a lawful immigration status by an unlawfully present alien so that he or she is no longer subject to removal under the ina .

because the ina takes a restrictive approach to legalization , the term is often used synonymously with ad hoc legalization to refer to proposals for programs of one - time relief .

this report , in contrast , focuses on legalization under current law .

to the exclusion of other issues , this report focuses on the circumstances in which the ina allows acquisition of legal status notwithstanding unlawful presence .

many of the statutory provisions discussed that allow legalization in limited circumstances—such as adjustment of status , asylum , and cancellation of removal—apply to lawfully present aliens as well , but those aspects of the statutes are not explored here .

further , most of the statutory provisions treated here have requirements that disqualify aliens with certain criminal convictions or immigration violations .

those requirements are referenced but not analyzed here ; another crs report discusses them in more depth .

the ina takes three primary approaches to regulating the unlawfully present population: removal , deterrence , and—to a lesser extent—legalization .

first , unlawfully present aliens are subject to removal for as long their presence violates the ina ; no statute of limitations applies .

this regime of perpetual removability has been a feature of u.s. immigration law since 1924 .

under it , aliens who enter the country surreptitiously or overstay nonimmigrant visas may be removed even after many years in the united states , whether or not they have committed other crimes or offenses .

enforcement of this legal regime comes with a well - known catch: the federal government does not allocate enough resources to make the removal of all unlawfully present aliens possible .

according to dhs estimates and removal statistics , the agency's resources allow it to pursue removal each year of only a small fraction of the approximately ten million to twelve million unlawfully present aliens in the united states .

there is an enforcement gap , in other words .

in response , executive branch administrations have , to varying degrees , established enforcement priorities to focus their removal resources on aliens who have committed crimes or who meet other criteria .

but the point remains that unlawfully present aliens face perpetual risk of removal under the ina , even if only a small percentage are actually placed in removal proceedings each year .

second , the ina seeks to deter the arrival or continued presence of unlawfully present aliens .

it criminalizes some immigration violations , such as illegal entry and reentry , and bars most aliens who lack lawful immigration status from working or receiving federal public benefits .

the ina renders aliens who commit some immigration violations inadmissible ( i.e. , ineligible for admission ) , either for a specified time period or for life .

aliens who are unlawfully present in the united states for one year or more , for example , are inadmissible for ten years once they depart , subject to some waiver provisions .

aliens who reenter the country illegally after being removed are inadmissible for life , also subject to limited waiver .

finally , legalization: as this report explains , the ina offers limited opportunities for unlawfully present aliens to acquire legal immigration status that extinguishes the statutory basis for their removal .

an alien who overstays a nonimmigrant visa and later marries a u.s. citizen ( or otherwise becomes the immediate relative of a u.s. citizen ) can legalize through the adjustment of status process , so long as he or she has not committed certain crimes and does not fall within other eligibility bars .

beyond that notable exception , the legalization mechanisms in the ina exist mainly to relieve specific types of hardships such as persecution abroad ( asylum ) or the extreme hardship that u.s. citizens or lprs would suffer due to the removal of their parents ( cancellation of removal ) .

where these forms of relief do not apply , unlawfully present aliens may seek to legalize by leaving the country and applying for an immigrant visa abroad on the basis of a qualifying family relationship or in an employment or diversity category .

in most cases , however , their prior unlawful presence in the united states will make them ineligible to return for ten years .

as such , under current law , it is generally more difficult for unlawfully present aliens in the united states to obtain legal immigration status on generally applicable grounds , such as qualifying family relationships , than it is for aliens abroad applying to immigrate on the same grounds .

u.s. immigration law developed its current stance toward the unlawfully present population in the middle period of the twentieth century , when congress strengthened removal statutes and allowed the primary legalization statute—known as the registry statute , which provided for legalization based on long - standing presence—to become obsolete .

illegal immigration emerged as a significant issue in the united states with the advent of quantitative immigration restrictions in the 1920s .

until 1875 , the only restrictions on immigration into the united states came from state laws providing for the exclusion or expulsion of convicts , paupers , and people with contagious diseases .

the page act of 1875 imposed the first federal restrictions when it barred convicts and prostitutes .

additional qualitative restrictions , including bars against chinese laborers and aliens "likely to become public charges," followed in the ensuing decades , culminating in the imposition of a literacy test in 1917 .

the first numerical restrictions on immigration were not imposed until 1921 , when the temporary measures of the emergency quota act capped new admissions by nationality ( at 3% of the foreign - born population of each nationality , as reflected in the census of 1910 ) .

congress established a permanent and generally more restrictive system of national origins quotas in the immigration act of 1924 , also known as the johnson - reed act .

numerical limitations of some form have remained a fixture of u.s. immigration law ever since .

some illegal immigration had existed during the regime of qualitative restrictions that began in 1875 , but it increased with the introduction of numerical caps .

the 1924 act , beyond establishing a permanent quota system , was also notable for its removal provisions .

the act rendered aliens who entered or remained in the country in violation of its restrictions subject to deportation "at any time after entering," which meant that no limitations period applied and even long - standing unlawfully present aliens could be deported .

this marked a significant change from earlier deportation statutes , which had imposed limitations periods of between one and five years for the removal of illegal entrants .

aliens physically present for longer than the limitations period could not be deported under those laws on the ground that their presence violated the immigration statutes .

the 1924 act eliminated this limitations period going forward .

yet soon after u.s. immigration law settled upon this regime of perpetual deportability of unlawfully present aliens , the law also developed a mechanism called "registry" for such aliens to legalize on the basis of long - standing presence .

congress enacted the first registry statute in 1929 and revised it periodically thereafter .

generally speaking , the registry statute authorized immigration officials to grant lawful permanent residence to aliens who entered the united states before a date specified in the statute and who resided in the country continuously after entry .

to qualify , aliens also had to demonstrate "good moral character" and not be ineligible on certain grounds that changed over time ( eg , not have certain criminal convictions ) .

unlawful presence—whether as a result of surreptitious entry or the overstay of a visa—was not a bar to registry .

in plain terms , then , the registry statute provided for the legalization of unlawfully present aliens who had been in the united states since a given cutoff date .

the first cutoff date , under the 1929 statute , was june 3 , 1921 .

congress apparently sought to provide relief to aliens who entered the united states before the first numerical restrictions went into effect in 1921 and before immigration officials began systematically recording alien admissions at ports of entry .

in 1939 , congress advanced the cutoff date to 1924 .

about 200,000 aliens appear to have legalized through registry between 1929 and 1945 .

a few more changes to the cutoff date followed in later decades .

a 1958 law advanced the date from 1924 to 1940 ; a 1965 law moved it up to 1948 ; and in 1986 , the immigration reform and control act ( irca ) set the current date of 1972 .

under current law , the registry statute remains in effect , but the 1972 cutoff date renders it mostly obsolete .

registry applications surged on the heels of the 1986 update that set the date at 1972 , but applications dwindled to a trickle as the date grew more distant .

in 2004 , the last year for which dhs published separate statistics on registry in its statistical yearbook , 205 aliens became lprs through registry .

thus , while the concept of registry persists in u.s. law as a legalization mechanism based on long - standing presence , few ( if any ) unlawfully present aliens qualify to legalize through registry because few have been present since the 1972 cut - off date .

perhaps the most significant body of legalization principles in the ina governs the extent to which unlawful presence disqualifies an alien from obtaining lpr status through family relationships or on other generally applicable grounds .

with the registry statute effectively obsolete , federal law no longer provides for the legalization of unlawfully present aliens based on the duration of their presence in the country alone .

but unlawfully present aliens often come within the generally applicable criteria that the law uses to select aliens for immigration to the united states .

the ina allocates immigrant visas to three major categories of aliens: family - based immigrants , employment - based immigrants , and diversity - based immigrants .

family - based immigrants account for about two - thirds of permanent immigration to the united states each year ; employment - based immigrants account for about 12% ; and diversity - based immigrants account for about 4% ( refugees , asylees , and some other categories account for the remainder ) .

an unlawfully present alien would come within one of these categories , to give some examples , by marrying a u.s. citizen , having a u.s. citizen son or daughter who turns twenty - one , obtaining an offer of employment that qualifies for an employment - based immigrant visa , or entering and winning a visa slot in the diversity lottery program .

the law's approach to aliens in this situation—that is , aliens who become eligible for an immigrant visa while living in the united states in violation of the ina—is to impose two interlinking obstacles to their acquisition of lpr status .

first , current law prohibits most ( but not all ) such aliens from obtaining lpr status unless they depart the united states to apply for the immigrant visa at a u.s. consulate abroad .

as discussed below , exceptions to this prohibition allow some groups of unlawfully present aliens who are eligible for immigrant visas to become lprs by adjusting their status from within the united states .

the most notable exception benefits those aliens who enter on a nonimmigrant visa , overstay , and then marry a u.s. citizen or otherwise become the immediate relative of a u.s. citizen .

second , most unlawfully present aliens who depart the united states to apply for immigrant visas abroad will face a bar on readmission of three years from the date of their departure ( for aliens unlawfully present for more than 180 days ) or ten years from the date of their departure ( for aliens unlawfully present for one year or more ) .

unless they receive a discretionary waiver of the ineligibility—a remedy with narrow eligibility criteria—they generally must wait out the bars abroad .

in general , then , the ina imposes a double barrier to the legalization of unlawfully present aliens who come within an immigrant visa category: the law prohibits such aliens from seeking lpr status unless they apply from abroad ( the first barrier ) and then bars their readmission for three or ten years once they depart the united states ( the second barrier ) .

crucially , the three - and ten - year bars on readmission apply only if the alien departs the united states following the period of unlawful presence .

the law that governs an alien's eligibility to adjust status from within the united states—that is , to obtain lpr status without departing—is therefore hugely important , because in most cases it determines whether an unlawfully present alien in an immigrant visa category must face the three - and ten - year bars before obtaining legal status .

in many cases , a grant of advance parole—essentially , an assurance from dhs that it will allow an alien to reenter the country on immigration parole after a trip abroad—can help an unlawfully present alien become eligible to adjust status , as discussed further below .

the ina's cancellation of removal provision authorizes immigration judges to grant lpr status to some unlawfully present aliens who are in removal proceedings and who have lived in the united states for at least ten years .

aliens qualify , however , only if , aside from meeting other requirements , they show that their removal would cause "exceptional and extremely unusual hardship" to immediate relatives who are u.s. citizens or lprs .

the lineage of this form of relief extends back at least to 1935 , when two members of president franklin roosevelt's cabinet , frustrated by the lack of a statutory mechanism to grant relief from deportation in hardship cases , used bureaucratic ingenuity to implement "a two - step procedure whereby the secretary [of labor] granted [an] illegal alien a waiver from deportation and allowed him or her to depart to canada and to reenter the united states as a legal permanent resident. .

in 1940 , congress rendered this arrangement unnecessary by enacting the first clearly delineated statutory form of relief from deportation in hardship cases , which was called "suspension of deportation" until 1996 .

the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act ( iirira ) of 1996 replaced "suspension of deportation" with "cancellation of removal," a more restrictive form of relief due in part to its higher threshold for qualifying hardship and its omission of hardship to the alien ( as opposed to the alien's u.s. family ) as a basis for relief .

under the current version of the ina , one form of cancellation of removal exists for lprs in removal proceedings , and one exists for non - lprs , including unlawfully present aliens .

to qualify for non - lpr cancellation of removal , aliens must have been physically present in the united states for the ten years preceding their application , and , critically , they must make the requisite showing of "exceptional and extremely unusual hardship" to their u.s. citizen or lpr immediate relatives .

"exceptional and unusual hardship" means a level of hardship to an immediate relative that is "'substantially' beyond the ordinary hardship that would be expected when a close family member leaves this country. .

the paradigmatic case involves "a u.s. citizen child with a serious medical condition who , if [cancellation of removal] is denied , would be either involuntarily separated from her parent or relocated to a country where adequate medical treatment is not available. .

aliens also must show good moral character and not have certain types of criminal convictions .

like adjustment of status , cancellation of removal is a discretionary form of relief , meaning that immigration judges retain discretion to deny it even to aliens who meet the statutory criteria .

the ina caps cancellations of removal for non - lprs at 4,000 per year , although the cap does not apply to some groups .

if the cap has been reached in a particular fiscal year but the immigration judge determines that a cancellation of removal application should be granted , the judge must reserve decision until a subsequent fiscal year when cap spaces are available .

finally , cancellation of removal is available only as a defense to removal , meaning that aliens can apply for cancellation only if they are in removal proceedings .

they cannot apply for relief affirmatively ( i.e. , outside of removal proceedings ) .

when an immigration judge grants cancellation of removal to an unlawfully present alien , the alien becomes an lpr .

some commentators have thus called cancellation of removal a mechanism for "case - by - case legalization. .

but the major parameters for this mechanism—the annual cap , the fact that aliens cannot apply for it affirmatively but instead only in removal proceedings , and the required hardship showing—sharply limit its availability .

the lack of an affirmative channel for requesting cancellation of removal , in particular , has prompted some aliens who believe they clearly qualify for cancellation to proactively prompt dhs to initiate removal proceedings against them .

the aliens do this , through their counsel , by making a special request to dhs or by filing an affirmative application for asylum , which upon denial triggers an automatic referral to removal proceedings .

this strategy has pitfalls , however: it affirmatively triggers proceedings that could end in removal , and , in any event , immigration judges have discretion to dismiss the proceedings without granting cancellation upon determining that the alien filed "a meritless asylum application with the uscis for the sole purpose of seeking cancellation of removal in the immigration court. .

other mechanisms in the ina provide for the legalization of unlawfully present aliens who suffer particular types of harms .

asylum offers the prospect of lpr status to unlawfully present aliens who would face a risk of persecution if returned to their countries of origin , while the related protections of withholding of removal and relief under the convention against torture ( cat ) offer more limited relief from persecution or torture .

a series of nonimmigrant visas , including the u visa , offer the prospect of relief to unlawfully present aliens who are the victims or witnesses of certain crimes .

although the legalization mechanisms in the ina are narrow , u.s. immigration law has used two other methods to confer legal immigration status or other protections from removal on segments of the unlawfully present population: ( 1 ) ad hoc legalization laws that , rather than reforming the ina's generally applicable legalization provisions going forward , offer one - time relief or offer relief only for discrete populations , and ( 2 ) discretionary reprieves from removal , such as deferred action , that confer weaker protection sometimes described as "quasi - legal status. .

the ina subjects the more than ten million unlawfully present aliens in the united states to removal without a limitations period and gives them few opportunities to legalize .

political views of this generally restrictive approach to legalization differ: some favor creating expanded , mostly ad hoc pathways to legalization ; others find the extant pathways to legalization too permissive and seek to curtail them .

the debate is informed by the ina's current approach to legalization .

the ina does not provide an avenue for an appreciable number of unlawfully present aliens to obtain lawful status based on long - standing presence , as the registry statute once did .

the ina's penalties for unlawful entry and unlawful presence make it difficult for unlawfully present aliens to obtain lawful status based on qualifying family relationships ( except , most notably , for nonimmigrant overstays who become immediate relatives of u.s. citizens ) .

and it allows legalization on hardship grounds only in cases of truly extreme hardship to immediate relatives who are u.s. citizens or lprs .

forms of humanitarian relief from persecution and other harms , such as asylum and the u visa program , do not exclude unlawfully present aliens from their reach but nonetheless have specific objectives and tailored eligibility criteria .

meanwhile , discretionary reprieves from removal and the quasi - legal status they confer upon unlawfully present aliens have become major components of the u.s. immigration system .

