dams may provide flood control , hydroelectric power , recreation , navigation , and water supply .

dams also entail financial costs for construction , operation and maintenance ( o&m ) , rehabilitation ( i.e. , bringing a dam up to current safety standards ) , and repair , and they often result in environmental c hange ( eg , alteration of riverine habitat ) .

federal government agencies reported owning 3% of the more than 90,000 dams in the national inventory of dams ( nid ) , including some of the country's largest dams ( eg , the bureau of reclamation's hoover dam in nevada is 730 feet tall with storage capacity of over 30 million acre - feet of water ) .

most dams in the united states are owned by private entities , state or local governments , or public utilities .

dams may pose a potential safety threat to populations living downstream of dams and populations surrounding associated reservoirs .

as dams age , they can deteriorate , which also may pose a potential safety threat .

the risks of dam deterioration may be amplified by lack of maintenance , misoperation , development in surrounding areas , natural hazards ( eg , weather and seismic activity ) , and security threats .

structural failure of dams may threaten public safety , local and regional economies , and the environment , as well as cause the loss of services provided by a dam .

in recent years , several dam safety incidents have highlighted the public safety risks posed by the failure of dams and related facilities .

from 2015 to 2018 , over 100 dams breached in north carolina and south carolina due to record flooding .

in 2017 , the near failure of oroville dam's spillway in california resulted in a precautionary evacuation of approximately 200,000 people and more than $1.1 billion in emergency response and repair .

in 2018 , california began to expedite inspections of dams and associated spillway structures .

congress has expressed an interest in dam safety over several decades , often prompted by destructive events .

dam failures in the 1970s resulting in the loss of life and billions of dollars in property damage prompted congress and the executive branch to establish the nid , the national dam safety program ( ndsp ) , and other federal activities related to dam safety .

following terrorist attacks on september 11 , 2001 , the federal government focused on dam security and the potential for acts of terrorism at major dam sites .

as dams age and the population density near many dams increases , attention has turned to mitigating dam failure through dam inspection programs , rehabilitation , and repair , in addition to preventing and preparing for emergencies .

this report provides an overview of dam safety and associated activities in the united states , highlighting the federal role in dam safety .

the primary federal agencies involved in these activities include the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , the u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) , and the bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) .

the report also discusses potential issues for congress , such as the federal role for nonfederal dam safety ; federal funding for dam safety programs , rehabilitation , and repair ; and public awareness of dam safety risks .

the report does not discuss in detail emergency response from a dam incident , dam building and removal policies , or state dam safety programs .

dam safety generally focuses on preventing dam failure and incidents—episodes that , without intervention , likely would have resulted in dam failure .

challenges to dam safety include aging and inadequately constructed dams , frequent or severe floods ( for instance , due to climate change ) , misoperation of dams , and dam security .

the risks associated with dam misoperation and failure also may increase as populations and development encroach upstream and downstream of some dams .

safe operation and proper maintenance of dams and associated structures is fundamental for dam safety .

in addition , routine inspections by dam owners and regulators determine a dam's hazard potential ( see " hazard potential " below ) , condition ( see " condition assessment " below ) , and possible needs for rehabilitation and repair .

in addition to owning dams , the federal government is involved in multiple areas of dam safety through legislative and executive actions .

following usace's publication of the nid in 1975 as authorized by p.l .

92-367 , the interagency committee on dam safety—established by president jimmy carter through executive order 12148—released safety guidelines for dams regulated by federal agencies in 1979 .

in 1996 , the national dam safety program act ( section 215 of the water resources development act of 1996 ; p.l .

104-303 ) established the national dam safety program , the nation's principal dam safety program , under the direction of fema .

congress has reauthorized the ndsp four times and enacted other dam safety programs and activities related to federal and nonfederal dams .

a chronology of selected federal dam safety actions is provided in the box below .

congress may consider oversight and legislation relating to dam safety in the larger framework of infrastructure improvements and risk management , or as an exclusive area of interest .

congress may deliberate the federal role for dam safety , especially as most of the dams in the nid are nonfederal .

further , congress may evaluate the level and allocation of appropriations to federal dam safety programs , project modifications for federal dams , and financial assistance for nonfederal dam safety programs and nonfederal dams .

in addition , congress may maintain or amend policies for disclosure of dam safety information when considering the federal role in both providing dam safety risk and response information to the public ( including those living downstream of dams ) while also maintaining security of these structures .

since the 1970s , the federal government has developed and overseen national dam safety standards and has provided technical assistance for the design , construction , and o&m of dams .

these activities , as well as the enhancement of federal agencies' dam safety programs , have improved certain dam safety metrics ; nonetheless , deficiencies in federal and state programs may have contributed to recent incidents ( eg , the 2017 spillway incident at oroville dam , california ) .

some federal agencies have received criticism of their dam safety programs .

for example , in 2014 , the department of defense ( dod ) inspector general found that dod did not have a policy requiring installations to implement a dam safety inspection program consistent with the federal guidelines for dam safety .

since the findings , some service branches of dod reported developing new dam safety policies including the creation of a dam safety program for the u.s. marine corps .

congress may consider other oversight activities similar to , for example , direction requiring usace , reclamation , and ferc to brief the senate committee on appropriations on efforts to incorporate lessons learned from oroville into dam inspection protocols across all three agencies and their state partners .

although incidents and reviews may result in recommending improvements to federal dam safety programs , some agencies report financial and other limitations to revising or expanding their dam safety programs .

congress may consider these obstacles , as identified in its oversight activities , in determining whether new authorities or appropriations are needed .

some stakeholders argue that the federal government should continue its activities in maintaining and regulating dams owned by federal agencies and nonfederal dams under federal regulatory authority , while state dam safety programs should retain responsibility for state - regulated dams by following the guidelines of the model state dam safety program .

however , some stakeholders , such as the association of state floodplain managers and asdso , advocate for a larger federal role in nonfederal dam safety .

they argue that many state dam safety programs and nonfederal dam owners have limited resources and authorities to inspect , conduct o&m , rehabilitate , and repair nonfederal dams .

however , land use and zoning are considered nonfederal responsibilities , and some may argue against encroaching on state and local sovereignty and against the potential growth of the federal government's role .

dam removal is a potential policy alternative to rehabilitation and repair of high hazard dams .

a dam - removal policy incentive would likely require , for example , evaluation of the current level of use of the dam , whether some or all of its functions could be economically replaced by nonstructural measures , and whether o&m , rehabilitation , and repair are feasible ( eg , the dam owner is absent or repairs are too costly ) .

congress has previously considered incentives to encourage states to remove dams deemed unnecessary or infeasible to rehabilitate .

for instance , congress authorized dam removal as an activity under fema's high hazard dam rehabilitation grant program and authorized usace to study the structural integrity and possible modification or removal for certain dams located in vermont .

when considering dam removal for dam safety purposes , policymakers also may weigh removal costs and the loss of recognized benefits from the dam .

individual dam o&m , rehabilitation , and repair can range in cost from thousands to hundreds of millions of dollars .

the responsibility for these expenses lies with dam owners ; however , many nonfederal dam owners are not willing or able to fund these costs .

as of 2019 , asdso estimated that rehabilitation and repair of nonfederal high hazard dams in the nid would cost approximately $18.7 billion ( overall rehabilitation and repair for nonfederal dams in the nid were estimated at $65.9 billion ) .

some , such as asdso and american society of civil engineers , call for increased federal funding to rehabilitate and repair these dams .

they note that upfront federal investment in rehabilitation and repair may prevent loss of lives and large federal outlays in emergency spending if a high hazard dam were to fail .

twenty - three states have created a state - funded grant or low - interest revolving loan program to assist dam owners with repairs .

asdso states that the programs seem to vary significantly in the scope and reach of the financial assistance available .

congress authorized the " fema high hazard dam rehabilitation grant program " in the wiin act , and subsequently provided appropriations of $10 million to the program in division a ( department of homeland security appropriations act , 2019 ) of the consolidated appropriations act , 2019 ( p.l .

116-6 ) .

for fy2020 , the house committee on appropriations recommended no money for the grant program , while the senate committee on appropriations recommended $10 million .

congress may consider the tradeoffs in focusing federal resources on federal dams versus nonfederal dams .

while federal agencies report owning only 3% of dams in the nid , many of these dams are considered large dams that can affect large populations and may require costly investments in dam safety .

in fy2019 , usace estimated a backlog of $20 billion to address dsac 1 and dsac 2 dam safety concerns .

usace has stated that investments in dam rehabilitation and repair above recent levels of appropriations would help alleviate risks and the likelihood of a major dam incident .

reclamation estimates that the current portfolio of dam safety modification projects for reclamation - owned dams would cost $1.4 billion to $1.8 billion through fy2030 .

to address this backlog , congress has considered authorizing mandatory funding from the reclamation fund to provide for dam o&m , rehabilitation , and repair , so the funding would not be subject to the appropriations process .

while some members of congress and stakeholders support this proposal , such as the western states water council , other members of congress argue that increasing mandatory funding would remove congressional oversight and control of the reclamation fund and result in increases in spending and budget deficits , among other things .

agencies with portfolios of smaller dams ( eg , forest service , fish and wildlife service , national park service ) report that their biggest challenge for dam safety is lack of resources , especially when dam safety is competing against other facility projects ( eg , buildings , levees ) .

the fish and wildlife service suggested in the fy2016-fy2017 national dam safety program report that downgrading small impoundments from the definition of a dam would alleviate some financial burdens .

the agency reasoned that small impoundments that narrowly qualify as dams based on height and / or storage volume obligate the owners and regulators to perform dam safety functions with little likelihood of providing significant dam safety benefits or any genuine risk reduction .

congress may consider continuing current spending levels for dam safety .

under current funding , some metrics for the ndsp , such as the percentage of dams with eaps and condition assessments , have shown improvement ( see " progress of the national dam safety program " ) .

similar metrics have improved for some federal agencies that own dams , and certain federal dam safety programs have implemented or are beginning to implement risk - based dam safety approaches to managing their dam portfolios ( eg , usace and reclamation ) .

some stakeholders ( eg , a committee convened by asdso , the association of state floodplain managers ) have recommended alternative funding structures to congressional appropriations , such as a federal low interest , revolving loan program or financial credit for disaster assistance .

for example , congress has previously authorized a water infrastructure finance and innovation act ( wifia ) program , creating a new mechanism—credit assistance including direct loans and loan guarantees—for usace to provide assistance for water resource projects ( eg , flood control and storm damage reduction ) .

congress may consider amending wifia to include making rehabilitation and repair of nonfederal dams eligible for credit assistance , or for establishing a new low - interest loan guarantee program .

although congress authorized secured and direct loans when it enacted wifia in 2014 , congress has not provided appropriations to usace to implement the programs as of fy2019 .

similarly , congress would need to provide both the authority and appropriations for these financial incentives for dam safety programs .

according to some advocacy groups , many americans are unaware that they live downstream of a dam .

further , if they are aware , the public may not know if a dam is deficient , has an eap , or could cause destruction if it failed .

a lack of public awareness may stem from a lack of access to certain dam safety information , the public's confidence in dam integrity , or other reasons .

dam safety processes and products ( such as inspections , eaps , and inundation maps ) are intended to support decisionmaking and enhance community resilience .

some of the information and resulting products may not be readily available to all community members and stakeholders because access to dam safety information is generally restricted from public access .

the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks drew attention to the security of many facilities , including the nation's water supply and water quality infrastructure , including dams .

damage or destruction of a dam by a malicious attack ( eg , terrorist attack , cyberattack ) could disrupt the delivery of water resource services , threaten public health and the environment , or result in catastrophic flooding and loss of life .

as a consequence of the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , current federal policy and practices restrict public access to most information related to the condition assessment of dams and consequences of dam or component failure .

for example , according to usace , dams in the nid meet the definition of critical infrastructure as defined by the uniting and strengthening america by providing appropriate tools required to intercept and obstruct terrorism ( usa patriot ) act of 2001 ( p.l .

107-56 ) .

vulnerability assessments of critical infrastructure are restricted from public access .

currently usace considers condition assessments as a type of vulnerability assessment ; therefore , dam condition assessments contained in the nid are restricted only to approved government users .

however , fema reported that following a 2017 recommendation from the ndsrb , usace is considering making condition assessments of nid dams unrestricted for public access .

congress may consider reevaluating the appropriate amount of information to share ( eg , inundation scenarios from dam failure ) to address public safety concerns and what amount and type of information not to share to address concerns about malicious use of that information .

there are tradeoffs involved in sharing certain types of data .

for example , sharing inundation mapping data with the public may raise awareness of the potential risk of living downstream of a dam , but misinterpretation of that information could cause unnecessary alarm in downstream communities .

currently , inundation mapping data generally are shared with emergency managers and responders rather than with the public at large .

some argue that disclosure to these officials is sufficient , as it provides the information to the officials who bear responsibilities for emergency response .

in addition to managing information flow to the public to address risk , congress might consider the risk of individuals or groups using the information for malicious purposes ; namely , the concerns originally raised following the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks .

