per - and polyfluoroalkyl substances ( pfas ) are a large , diverse group of fluorinated compounds that have been used in numerous commercial , industrial , and u.s. military applications .

among other uses , pfas have been used in fire - fighting foams and in the processing and manufacture of many commercial products ( eg , nonstick cookware , stain - and water - resistant fabrics ) .

pfas are persistent in the environment , and studies of several pfas suggest that exposures above certain levels may lead to adverse health effects .

detections of pfas contamination in drinking water and the environment , have increased in recent years with the availability of new analytical methods and increased monitoring .

pfas—primarily perfluorooctanoic acid ( pfoa ) and perfluorooctane sulfonate ( pfos ) —have been detected in soil , surface water , groundwater , and public water supplies in numerous locations .

these detections have been associated primarily with releases from manufacturing and processing facilities , and from u.s. military installations and other facilities that use firefighting foams ( eg , civilian airports and fire departments ) .

these detections have prompted calls for increased federal action and authority to prevent and mitigate exposures to pfas .

federal actions to address potential health and environmental risks of exposure to pfas have been taken primarily under the authorities of the following federal statutes: toxic substances control act ( tsca ) ; safe drinking water act ( sdwa ) ; and comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( cercla ) and related u.s. department of defense ( dod ) response authorities .

the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) has used the authorities of these three statutes to take most of its actions to address potential risks of pfas .

dod and other federal agencies have also used cercla authorities to respond to releases of various pfas at federal facilities .

some federal actions have involved the private sector in complying with reporting and other requirements .

other actions have involved voluntary measures taken by some companies .

although the federal government has taken a range of actions to address pfas exposure , policymakers and stakeholders have urged federal agencies to act more quickly and broadly .

for instance , some are calling for epa to issue enforceable drinking water standards for some or all pfas .

others want epa to designate all pfas as hazardous substances ( and thus establish liability for responsible parties to pay response costs ) .

multiple bills introduced in the 116 th congress would require epa or other agencies to take various actions under existing law or would create new authorities .

some of these bills are incorporated into the house - passed and senate - passed versions of the national defense authorization act for fy2020 ( h.r .

2500 and s. 1790 ) .

for example , among other pfas provisions , h.r .

2500 would establish liability for pfas response costs through designation of pfas as hazardous substances under cercla and also indirectly through listing pfas as toxic pollutants under the clean water act , whereas s. 1790 would expand dod statutory responsibilities for response actions to include releases of any other pollutant or contaminant without establishing enforceable liability under cercla for such chemicals .

s. 1790 also would direct epa to issue drinking water standards for pfas and to take various actions for other purposes .

bills related to the topics covered in this report are noted where relevant in the discussions , and these and other related bills are identified in this report in table 2 .

this report focuses on federal authorities under which epa and other agencies have taken actions to address potential risks of pfas .

it does not discuss other laws under which epa or other agencies may take additional actions , or actions under state laws .

the report begins with a brief discussion of the chemical properties , uses , and varying risks of pfas , followed by discussions of federal actions , relevant legislation enacted in the 115 th congress , and relevant legislation in the 116 th congress .

pfas are a large group of synthesized chemical compounds that do not occur naturally .

chemical manufacturers have produced various types of pfas for a range of commercial , industrial , and u.s. military applications since the 1940s .

epa identifies over 1,200 pfas manufactured in the united states over time .

the specific types and quantities of pfas produced and used have varied over time and continue to change .

pfas are not a single chemical or a single compound , but refer to a group of compounds that share similar chemical structures .

any compound that has the chemical structure of at least one carbon atom attached to two or more fluorine atoms , or a chain of at least two carbon atoms attached to two or more fluorine atoms , may be considered a pfas .

individual pfas vary in terms of the numbers of fluorinated carbon atoms .

the extent to which a chain of carbon atoms is fluorinated would determine whether a chemical may be considered a perfluoroalkyl substance or a polyfluoroalkyl substance .

given the possible variations in the length of the carbon chain , number of fluorinated carbon atoms , and other atoms attached to the chain , pfas potentially could include thousands of chemical compounds if every possible combination were created .

industry and government sources indicate that manufacturers have focused on producing pfas with longer fluorinated carbon chains , primarily because they reduce the surface tension of liquids and resist heat .

some longer chain pfas have been used in chemical manufacturing processes to produce fluoropolymers designed for multiple consumer uses , including non - stick and heat - resistant coatings for cookware and food packaging , and treatment of clothing , leather , and other materials for soil , stain , and water resistance .

in some cases , pfas may be used only as a processing aid to create a fluoropolymer - based product , and in other cases , pfas may be a constituent in the resulting product .

fluoropolymer - based products may therefore contain varying amounts of pfas depending on the manufacturing process .

fluoropolymers containing specific types of pfas may also break down into other pfas depending on the conditions .

some pfas have also been used as an ingredient in a variety of products , including fire suppressants in aqueous film forming foam ( afff ) used by u.s. military installations , other federal agencies , civilian airports , and local fire departments as class b agents to extinguish petroleum - based liquid fuel fires ; and suppressants of oxidizing mist in industrial metal plating operations .

such products generally contain relatively small concentrations of pfas that require further dilution of the product for its intended use .

for example , afff products that contain pfas are designed to be diluted with water in their application to form an aqueous film that restricts oxygen to extinguish petroleum - based liquid fuel fires .

perfluorooctane sulfonate ( pfos ) , perfluorooctanoic acid ( pfoa ) , and certain other related perfluoroalkyl substances accounted for most of the historical production of pfas prior to their phase - out , discussed below in "regulation of pfas in commerce under tsca. .

manufacturers have transitioned away from these longer chain pfas because of their potential toxicity and environmental persistence .

policymakers and stakeholders have continued to raise questions about the relative toxicity and persistence of shorter chain or less fluorinated pfas in comparison to longer chain pfas .

some policymakers and stakeholders have also expressed concern about the continued use and disposal of existing stocks of longer chain pfas and products containing these chemicals , including the disposal of afff stocks by the federal government , civilian airport operators , and local fire departments , as they move to alternative firefighting foams .

similar to other commercial chemicals , releases of pfas may occur in multiple ways that could result in exposures .

pfas may be released from chemical manufacturing or processing operations ; intended uses ( such as the application of afff as a fire extinguishing agent ) ; disposal of products or wastes containing these chemicals ; or accidental spills or other unexpected incidents .

occupational exposures may occur among workers in facilities that manufacture or process pfas , among workers that use products containing these chemicals ( such as firefighters that use afff ) , or among workers involved in disposal .

exposures among the general public would depend on whether a release may move through the environment in a manner that an individual could come into contact with these chemicals .

exposures may also occur among individuals who use a product containing these chemicals .

as with any chemical , potential risks to human health and the environment would depend on the properties of the specific pfas , the conditions under which exposure may occur , and the characteristics of the exposed individual .

how pfas interact in the environment and in humans or animals would vary depending on the structure , toxicity , persistence , and other properties of the individual chemical .

the breakdown rate of a particular chemical once released would determine how long it persists before reacting with other chemicals in the environment or in a human or animal that would produce new chemicals with different properties .

although some have characterized pfas as "forever chemicals," persistence varies among longer chain versus shorter chain pfas , and among more fluorinated versus less fluorinated pfas .

toxicity and potential health effects may also vary .

whereas persistence would affect how long the properties of the chemical remain intact , the potential risks associated with exposure would depend on the toxicity of the specific chemical , the exposure pathway and other exposure factors .

given this variability , evaluating the potential risks of all pfas as a singular category presents scientific ( and regulatory ) challenges .

similarly , regulating all pfas as a singular category would present challenges in developing a singular risk - based standard ( i.e. , a singular concentration level ) .

because of the diversity of the potential universe of these chemicals , designating all pfas as a singular category for regulatory or reporting purposes would also present challenges in implementation to identify which chemicals would be subject to applicable requirements .

studies of the potential human health and environmental effects of pfas have focused on pfoa , pfos , and certain other longer chain perfluoroalkyls because of their more predominant manufacture and use .

fewer studies have examined shorter chain perfluoroalkyls or polyfluoroalkyls .

although scientific understanding of the potential risks of these chemicals has been evolving , uncertainties remain about health effects that may be associated with exposures to various pfas .

much of the attention among policymakers , stakeholders , and the general public has focused on drinking water sources .

studies of these chemicals have mostly focused on drinking water or contaminated food sources .

less is known about risks that may be associated with other exposure pathways , such as dermal contact or inhalation .

the agency for toxic substances and disease registry ( atsdr ) and epa have developed guidelines for assessing chemical exposure risks under various agency programs .

the national research council of the national academy of sciences has also established risk assessment guidelines and has examined some of the challenges , such as uncertainty stemming from data quantity and quality .

each of these guidelines outlines factors to evaluate potential risks that may be associated with exposure to a specific chemical , including toxicity and other properties of the chemical ; frequency , concentration , and duration of exposure ( i.e. , the dose ) ; pathway of exposure ( eg , inhalation , ingestion , or skin contact ) ; interaction with other chemicals that may be present in the environment ; and age , overall health , and genetic and behavioral characteristics of the exposed individual .

federal actions to address potential risks from pfas have primarily been taken under the authorities of tsca , sdwa , and cercla .

most of these actions have focused on pfos and pfoa , because of predominant past uses , prevalence in the environment stemming from these uses , and the greater availability of scientific research on potential health effects than for other pfas .

congress has also authorized specific federal actions in separate legislation .

see the section on " relevant legislation enacted in the 115th congress " for a list of these laws .

epa has taken actions under tsca over the past few decades to gather and assess existing information on the risks of pfos , pfoa , and certain other pfas .

based on the findings , tsca authorizes epa to require manufacturers to submit more information if needed to further evaluate potential risks , and the agency has done so .

epa has also required , or worked with , manufacturers to develop new information when existing information on a substance is insufficient to evaluate the risks .

if epa determines that the risks would meet the statutory threshold of "unreasonable" under tsca , tsca authorizes epa to establish various regulatory controls if no other statute addresses the risks .

epa has not rendered a finding of unreasonable risk for any pfas to date .

following a series of voluntary industry phase - outs in the united states for the manufacture of pfos , pfoa , and other related substances , epa used tsca authority to promulgate multiple significant new use rules ( snurs ) that require manufacturers to notify the agency prior to reintroducing these substances into commerce .

tsca also requires manufacturers to notify epa of the intent to produce any new pfas .

when information on potential risks is insufficient , epa has issued orders that restrict the manufacture , processing , distribution , use , disposal or any combination of these activities pending the development of new information on risks .

epa has used information on pfas gathered under tsca to inform its actions under sdwa and cercla .

for over a decade , epa has been evaluating pfoa and pfos under sdwa to determine whether an enforceable maximum contaminant level ( mcl ) for drinking water provided by public water systems may be warranted .

epa has also included four other pfas among emerging contaminants being evaluated for potential regulation under sdwa .

in 2009 , epa issued provisional health advisories for short - term exposures to pfoa and pfos in drinking water .

in 2016 , epa issued additional health advisories for exposures to these chemicals in drinking water over an individual's lifetime .

these health advisories are not enforceable standards for public water systems .

however , sdwa grants epa "emergency powers" to issue enforceable orders to abate an imminent and substantial endangerment to health from a contaminant in drinking water—whether or not the contaminant is regulated under the act .

epa has issued such orders at certain sites where releases of pfoa or pfos have threatened drinking water sources .

epa and other federal agencies have also responded to releases of pfas under cercla .

dod administers the vast majority of federal facilities where pfas has been detected .

dod has been responding to releases of pfoa and pfos from the use of afff at active and decommissioned u.s. military installations under the defense environmental restoration program .

dod has been phasing out the use of afff that contains pfoa or pfos to reduce the risks of future releases .

epa has responded to releases of pfoa and pfos under the superfund program at some sites located on non - federal lands , in coordination with the states in which these sites are located .

sites addressed under the superfund program have varied in terms of manufacturing or uses of pfas .

in february 2019 , epa issued a pfas action plan that established an administrative framework for multiple planned actions under tsca , sdwa , cercla , and other related authorities , including determining whether to establish an mcl for pfoa and pfos ; proposing sdwa monitoring for additional pfas under the fifth unregulated contaminant monitoring rule ( ucmr5 ) ; proposing the designation of pfoa and pfos as hazardous substances under cercla ( or other related laws that trigger such designation ) ; developing "groundwater cleanup recommendations" to guide decisions at superfund sites and federal facilities under cercla ( proposed in april 2019 ) ; proposing additional snurs under tsca for potential new uses ; taking enforcement actions "as appropriate" under available authorities ; and developing toxicity values and other risk assessment tools to inform decisions under multiple statutes .

the status of federal actions to address potential risks of pfas under tsca , sdwa , cercla , and other related authorities are discussed in greater detail below .

in the 115 th congress , multiple bills of broader purposes containing provisions related to pfas were enacted .

some of these provisions were included in annual defense authorization legislation to authorize the cdc , atsdr , and dod to conduct additional health effects studies , and require dod to submit reports to congress related to the use of afff containing pfas .

other provisions related to pfas were included in federal aviation administration ( faa ) reauthorization legislation to allow the use of fluorine - free firefighting foams for civilian airport certification , and in a "farm bill" to authorize technical assistance for rural water systems .

table 1 on the following page identifies each of these laws , the specific provisions related to pfas , the date of enactment , and a summary of the purpose of each relevant provision .

various appropriations acts have also allocated funding for dod response actions at current and former u.s. military installations , joint cdc / atsdr health effects studies , and certain other federal actions not identified in the table below .

multiple bills introduced in the 116 th congress would also require epa to take actions related to pfas under various existing laws or would create new authorities , but none of these bills have been enacted to date .

more than 40 bills have been introduced in the 116 th congress to address pfas through a broad range of actions and federal agencies , but none of these bills have been enacted to date .

among these bills , the house - and senate - passed ndaa bills ( s. 1790 and h.r .

2500 ) contain numerous pfas provisions specific to dod .

for example , some provisions involve the use , phase out , and disposal of afff , while others address dod remediation of pfas - contaminated drinking water , groundwater , and surface water .

multiple bills would require epa to take actions related to pfas under various existing laws or would create new authorities .

the apparent intent of many of these bills is to reduce exposures to pfas in drinking water and prevent or remediate the contamination of environmental media from releases of these substances .

table 2 identifies each of these bills and their status , the specific provisions related to pfas , and a summary of the purpose of each relevant provision .

