t his report examines technological innovation in payment systems generally and particular policy issues as a result of retail ( i.e. , point of sale ) payment innovation .

the report also discusses wholesale payment , clearing , and settlement systems that send payment messages between banks and transfer funds , including the "real - time payments" service being introduced by the federal reserve .

this report includes an appendix that describes interbank payment , clearing , and settlement systems related to u.s. payments .

the u.s. financial system processes millions of transactions each day to facilitate purchases and payments .

in general terms , a payment system consists of the means for transferring money between suppliers and users of funds through the use of cash substitutes , such as checks , drafts , and electronic funds transfers .

the committee on payment and settlement systems ( cpss ) , consisting of representatives from several international regulatory authorities , has developed generally accepted definitions of standard payment system terminology .

as defined by the cpss , a payment system is a system that consists of a set of instruments , banking procedures , and , typically , interbank funds transfer systems that ensure the circulation of money .

these systems allow for the processing and completion of financial transactions .

from the typical consumer's perspective , making a payment is simple .

a person swipes a card , clicks a button , or taps a mobile device and the payment is approved within seconds .

however , the infrastructure and technology underlying the payment systems are substantial and complex .

to simplify , a payment system has three parts ( see figure 1 ) .

first , the sender ( i.e. , the person making the payment ) initiates the payment through an end - user service , such as an online payment service or mobile app , instructing the payer's bank to make a payment to the recipient .

the payer and recipient interact only with end - user services , which comprise the "retail" portion of payments .

second , the payer's bank sends a payment message containing payment details to the recipient's bank through a payment system ( sometimes called a clearing service ) .

third , the payment is completed ( or settled ) when the two banks transfer funds through a settlement system .

different systems can perform each of these parts , and systems' developers and operators compete with each other to provide payment and settlement services to consumers , businesses , and banks .

these final two inter - bank steps are the "wholesale" portion of payments .

end - user services , which are operated by the private sector , facilitate a consumer's ability to purchase goods and services , pay bills , obtain cash through withdrawals and advances , and make person - to - person payments .

retail payments tend to generate a large number of transactions that have relatively small value per transaction .

retail payment services can be accessed through many consumer financial products , including credit and debit cards and checking accounts .

the most common methods of payment are debit cards , cash , credit cards , direct debits and credits via an automated clearing house ( ach ) , checks , and prepaid debit cards ( see figure 2 ) .

in the united states , the federal reserve ( fed ) operates some of the key bank - to - bank payment , clearing , and settlement ( pcs ) systems that process retail or wholesale transactions , and private - sector organizations operate other systems that clear and settle bank - to - bank payment , including those described in the appendix .

technological advances in digitization and data processing and storage have greatly increased the availability and convenience of electronic payments .

in recent years , the use of electronic payments has risen rapidly , whereas the use of cash and checks has declined ( see figure 2 ) .

according the federal reserve's most recent triennial payment study ( released in 2016 ) , the number of transactions of three electronic payment methods—debit card , credit card , and ach—grew at annual rates of 7.1% , 8.0% , and 4.9% , respectively .

together , they totaled more than 144 billion transactions with a value of almost $178 trillion in 2015 .

meanwhile , check payments declined by an annual rate of 4.4% during that period , and totaled 17.3 billion transactions worth almost $27 trillion in 2015 .

less data are available on cash usage and the value of cash transaction in part because they are person - to - person and do not involve a digital record , but a fed survey estimates that between 2012 and 2015 , the share of transactions made in cash fell from 40.7% of all transactions to 32.5% .

this trend is probably due , at least in part , to various new technological products and services that offer fast , convenient payments for individuals and businesses .

payment apps linked to bank accounts and payment cards can be downloaded onto mobile devices that allow individuals to send payments to each other or to merchants .

these services include venmo ( owned by paypal ) , zelle ( owned by a consortium of large u.s. banks ) , and cash app ( owned by square ) .

other companies provide hardware and software products that allow individuals and small businesses to accept debit and credit card payments , online or in person .

these companies include paypal , square , and stripe .

another advance in payments is allowing consumers to make payments using a mobile device , wherein debit card , credit card , or bank account information is stored in a "digital wallet" and sensitive information is protected by transmitting surrogate data ( a process called tokenization ) at the point of sale .

this service includes apple pay , google pay , and samsung pay .

these services are generally layered on top of traditional electronic payment systems .

to use these services , the consumer or business often must link them to a bank account , debit card , or credit card .

the payments are still ultimately settled when the money from the payer's account is deposited in the recipient's account .

an exception are payments made by cryptocurrencies , discussed in the text box .

although faster and potentially less costly payment systems benefit consumers and businesses , the use of new technology in existing and new payment systems raise questions about whether existing regulation adequately addresses issues related to cybersecurity and data privacy , industry competition , and consumer access and protection .

payments between two parties who are both members of the same end - user service—a closed loop paymen t —can occur in real time because the service can instantly communicate between the two parties , verifying that the payer has sufficient funds in the account to make the payment .

however , a payment in which one party is outside of a single end - user service typically travels through the banking system , and thus cannot occur in real time unless real - time messaging , clearing , and settlement of the payment is available through wholesale payment systems .

for example , a debit or credit card payment to a merchant needs to transfer funds from the sender's bank ( in the case of a credit card , the card - issuing bank ) and send them to the recipient's bank .

real - time payment can only occur in this scenario if settlement occurs in real - time or if payment occurs before settlement ( putting the recipient's bank at risk that the transfer never occurs ) .

even within an end - user service that would provide real - time payment , if the transfer were made between two members entirely using existing balances within the service , delivery of funds could be delayed if the payer needs to add funds to their account to make payment ( via direct debit or credit card transfer , for example ) or if the recipient wishes to withdraw funds from the payment service to deposit in its bank account .

thus , the speed of many existing end - user services are ultimately limited by what happens with wholesale payment systems .

on august 5 , 2019 , the fed announced plans to create a wholesale real - time payment ( rtp ) system .

this section discusses the history of the fed's role in the payment system ; compares recent rtp initiatives by the fed , the private sector , and abroad ; and analyzes policy issues raised by these initiatives .

the fed was originally created as a "banker's bank" to improve the functioning of a national banking system that was dominated at the time by small , local banks .

to that end , providing bank - to - bank check - clearing services was one of the fed's original , primary functions .

problems with private clearinghouses were one of the central issues in the financial panic that led to the fed's creation .

as other payment methods have emerged over time , the fed has also provided other types of bank - to - bank payment and settlement systems .

the fed provides these services by linking the accounts that all banks maintain at the fed to comply with reserve requirements .

throughout the fed's history , the private sector has operated competing payment and settlement systems that the fed has regulated ( see appendix for more details ) .

for example , the fed and the private - sector electronic payments network ( owned by the clearing house , an association of large banks ) currently operate competing automated clearinghouse ( ach ) systems , which are payment systems that allow banks ( and certain other financial institutions ) to send direct debit and credit messages that initiate fund transfers .

the fed also operates two wholesale settlement systems for payments , fedwire funds service and the national settlement service .

the clearing house interbank payment system ( chips ) is a competing private - sector gross settlement system .

 ( the fed does not operate any end - user service directly accessed by individuals or nonfinancial businesses. ) .

a typical bank - to - bank electronic payment is currently settled on the same or next business day .

the fed plans to introduce an rtp system called fednow in 2023 or 2024 .

fednow would be "a new interbank 24x7x365 real - time gross settlement service with integrated clearing functionality to support faster payments in the united states," that "would process individual payments within seconds ... ( and ) would incorporate clearing functionality with messages containing information required to complete end - to - end payments , such as account information for the sender and receiver , in addition to interbank settlement information. .

according to the fed , fednow will be available to all banks with a reserve account at the fed .

it will require banks using fednow to make funds transferred over it available to their customers immediately after being notified of settlement .

in a november 2018 proposal , the fed also sought comment on the possibility of the fed creating "a liquidity management tool that would enable transfers between federal reserve accounts on a 24x7x365 basis to support services for real - time interbank settlement of faster payments , whether those services are provided by the private sector or federal reserve banks. .

the purpose of this tool would be to accommodate the need for banks to move funds between their accounts at the fed continuously , including outside of business hours in real - time settlement .

in the august notice , the fed stated it was exploring whether this goal could be accomplished by expanding fedwire funds service and the national settlement service to permit 24x7x365 real - time gross settlement .

previously , the fed proposed expanding same - day payment settlements on fedwire and the national settlement service .

several private - sector initiatives are also underway to implement faster payments , some of which would make funds available to the recipient in real time ( with deferred settlement ) and some of which would provide real - time settlement .

notably , the clearing house introduced its rtp network ( with real - time settlement ) in november 2017 ; according to the clearing house , it currently "reaches 50% of u.s. transaction accounts , and is on track to reach nearly all u.s. accounts in the next several years. .

in addition , both the fed and private - sector companies can set joint standards , rules , and a governance framework to facilitate the adoption of faster payments , whether those systems are operated by the fed or the private sector , and promote interoperability between systems .

the fed convened the faster payments task force , composed of more than 300 stakeholders , which has issued a number of recommendations to facilitate the adoption of faster payments .

other countries have already introduced or are in the process of introducing rtp .

according to fed chair jerome powell , "the united states is far behind other countries in terms of having real - time payments available to the general public. .

businesses and consumers would benefit from the ability to receive funds more quickly , particularly as a greater share of payments are made online or using mobile technology .

some have argued that rtp would be especially beneficial to low - income , liquidity - constrained individuals as described in the " financial access " section above .

the main policy issue regarding the federal reserve and rtp is whether fed entry in this market is desirable .

the fed bases decisions on whether to introduce new payment systems or system features on three principles: "the federal reserve must expect to achieve full recovery of costs over the long run .

the federal reserve must expect that its providing the service will yield a clear public benefit , including , for example , promoting the integrity of the payments system , improving the effectiveness of financial markets , reducing the risk associated with payments and securities - transfer services , or improving the efficiency of the payments system .

the service should be one that other providers alone cannot be expected to provide with reasonable effectiveness , scope , and equity. .

stakeholders are divided over the introduction of fednow .

some question whether , in light of these principles , the fed can justify creating a rtp system in the presence of competing private systems .

some fear that fednow will hold back or crowd out private - sector initiatives already underway and could be a duplicative use of resources .

the treasury department supports fed involvement on the grounds that it will help private - sector initiatives at the retail level .

others , including many small banks , fear that aspects of payment and settlement systems exhibit some features of a natural monopoly ( because of network effects ) , and , in the absence of fednow , private - sector solutions could result in monopoly profits or anticompetitive behavior , to the detriment of financial institutions accessing rtps and their customers ( merchants and consumers ) .

in 2017 , the justice department sent the clearing house a letter stating that it did not plan to challenge the clearing house's rtp system on antitrust grounds , based on the clearing house's plans at that time .

from a societal perspective , it is unclear whether it is optimal to have a single provider or multiple providers in the case of a natural monopoly , particularly when one of those competitors is governmental .

multiple providers could spur competition that might drive down user costs , but more resources are likely to be spent on duplicative infrastructure .

rtp competition between the fed and the private sector also has mixed implications for other policy goals: innovation .

competition typically fosters innovation , but the fed's unique cost structure could potentially undermine the private sector's success , limiting the latter's willingness to invest in innovations .

ubiquity .

the fed argues that rtp ubiquity is more likely with its involvement because it has existing relationships with all banks and because no single payment system has ever achieved ubiquity historically .

however , the fed's entry into rtp could delay the achievement of universal rtp in the next few years if banks decide to wait until fednow is available instead of joining the clearing house's network .

interoperability .

interoperability ( the ability to make payments across different systems ) is more difficult to achieve with competing firms , but the fed argues that if no single rtp system is ubiquitous , the ability of any two given institutions to exchange funds is improved if competing systems increase ubiquity .

the ability to make payments across ach networks is an example of how interoperability has currently been achieved between competing fed and clearing house systems .

however , the technology involved in rtp may make interoperability more difficult .

in its proposal , the fed did not commit to ensure interoperability , but stated that it was a desirable goal .

equity .

the clearing house has attempted to assuage equity concerns by pledging access to its system on equal terms to all banks , regardless of size , but these terms could change , and small banks have raised concerns that they may since the system is owned by large banks .

the clearing house has pointed to the fed's volume discounts for existing payment systems as evidence that fednow may not be equitable , however .

security .

security across competing systems could be difficult to coordinate , but systems might also attempt to compete by providing better security features .

the fed argues that competing rtp systems reduces operational and systemic risks because a system with only one provider has a "single point of failure. .

repeated data breaches at large financial institutions also point to the difficulty of monitoring cybersecurity in private systems , although government has also proven to be vulnerable to data breaches as well .

the fed states that "participating banks would continue to serve as a primary line of defense against fraudulent transactions , as they do today ... " under fednow .

the fed , and by extension the taxpayer , is exposed to default risk because of its provision of intraday and overnight credit ( some of which is uncollateralized ) when banks use its payment and settlement systems .

currently , when banks use fed payment and settlement systems , the time lag between payment and settlement can cause mismatches in the amounts due and the amounts available in their accounts .

as a result , the fed extends intraday credit for a fee ( if uncollateralized ) to avoid settlement failures .

daily overdrafts have been relatively low in recent years , but peaked at $186 billion during the 2007-2009 financial crisis .

introducing real - time payments with deferred settlement could increase the use of intraday credit .

the fed does not state in its final rule whether it expects the level of intraday credit to be affected under fednow , although it notes that it might need to extend the availability of intraday credit to off - hours .

note that the fed provides this credit to reduce systemic risk to the banking system , so eliminating intraday credit has the potential to reduce financial stability .

rtps offered by the private sector could fit into the existing regulatory framework .

the fed already regulates and supervises private payment systems for risk management and transparency , but not pricing .

rtp could potentially alleviate some existing risks ( eg , if settlement is in real time , credit risk is reduced for the recipient institution ) while posing new risks ( eg , rtp requires more active liquidity management ) .

any rtp system and regulation would need to account for these changing risks .

to address systemic risk concerns , a private rtp system could be designated as a systemically important financial market utility ( fmu ) under title viii of the dodd - frank act ( p.l .

111-203 ) .

the dodd - frank act allows the financial stability oversight council , a council of financial regulators led by the treasury secretary , to designate a payment , clearing , or settlement system as systemically important on the grounds that "the failure of or a disruption to the functioning of the fmu could create or increase the risk of significant liquidity or credit problems spreading among financial institutions or markets and thereby threaten the stability of the u.s. financial system. .

fmus , currently including the clearing house interbank payments system , are subject to heightened regulation , and the fed has supervisory and enforcement powers to ensure those standards are met .

policymakers could consider whether systemic risk concerns are better addressed through fed operation of payment and settlement systems or fed regulation of private systems .

