this report focuses on selected ground electronic warfare ( ew ) systems .

the department of defense ( dod ) fy2020 budget requests funding for a number of ground ew systems associated with the army and the marine corps .

generally , ground ew capabilities seek to use the electromagnetic spectrum to achieve one of three battlefield effects .

first , ground ew systems can be used to defeat improvised explosive devices ( ied ) .

this was the focus of the u.s. military's ground ew programs for the past decade and a half .

a second role for ground ew can be to defeat unmanned aerial systems ( uas ) .

a third role , largely a legacy from the cold war , can be to jam enemy communications and radars .

an overall issue for congress is whether to approve , reject , or modify dod's proposals for ground ew programs .

these programs also pose a number of potential oversight issues for congress .

congress's decisions on these issues could affect future u.s. military capabilities and funding requirements .

potential issues for congress include balancing ew programs between counter - improvised explosive device missions and great power competition , potentially standardizing how different services approach ew funding , and the role new technologies may play in ew operations .

during the cold war , competition in ew capabilities was an ongoing and significant component of the overall competition in military capabilities between the u.s. - led nato alliance and the soviet - led warsaw pact alliance .

the end of the cold war and the shift in the early 1990s to the post - cold war era—a period that featured reduced tensions between major powers and a strong u.s. military emphasis on countering terrorist and insurgent organizations—may have led to a reduced emphasis in u.s. defense plans and programs involving ew related to so - called high - end warfare , meaning high - intensity warfare against technologically sophisticated adversaries .

the perceived shift in the international security environment from the post - cold war era to an era of renewed great power competition has led to a renewed focus on ew in u.s. defense planning and programming .

in particular , u.s. defense planning has focused on aspects of ew related to high - end warfare , and to concerns among some observers that the united states needs to strengthen its ew capabilities as part of its overall effort to preserve u.s. qualitative military superiority over potential adversaries such as russia and china .

china and russia have developed sophisticated anti - access / area denial ( a2 / ad ) systems to deny u.s. military forces many advantages ; chinese and russian ew systems are considered a2 / ad systems that deny the u.s military access to their communication and command and control .

dod notes that russia has emphasized ew in its military modernization effort .

russia reportedly has employed ew as part of its military operations in ukraine and syria .

dod similarly states that china recognizes the importance of ew in modern military operations and is developing its ew capabilities as an integral part of its broad - based military modernization effort .

china encouraged greater integration between its civil and military technological and industrial bases , which may enable its ew capabilities to benefit from the sophistication of its extensive civilian electronics industry .

 balance of ground ew capabilities .

a potential oversight issue for congress is the balance of ew capabilities the army and marine corps are fielding and plan to procure .

during the height of the conflicts in iraq and afghanistan , ew programming was weighted toward counter - ied programs rather than on countering great power competition .

although u.s. military forces continue to operate in high - threat ied areas—as illustrated by recent casualties in afghanistan—these programs do not necessarily provide the necessary protection against potential russian or chinese weapons systems .

both services have acknowledged that they require new investments to support command and control in an electromagnetically contested environment .

congress may review how both the marine corps and army allocate resources to counter the ied threat , while working to ensure that ground services are prepared to counter emerging threats .

part of the capabilities balance is overlapping programs between the army and marine corps .

as both the army and marine corps have ew programs with similar functions .

for instance , both services are developing competing c - uas programs—the army mehl and the marine corps claws—that appear to have similar capabilities .

c - ied programs , on the other hand , are joint programs in which one service develops a solution that other services can procure ( thus all dod services use the same programs which can have efficiencies for sustainment ) .

congress may examine if it is worthwhile for the army and marine corps to develop competing programs , or if funding competing programs allows technology research and development ( r&d ) to make greater progress .

funding of programs .

funding for ew systems can be difficult to track due to the complexity and classification of ew programs .

one challenge associated with ground ew funding is that both the army and the marine corps use research and development appropriations to potentially fund procurement activities due to the relatively fast - paced changes to electronic components .

a second , but related , challenge is tracking ew programs when they transition from development to procurement .

part of the challenge is that the procurement activities for ew systems can be relatively small compared with larger weapons systems .

as a result , dod procurement activities do not necessarily disclose these components from the larger acquisition , making it difficult to track both a breakout of ew components associated with larger systems ( eg , the m1 abrams main battle tank ) and the total dollar figure associated with ew procurement activities for the army and marine corps .

the marine corps and the army use different funding policies to maintain ew programs .

many of the army's ew capabilities , as either demonstrators or prototypes , receive r&d funding .

as a result , funding for these programs is generally seen as inconsistent and lacking plans for sustainment .

the marine corps' programs , on the other hand , are programs of record , receiving both r&d and procurement funding .

by making these systems programs , the marine corps seeks to provide predictable funding for systems over long periods of time .

however , these systems are developed through the acquisition system and therefore might not be at the forefront of technological advances .

emerging technologies .

emerging technologies may change how the army and marine corps conduct ew .

some experts argue that advances in electronics are already changing how ground forces perform electronic warfare , particularly with continuously improving active electronically scanned arrays and new software defined radios .

some argue that these advances in electronics , paired with artificial intelligence , could allow for some automated decision making .

these algorithms could help manage the electromagnetic spectrum by making spectrum allocation decisions , determine when adversaries are jamming ( or denying ) a frequency band , and automatically develop a jamming plan to deny adversaries access by looking at trends in their electronic emissions .

artificial intelligence algorithms could also enable ew systems to locate and engage small unmanned aerial systems by using data sources to help identify radar contacts ( versus environmental clutter from clouds or animals ) and electronic emissions .

neither the army nor the marine corps have publicly stated that they plan to use artificial intelligence for managing electromagnetic spectrum operations or electronic warfare .

new materials are changing the size , weight , power , and cooling of electronics components and power supplies .

electronics are smaller and require less power , and therefore smaller batteries .

these new electronics emit less heat because of their reduced consumption of energy , requiring less cooling to maintain ideal temperatures , further reducing energy consumption .

battery technology is improving energy density .

these designs provide similar electrical power outputs while reducing their size and weight , making it easier to develop man - portable electronics ( such as the thor c - ied system and the cesas ii jammer ) .

furthermore , advances in electronics allow for new waveforms using advanced electronically scanned array ( aesa ) antennas and other designs .

as new materials emerge , dod may request additional funding to upgrade ew systems and potentially procure aesa technology to more effectively jam enemy communications and radar systems .

quantum technologies could potentially change electronic warfare .

emerging developments in quantum communications and quantum radars will likely change how the military communicates and observes enemies .

quantum technologies will likely have an impact on ew ; however , the exact impact they will have on executing ew operations remains unclear .

appendix a. russian ew company equipmen .

