the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) is the primary source of flood insurance coverage for residential properties in the united states , with more than five million policies in over 22,000 communities in 56 states and jurisdictions .

the program collects about $4.6 billion in annual revenue from policyholders' premiums , fees and surcharges and provides over $1.3 trillion in coverage .

the nfip was established by the national flood insurance act of 1968 .

the general purpose of the nfip is both to offer primary flood insurance to properties with significant flood risk , and to reduce flood risk through the adoption of floodplain management standards .

a longer - term objective of the nfip is to reduce federal expenditure on disaster assistance after floods .

the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , which administers the nfip , is planning to introduce risk rating 2.0 , which represents the biggest change to the way the nfip calculates flood insurance premiums since its inception .

the new rates are scheduled to go into effect on october 1 , 2021 , for all nfip policies .

the price of insurance is generally based on three components: ( 1 ) the average annual loss , which is the expected loss per year ; ( 2 ) the risk , which depends on the variability or uncertainty in loss estimates ; and ( 3 ) expenses .

these rating factors are used to calculate the premium that is sufficient to cover expected losses .

the methodologies used to estimate these components , particularly the average annual loss and the risk , have changed over the decades that the nfip has been in operation .

this report will outline how the nfip currently rates risks and sets premiums to cover losses , and how these are expected to change with the introduction of risk rating 2.0 .

fema has statutory authority to set premium rates .

the limitations on annual premium increases are also set in statute , and risk rating 2.0 will not be able to increase rates annually beyond these caps .

hfiaa set maximum rate increases for primary residences at 5-18% per year .

hfiaa permits individual property increases of up to 18% , but limits the rate class increases to 15% per year .

in other words , the average annual premium rate increase for primary residences within a single risk classification rate may not be increased by more than 15% a year , while the individual premium rate increase for any individual policy may not be increased by more than 18% each year .

other categories of properties are required to have their premium increased by 25% per year until they reach full risk - based rates: this includes non - primary residences , non - residential properties , business properties , properties with severe repetitive loss , properties with substantial cumulative damage , and properties with substantial damage or substantial improvement after july 6 , 2012 .

however , fema does not consider everything that policyholders pay to the nfip to be part of the premium and therefore subject to these caps .

when premium rates are calculated for compliance with the statutory caps , fema only includes the building and contents coverage , the increased cost of compliance coverage , and the reserve fund assessment .

other fees and surcharges are not considered part of the premium and therefore are not subject to the premium cap limitations , including the federal policy fee , the hfiaa surcharge and , if relevant , the 5% severe repetitive loss premium and / or probation surcharge .

table 1 shows the effects of a maximum statutory increase on the national average premium for a standard flood insurance policy ( sfip ) which pays the full $75 for increased cost of compliance ( icc ) coverage .

according to fema , the national average premium for an sfip is $700 .

the reserve fund assessment for this policy would be $105 and the icc premium would be $75 , for a total premium of $880 .

for an sfip primary residence , the maximum 18% increase would be calculated on this premium of $880 , leading to an increase of $158.40 and a new premium of $1038.40 .

however , an sfip primary residence would also pay an fpf of $50 and a hfiaa surcharge of $25 , so the total amount due to the nfip after an 18% increase would be $1113.40 .

an sfip for a non - primary residence would be subject to a 25% increase on the initial premium of $880 , leading to an increase of $220 and a new premium of $1100 .

costs for such a policy for a non - primary residence would also include an fpf of $50 and a hfiaa surcharge of $250 , so the total amount due to the nfip after a 25% increase would be $1,400 .

fema believes that the more transparent and accurate flood insurance pricing in risk rating 2.0 will lead to better risk communication and an increase in flood insurance take - up rate .

however , risk rating 2.0 is not designed to increase or decrease revenue for the nfip .

according to fema , risk rating 2.0 will not be allowed to create a shortfall relative to the amount of premium income under the current rating system .

if the new rates lead to a shortfall , the rating plan will be revised .

fema is carrying out an actuarial analysis and cannot give any information at the time of writing about the number or percentage of properties which will see their premiums change under risk rating 2.0 .

however , certain types of properties may be more likely to be affected , either positively or negatively .

these may include zone - grandfathered properties , properties which are currently on the border of flood zones , properties currently outside the sfha at risk of pluvial flooding , and properties with above - average or below - average replacement cost values .

for example , the use of distance to water , rather than flood zone , may mean that premiums for properties at the landward boundary of an sfha could go down , while premiums for a property at the water boundary could go up .

concerns about premium increases in the past have focused on certain subsidized properties , but under risk rating 2.0 all types of properties may be subject to higher rates of increase than at present .

for example , as of april 1 , 2019 , the premium for pre - firm properties increased by 7.3% and the premium for newly mapped properties increased by 15% .

premiums for post - firm v zone properties increased by 6% , post - firm a zones increased by 4% , and x zone properties increased by 1% .

these properties could face higher premiums under risk rating 2.0 .

risk rating 2.0 is may lead to premium increases for some nfip policyholders , which could raise questions of affordability .

when the biggert - waters flood insurance reform act of 2012 ( bw - 12 ) went into effect , constituents from multiple communities expressed concerns about the elimination of lower rate classes , arguing that it created a financial burden on policyholders , risked depressing home values , and could lead to a reduction in the number of nfip policies purchased .

similar concerns may be expressed with risk rating 2.0 .

although risk - based price signals could give policyholders a clearer understanding of their true flood risk , charging actuarially sound premiums may mean that insurance for some properties is considered unaffordable , or that premiums increase at a rate which may be considered to be politically unacceptable .

fema does not currently have the authority to implement an affordability program , nor does fema's current rate structure provide the funding required to support an affordability program .

however , affordability provisions are included in the three bills which have been introduced in the 116 th congress for long - term reauthorization of the nfip: the national flood insurance program reauthorization act of 2019 ( h.r .

3167 ) , and the national flood insurance program reauthorization and reform act of 2019 ( s. 2187 ) and its companion bill in the house , h.r .

3872 .

as congress considers a long - term reauthorization of the nfip , a central question may be who should bear the costs of floodplain occupancy in the future and how to address the concerns of constituents facing increases in flood insurance premiums .

