offshore aquaculture is generally defined as the rearing of marine organisms in ocean waters beyond significant coastal influence , primarily in the federal waters of the exclusive economic zone ( eez ) .

currently , marine aquaculture facilities are located in nearshore state waters , but no commercial facilities operate in u.s. federal waters .

some aquaculture advocates contend that developing such offshore aquaculture facilities could increase u.s. seafood production and provide economic opportunities for coastal communities ; opponents counter that doing so could harm the environment and have negative impacts on other coastal activities , such as fishing .

offshore aquaculture development will likely depend on several interrelated legal and institutional requisites , such as establishing a regulatory framework , minimizing environmental harm , and developing the capacity to manage and support the industry .

regulatory uncertainty has been identified as one of the main barriers to developing offshore aquaculture in federal waters of the united states .

according to the u.s. commission on ocean policy , "aquaculture operations in offshore waters lack a clear regulatory regime , and questions about exclusive access have created an environment of uncertainty that is detrimental to investment in the industry. .

some observers have concluded that "offshore aquaculture will not fully develop unless governments create a supportive political climate and resulting regulatory conditions. .

a framework also may be needed to assure environmentalists , fishermen , and other stakeholders that coastal and fisheries managers would have the authority to address potential threats to the environment and other impacts .

according to most observers , congressional action may be necessary to develop a comprehensive regulatory framework for offshore aquaculture .

comprehensive legislation has been introduced a number of times since the 109 th congress , but none of the bills have been enacted .

controversy has stemmed from different perspectives of aquaculturalists , environmentalists , fishermen , and others .

some environmental organizations and fishermen have asserted that poorly regulated aquaculture development has degraded the environment and harmed wild fish populations and ecosystems .

some segments of the commercial fishing industry are opposed to marine aquaculture because of potential development on fishing grounds , environmental effects on fish populations , and competition of cultured products with wild products in domestic markets .

offshore aquaculture advocates counter that a combination of farming experiences , technological advances , proper siting , and industry regulation has decreased environmental impacts and improved the efficiency of marine aquaculture .

it appears that renewed efforts have emerged in the 116 th congress to meet current challenges by attempting to improve regulatory efficiency , minimize environmental degradation , and avoid impacts on existing ocean uses .

additional related factors , such as technical advances , economic feasibility , and the level of government support , also are likely to affect future growth of the u.s. aquaculture industry .

although a regulatory framework appears to be necessary for establishing offshore aquaculture in federal waters , it may not be sufficient for significant development of the industry .

sometimes overlooked are the services that may be needed to establish a new industry , such as program administration , research , and other services ( eg , disaster assistance , insurance ) .

technical uncertainties related to harsher offshore environmental conditions and higher costs of operating farther from shore may slow extensive offshore development , especially in the immediate future .

this report examines issues and challenges related to the development of offshore aquaculture in federal waters .

it introduces the topic with background information that covers aquaculture production and methods , federal agencies involved in aquaculture , and potential congressional interest in the topic .

it then focuses on three of the main challenges faced by the industry , including the current regulatory framework , environmental concerns , and economic viability .

the report concludes with issues related to regulatory and institutional development that have been identified by researchers and stakeholders , potential issues for congress , and a summary of legislation that has been introduced in recent congresses .

federal aquaculture , regulation , research , and support are conducted by a number of federal agencies .

their roles vary widely depending on the agency's statutory responsibilities , which may be related directly or indirectly to aquaculture .

congress enacted the national aquaculture act of 1980 to encourage development of the aquaculture industry and coordinate federal activities .

the act established the subcommittee on aquaculture ( sca ) to provide opportunities to exchange information and enhance cooperation among federal agencies .

sca's main functions include the following: reviewing national needs for aquaculture research , technology transfer , and technology assistance programs ; supporting coordination and communication among federal agencies engaged in the science , engineering , and technology of aquaculture ; collecting and disseminating information on aquaculture ; encouraging joint programs among federal agencies in areas of mutual interest relating to aquaculture ; and recommending specific actions on issues , problems , plans , and programs in aquaculture .

sca operates under the committee on environment of the national science and technology council in the executive office of the president .

sca is chaired by the secretary of agriculture , in consultation with the secretaries of commerce and the interior .

in addition to the three main departments , sca includes nine additional departments and agencies with an interest in aquaculture .

sca meets quarterly and has provided information on topics such as fish disease , aquaculture regulation , and other areas of interest .

most federal aquaculture activities and programs that are specific to aquaculture are carried out by the department of the interior ( doi ) , department of commerce ( doc ) , and the department of agriculture ( usda ) .

other federal agencies have roles that are indirectly related to aquaculture , such as regulatory programs that apply to a variety of aquatic or marine activities , including aquaculture .

examples include usace for activities in navigable waters , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) for protection of environmental quality , and the food and drug administration for regulation of drugs used to treat fish diseases .

a broad array of challenges is associated with offshore aquaculture development and expansion .

these challenges pertain to evolving production technology , uncertain economic costs and benefits , and potential environmental and social impacts .

generalizations about how to address these challenges are difficult to make because of the variety of candidate species , different technologies , and potential scales of operation .

major categories of concerns related to offshore aquaculture development include ( 1 ) the legal and regulatory environment ; ( 2 ) potential environmental harm ; ( 3 ) economic , trade , and stakeholder concerns related to development of a new industry ; and ( 4 ) business and institutional support .

currently , development of offshore aquaculture appears unlikely because of regulatory , technical , and economic uncertainties .

one of the main issues for congress is whether legislation can be developed that could provide the industry with greater regulatory certainty while assuring other stakeholders that environmental quality can be maintained and other potential conflicts minimized .

research and development of inshore facilities have shown that offshore aquaculture is technically feasible but have not shown whether moving facilities to offshore areas would be profitable .

it is likely that the investment required for commercial development of offshore aquaculture facilities will depend to some degree on greater regulatory certainty .

for example , one business that was developing offshore aquaculture in puerto rico has moved its operations to panama ; according to the owner , u.s. regulations made expansion impossible .

aquaculturalists and investors are likely to require secure property or leasing rights and clear regulatory requirements before investing in large - scale operations .

stakeholders with concerns that aquaculture will degrade the environment also may need assurances that adequate regulation , inspections , and enforcement will be required features of a regulatory program .

these concerns have been reflected in several aquaculture bills that would prohibit offshore development until comprehensive legislation is enacted .

previous congressional actions , such as hearings and bills , have concentrated on several areas , which include providing institutional support for aquaculture , such as planning , research , and technology transfer ; identifying a lead agency to administer and coordinate aquaculture development and regulation ; establishing and streamlining permit and consultation requirements to improve the efficiency of the permitting process ; developing processes to consult and communicate with other stakeholders to reduce user conflicts ; and minimizing environmental harm and addressing environmental concerns through planning and monitoring .

if aquaculture is developed in the eez , most stakeholders likely would agree that there is a need for better coordination , clear regulation , and focused agency leadership .

some assert that congressional action will be necessary to support both commercial development and environmental protection .

congress has made several attempts to pass offshore aquaculture legislation , including bills in the 109 th , 110 th , 111 th , 112 th , and 115 th congresses , but none of these bills were enacted .

bills also were introduced that would have prevented aquaculture development in federal waters until statutory authority for offshore aquaculture development is enacted .

while many stakeholders continue to call for federal legislation , it has been difficult to find a common vision among them for future development of an offshore aquaculture industry .

the united states is the largest importer of seafood products in the world , and nearly half of domestic seafood imports are produced by aquaculture .

aquaculture development and production in the united states have lagged behind other countries due to a variety of factors , such as relatively inexpensive imports , regulatory policies , user conflicts , and higher costs of production .

some have speculated that marine aquaculture facilities could be developed farther offshore in federal waters , where they would be subject to fewer user conflicts and have space to operate in relatively clean ocean waters .

however , movement to offshore areas also would involve several significant challenges , such as establishing a regulatory framework , developing new technologies , and competing with other existing sources of seafood .

according to many stakeholders and researchers , the lack of a governance system for regulating offshore aquaculture hinders the industry's development in the united states .

development of marine offshore aquaculture would likely require a new regulatory framework for establishing offshore aquaculture in federal waters .

a regulatory framework potentially could provide the industry with clear requirements for its development while minimizing potential environmental harm .

it remains an open question whether legislation could be crafted to achieve a balance between providing the certainty sought by potential commercial developers of aquaculture and satisfying environmental and other concerns of stakeholders such as environmentalists and fishermen .

while a new regulatory framework potentially could provide greater certainty to offshore aquaculture developers , other challenges would remain .

for example , offshore aquaculture may involve higher costs and greater risk of losses associated as compared to inshore operations .

lack of experience operating in offshore areas and limited knowledge of culture techniques for many candidate marine species contribute to the financial risk of offshore aquaculture .

some observers expect that offshore aquaculture may occur incrementally as inshore areas are developed and culture techniques are refined .

federal support may be needed for finance , research , extension , market development , and disaster assistance , similar to usda support of agriculture .

