amtrak—legally the national railroad passenger corporation—was created by the rail passenger service act of 1970 and began operating in 1971 , taking over intercity passenger service from financially distressed private railroad companies .

it originally did not own any rail infrastructure , eventually coming to own some assets cast off by bankrupt private railroads .

it is operated as a private company and not a government corporation , but the president appoints the members of its board of directors and its primary stockholder is the u.s. department of transportation ( dot ) , with a small proportion of common stock held by other railroad companies .

amtrak currently serves over 500 stations in 46 states and the district of columbia , running over 300 trains per day on a network approximately 22,000 miles long ( figure 1 ) .

since 2008 , amtrak services have been grouped into three business lines: ( 1 ) the washington - new york - boston northeast corridor ( nec ) , ( 2 ) short - distance corridors under 750 miles long with service supported by state governments , and ( 3 ) long - distance trains serving destinations over 750 miles apart , usually once per day on an overnight schedule .

under the fixing america's surface transportation ( fast ) act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-94 ) , the state - supported short - distance and long - distance routes were grouped together into the national network .

amtrak's thruway network of over 150 intercity bus routes serves as a feeder service for passenger trips originating or terminating in cities off the rail system .

over 31 million trips were taken on amtrak in 2018 , a company record .

amtrak system ridership has exceeded 30 million trips every year since 2011 , and has increased 26% over the last 15 years , with much of that growth coming on amtrak's state - supported short - distance corridors ( figure 2 ) .

approximately 48% of all amtrak trips were taken on state - supported routes in 2018 , compared with 38% on the northeast corridor and the remaining 14% on long - distance trains .

state - supported routes have accounted for the plurality of amtrak trips among its three business lines every year since 2005 .

one contributing factor to the growth of state - supported route traffic over that period is that amtrak and its state partners have added new routes and additional daily trains .

despite record ridership levels , amtrak trains are roughly as full as they have been at any point in the past decade ( see discussion of load factor below ) , and amtrak passengers account for a small fraction of intercity passenger travel volume nationwide .

in 2017 , the most recent year for which such data are available , amtrak generated 6.5 billion passenger - miles ( one passenger - mile is equal to one passenger traveling one mile ) of traffic volume ; by comparison , domestic air travel generated 694 billion passenger - miles , over 100 times as many as amtrak .

highway users generated an estimated 5.5 trillion passenger - miles in 2017 , including 365 billion on buses , though this includes trips that are not intercity in nature .

however , amtrak passenger - miles have seen a greater cumulative percent increase since 2004 than highway passenger - miles , and saw a greater cumulative percent increase than domestic air passenger - miles from 2008 to 2015 before being overtaken in 2016 ( figure 3 ) .

though amtrak ridership has been steady or rising in terms of trips taken , amtrak passenger - miles have declined somewhat since 2013 , suggesting an increase in shorter trips .

the nec is the only market in which amtrak serves a larger proportion of intercity trips than airlines , with both lagging far behind highway travel .

lack of equipment and track capacity have inhibited amtrak from increasing service on the nec .

amtrak's expenses exceed its revenues each year .

in fy2018 , amtrak's revenues totaled $3.2 billion , against expenses of $4.1 billion , for a net loss of $868 million .

that loss was covered by federal grants made to amtrak by dot ( see the discussion of funding issues later in this report ) .

revenues covered 79% of the railroad's total expenses in fy2018 , the highest ratio over the 15 years for which comparable data are available ( see figure 4 and table 1 ) .

under pressure from congress and several administrations , amtrak has reduced—but not eliminated—its reliance on federal subsidies to support its operations .

amtrak had net losses of roughly $900 million in each of fy2017 and fy2018 , the first two years in the past 15 in which net losses were less than $1 billion .

one important reason for this improvement is a doubling of revenue from commuter railroads using the nec from pre - 2016 to post - 2016 , due to higher payments required under the cost allocation policy established by section 212 of the passenger rail investment and improvement act of 2008 ( priia ; division b of p.l .

110-432 ) and enforceable by the surface transportation board ( stb ) under section 11305 of the fast act .

by amtrak's preferred metric , which adjusts the net loss by removing depreciation and certain other expenses , annual operating losses have been reduced to a figure smaller than $250 million in each of the past five fiscal years ; this figure was over twice as large in nominal terms in the years prior to 2007 ( figure 5 ) .

the effect is more dramatic when taking the effects of inflation into account ; in constant 2019 dollars , the figure was four times as large in 2007 as it was in 2018 .

this metric , dubbed the a djusted o perating r esult , is seen by amtrak as more closely reflecting the need for federal operating support , but it does not take the railroad's capital investment needs into account .

by another measure , which allocates costs and revenues to each available seat - mile of passenger capacity offered , amtrak has recovered at least 96% of operating costs every year since 2014 , up from below 80% in the preceding years ( figure 6 ) .

one contributing factor to this improved financial performance is likely the requirement , contained in priia , that operating losses on short - distance routes located off the nec be offset by state funds , effective on the first day of fy2014 .

one measure of efficiency is the passenger load factor , which measures what percentage of the available seats is being used by passengers .

amtrak's load factor has varied within a fairly narrow band since 2004 .

its current load factor , 51% , is near the record load factor amtrak reported in fy1988 .

load factor varies across amtrak's three business lines , with nec and long distance trains at 58% and 57% , respectively , in fy2018 , while state - supported routes lagged at 40% .

improving load factor is one way of boosting revenue without increasing costs , but this can be difficult if passenger traffic is not distributed evenly along a route .

routes on which one station generates a large share of originating and terminating traffic are likely to have relatively low load factors in some segments but higher load factors in the "peak segment. .

for example , if a train on the nec is sold out between philadelphia and new york , amtrak may not be able to accommodate passengers who wish to travel between baltimore and new york , resulting in empty seats between baltimore and philadelphia .

if amtrak were to accommodate these riders with additional cars , this could reduce load factor even as it increases ridership .

as discussed above , amtrak has never generated sufficient revenue to cover its operating and capital expenses .

the administration requests funding for amtrak each year as part of its dot budget request .

amtrak also submits a separate appropriation request to congress each year ; typically , that request is larger than the administration's request .

table 2 shows the difference in the requests submitted for fy2020 .

congress addresses amtrak's subsidy in the annual transportation , housing and urban development , and related agencies appropriations act .

for most of amtrak's existence , congress has divided amtrak's grant into two categories , operating and capital grants .

the operating grant could be thought of as relating to amtrak's annual cash loss , and the capital grant as relating to the depreciation of amtrak's assets , as well as an amount for amtrak debt repayments .

congress changed the structure of federal grants to amtrak in title xi of the fast act .

starting in fy2017 , amtrak's appropriation has been divided between funding for the operationally self - sufficient nec , which has large capital needs , and the national network , which has modest capital needs ( as the tracks are almost entirely owned and maintained by freight railroads ) but runs an operating deficit of several hundred million dollars .

the change was intended to increase transparency of the costs of amtrak's two major lines of business and eliminate cross - subsidization between them ; operating profits from the nec and state access payments for use of the nec will be reinvested in that corridor , and passenger revenue , state payments , and federal grants for the national network will be used for that account .

amtrak's reliance on annual appropriations has made it difficult to fund long - term capital projects .

dot's inspector general has noted that the lack of long - term funding "has significantly affected amtrak's ability to maintain safe and reliable infrastructure and equipment , and increased its capital program's annual cost. .

amtrak's fy2020 budget request suggests a multiyear appropriation to provide some additional stability without fundamentally altering the mechanism by which amtrak receives its federal funding .

most federal funding for highway and transit programs is provided by a special form of budget authority , contract authority , which allows dot to obligate funds from the highway trust fund in advance of an appropriation .

this permits dot to commit to support highway projects that may take several years to complete .

there have been proposals to create a similar trust fund for amtrak , in order to provide a greater level of financial stability and permit such long - term funding of capital projects .

such efforts have faced objections from some members of congress opposed to amtrak receiving federal funding .

there is also a practical challenge to identifying a revenue source for an amtrak trust fund .

the highway trust fund , which receives revenue from taxes on motor fuels and heavy trucks , is not authorized to spend money on intercity rail services ; in any event , the revenues flowing into the fund are far below the level required to support the levels of federal highway and transit spending authorized by congress , necessitating several transfers of money from the general fund since 2008 .

if a passenger rail trust fund were to be funded solely from a tax on passengers , the cost of amtrak tickets could rise by several dollars per ticket at current ridership levels , potentially contravening the purpose of the fund by reducing ridership .

positive train control ( ptc ) is an interconnected system of signals and communication devices designed to prevent collisions and derailments by automatically slowing or stopping a train if its engineer fails to do so .

the railway safety improvement act of 2008 ( rsia ; division a of p.l .

110-432 ) required all tracks used by passenger trains to be equipped with ptc by the end of 2015 , now effectively extended to december 31 , 2020 , by subsequent laws and regulations .

all amtrak - owned or - controlled track had ptc in operation on january 1 , 2019 , except approximately one mile of slow - speed track in the complex chicago and philadelphia terminal areas , and ptc is installed on 85% of other railroads' route miles that amtrak uses .

however , to fully comply with the ptc mandate , ptc - equipped amtrak trains must be certified interoperable with all ptc systems installed by host railroads , and amtrak's ptc system must be interoperable with other railroads' ptc - equipped trains that use its tracks .

at the end of 2018 , amtrak had achieved interoperability with 2 railroads out of a total of 13 that use its tracks , though this does not necessarily reflect amtrak's progress achieving interoperability with its host railroads .

the government accountability office has found that of all railroads subject to the statutory mandate , only two commuter railroads have achieved full operation and full interoperability .

if amtrak does not achieve 100% interoperability with its host railroads by the deadline , absent a waiver or subsequent extension ( which fra has stated it will not issue ) , amtrak would need to suspend rail service on noncompliant lines or risk enforcement action in the form of financial penalties for each day it operates in violation of the mandate .

