every 10 years , the u.s. population is counted through the national census , and districts for the u.s. house of representatives are readjusted to reflect the new population level and its distribution across states through the federal apportionment and state redistricting processes .

the requirement to have proportional representation in the house is found in the u.s. constitution , and constitutional provisions also underlie other elements of the census , apportionment , and redistricting practices .

figure 1 provides a generalized timeline for how these three interrelated processes occur , and the sections of the report that follow provide additional information on apportionment and redistricting .

for additional information on the census process , see crs report r44788 , the decennial census: issues for 2020 , and crs in focus if11015 , the 2020 decennial census: overview and issues .

apportionment ( or reapportionment ) refers to the process of dividing seats in the u.s. house of representatives among the states .

article 1 , section 2 , of the u.s. constitution , as amended by section 2 of the fourteenth amendment , requires that seats for representatives are divided among states , based on the population size of each state .

house seats today are reallocated due to changes in state populations , since the number of u.s. states ( 50 ) has remained constant since 1959 ; in earlier eras , the addition of new states would also affect the reapportionment process , as each state is constitutionally required to receive at least one house seat .

the 2010 census reported a 9.9% overall increase in the u.s. apportionment population since the 2000 census , to 309,183,463 individuals .

the ideal ( or average ) district population size increased across all states following the 2010 census , even though some states experienced larger growth levels than others .

the average congressional district population for the united states following the 2010 census was 710,767 individuals .

the map in figure 2 illustrates changes in states' ideal district size and changes in the number of house seats allocated to each state between the 1990 and 2010 apportionments .

twelve u.s. house seats shifted across states following the 2010 census ; 10 states lost seats and 8 states gained seats , distributed as shown in table 1 .

table 2 provides additional historical data on the number of states and number of seats affected by each apportionment since 1910 .

regional patterns of population change observed following previous censuses continued in 2010 , as the percentage of house seats distributed across the northeast and midwest regions decreased , and the percentage of house seats distributed across the south and west regions increased .

california had the largest house delegation following the 2010 census , with 53 seats ; alaska , delaware , montana , north dakota , south dakota , vermont , and wyoming each had a single house seat .

congressional redistricting involves creating or redrawing geographic boundaries for u.s. house districts within a state .

redistricting procedures are largely determined by state law and vary across states , but states must comply with certain parameters established by federal statute and court decisions .

in general , there is variation among states regarding the practice of drawing districts and which decisionmakers are involved in the process .

across states , there are some common standards and criteria for districts , some of which reflect values that are commonly thought of as traditional districting practices .

districting criteria may result either from shared expectations and precedent regarding what districts should be like , or they may result from certain standards established by current federal statute and court decisions .

these criteria typically reflect a goal of enabling "fair" representation for all residents , rather than allowing arbitrary , or discriminatory , map lines .

redistricting efforts intended to unfairly favor one group's interests over another's are commonly referred to as gerrymandering .

packing and cracking are two common terms that describe such districts , but there are various ways in which district boundaries might be designed to advantage or disadvantage certain groups of voters .

packing describes district boundaries that are drawn to concentrate individuals who are thought to share similar voting behaviors into certain districts .

concentrating prospective voters with shared preferences can result in a large number of "wasted votes" for these districts , as their representatives will often be elected by a supermajority that far exceeds the number of votes required for a candidate to win .

cracking may be thought of as the opposite of packing , and occurs when individuals who are thought to share similar voting preferences are deliberately dispersed across a number of districts .

this approach dilutes the voting strength of a group and can prevent its preferred candidates from receiving a majority of the vote in any district .

for some states , redistricting following an apportionment may be necessary to account for house seats gained or lost based on the most recent census population count .

generally , however , states with multiple congressional districts engage in redistricting following an apportionment in order to ensure that the population size of each district remains approximately equal under the equality standard or "one person , one vote" principle ( discussed under " population equality " below ) .

some states might make additional changes to district boundaries in the years following an initial redistricting ; in some instances , such changes are required by legal decisions finding that the initial districts were improperly drawn .

apportionment and redistricting address fundamental elements of representational democracy .

determining how many elected representatives should serve in the house , and how many people should be in each congressional district , are central questions for those who are concerned with how responsive the house can be to the interests of the american public .

during earlier eras in the united states , the number of seats in the house of representatives generally increased as the american population increased , and district sizes could be kept more equal over time and across states .

the house size , however , has been set at 435 seats throughout the last century , while the national population has continued to grow and concentrate in certain geographic areas , leading to larger constituencies across all house districts over time and disparate district sizes across states .

certain elements of the apportionment process are established by the u.s. constitution .

this includes the requirement for representation in the house based on state population size ; the reallocation of house seats every 10 years upon the completion of a national population count ; and the requirements that each state receives at least one representative and that there can be no more than one representative for every 30,000 persons .

other elements of the process are addressed through congressional legislation , such as the overall number of house seats or method of distributing seats among the states .

congress more regularly legislated in this area prior to the mid - 20 th century , passing decennial acts to address upcoming censuses and apportionments , rather than creating bills intended to apply for all future reapportionment cycles .

whereas apportionment is a process largely governed by federal statute , redistricting is a process , in practice , largely governed by state law .

certain federal standards apply to house districts , generally in the interest of preserving equal access to representation , but the method and timeline by which those districts are created is largely determined by state law .

in states with multiple congressional districts , there are a multitude of ways in which district boundaries can be drawn , depending upon the criteria used to create the districts .

there is often an expectation that congressional districts will be drawn in a way that ensures "fair" representation , but "fairness" can be a somewhat subjective determination .

many lawmakers and members of the public may agree on some of the more basic representational principles embedded in apportionment and redistricting law , but can find it difficult to apply those principles in practice .

the criteria commonly used for redistricting today reflect a combination of state and federal statutes , judicial interpretations , and practices from past redistricting cycles that may require trade - offs between one consideration and another .

ensuring equal population size across all congressional districts , for example , may be an agreeable goal for many individuals .

in practice , however , the geographic and demographic distribution of residents within and across states , coupled with requirements to observe state boundaries , provide all states with at least one representative , and maintain a constant number of house seats , make this goal more difficult to achieve .

although mapmaking software today can design districts with increasing precision with respect to geographic boundaries and population characteristics , this technological capacity has not necessarily simplified the overall task of redistricting .

a majority of states faced legal challenges to congressional district maps drawn following the 2010 census , and several cases remained pending in 2019 , reflecting differing perspectives on fairness , representational access , and how competing redistricting criteria should be weighted .

congress is a bicameral legislature , in which each state receives equal representation in the senate and each state's representation in the house is based upon its population .

essentially , any method of apportionment for the house must consider three key variables: ( 1 ) the number of house seats ; ( 2 ) the number of u.s. states ; and ( 3 ) the apportionment population of each state .

a mathematical decision must also be made regarding how fractions of seats are addressed , since house seats must be allocated as whole numbers , and simple division methods are unlikely to produce this outcome for all ( or any ) states .

because the constitution does not specify a particular method for apportionment , several options have been considered and utilized throughout history .

when determining apportionment , parameters could be set for the number of seats in the house , the population size of a district , or both .

the constitution , to an extent , addresses house size and district size by requiring that each state receives at least one house seat and requiring that there can be no more than one representative per every 30,000 persons .

yet these provisions provide little practical guidance for what the size of the house or the size of a district should be .

based on the number of states and u.s. apportionment population from the 2010 census , for example , the house could range from a minimum of 50 seats to a maximum size of over 10,000 seats .

as a general principle , house size and district size are inversely related: a larger number of house seats means smaller population sizes for districts , and a smaller number of house seats means larger population sizes for districts .

attempts by the framers and various congresses to address apportionment reveal a number of perspectives on how best to create a representative legislature , along with political and logistical considerations related to changes in the size of the house .

prioritizing equal - sized districts or preserving a fixed house size an apportionment method prioritizing relatively equal district population size would establish a representation ratio , where there would be one representative per x number of persons .

if the ratio remains the same across apportionment cycles , increases or decreases in the u.s. apportionment population would result in corresponding increases or decreases to the total number of house seats .

the representation ratio could also be adjusted to create larger or smaller districts , in order to limit the magnitude of changes to the overall size of the house .

if states receive fractional allocations of house seats and there is no constraint on the size of the house , a simple rounding rule could be utilized to arrive at a whole number of seats for the house overall .

a general example of an apportionment approach prioritizing relatively equal district size follows: 1. determine an ideal district population size , d ; 2. divide each state's apportionment population , p s1 , p s2 … p s50 , by d to determine how many house seats a state would be entitled to ( its "quota" of seats ) , q ; and 3. determine a rounding rule to apply for states in which q is not a whole number .

until the early 20 th century , the size of the house generally increased with each apportionment , due to the addition of new states and population growth , but today , the number of house seats is set at 435 by federal statute .

arguments to expand the house have included expanding the range of interests that house members would represent and ensuring that members remained knowledgeable about local issues .

yet concerns have also been raised that it would not be feasible to increase the house size apace with national population growth .

to be sure that a particular apportionment conforms to a specified size of the house , each state must receive a whole number of seats , and the sum of all states' seats must equal the desired total house size .

many apportionment approaches vary on how to address fractional seats , as remainders will often result when calculating state seat quotas .

a general example of an apportionment approach to reach a certain house size follows: 1. a set number of house seats , h , is agreed upon ; 2. divide the national apportionment population , p usa , by h to determine an "ideal" or average district population size , d , also known as the "initial divisor" ; 3. divide each state's apportionment population , p s1 , p s2 … p s50 , by d to determine how many house seats a state would be entitled to ( its "quota" of seats ) , q ; 4. determine a rounding rule to apply to any q values that are not whole numbers ( to represent actual house seats , which cannot be divided ) ; and 5. add these rounded ( or adjusted ) , q values ; if this sum does not equal h , determine a method to adjust state quotas so that the sum of the resulting q values equals h .

the following discussions provide an introduction to several methods that have been used for congressional apportionment in the united states .

to illustrate how these methods work , for each method an imaginary example is provided in the accompanying table , in which the size of the house is fixed at 20 members and the seats are divided among four states ( states a , b , c , and d ) with the populations specified in the tables .

hamilton / vinton method ( ranking fractional remainders ) congress considered various methods of apportionment after the first census of 1790 and passed an initial apportionment bill in 1792 that would have utilized what is now known as the hamilton / vinton method .

president george washington , however , exercised his first veto on the measure , in part , because the resulting apportionment calculations would have violated the requirement of at least 30,000 persons per district for multiple states .

representative samuel vinton later introduced legislation proposing this method , which was enacted , and this apportionment method was first used in 1850 and continued to inform apportionment considerations throughout the rest of the 19 th century , in conjunction with the webster method ( discussed below ) .

the hamilton / vinton method is based on a fixed house size , h .

each state receives the whole number of seats in its quota , q , of seats .

the remainders from q are rank - ordered from largest to smallest , and any additional house seats are apportioned to the states with the largest remainders .

jefferson method ( largest divisors ) following the presidential veto of the hamilton method , congress adopted the jefferson method of apportionment , which was used from 1792 to 1832 .

the jefferson method for apportionment is based on a fixed house size , h , and each state's quota of seats , q , is rounded down to the nearest whole number .

often , the sum of the rounded - down q values is less than h .

when this occurs , divisor values smaller than d are tested until an adjusted divisor , d adj , is found that results in a set of q values which , when rounded down , sum to h .

webster method ( major fractions ) some believed that the jefferson method favored large states , and the webster method was an approach first used for apportionment in 1842 and last used for apportionment following the 1930 census .

the webster method is similar to the hamilton / vinton method but differs in how it addresses remainders of seats .

each state receives the whole number of seats in its quota , q ; then , q remainders greater than or equal to 0.5 are rounded up to the next whole number , and those states receive an additional seat .

the example provided in table a - 3 happens to result in the same number of house seats as the other examples in this appendix , which treat the house size , h , as fixed at 20 seats , but performing these initial calculations under the webster method could result in a subsequent adjustment to the number of house seats .

if the house size remains fixed , and the initial sum of seats produced by the webster method does not equal the desired number of seats , an adjusted divisor , d adj , can be used to calculate q values that , when rounded and summed , result in a specific house size .

huntington - hill method ( method of equal proportions ) in addition to treating large and small states similarly , some have also believed that an apportionment method should minimize percentage differences in district population sizes ( across states ) as much as possible .

the method of equal proportions , also known as the huntington - hill method , seeks to achieve this objective , and has been used for all house apportionments since 1941 .

this method differs from the webster method by rounding up remainders for a state's quota , q , at the geometric mean , g , rather than at the arithmetic mean .

the geometric mean is found by multiplying two successive numbers together , then taking the square root of their product ; here , the successive numbers represent a state's q rounded down to the nearest whole number ( its "lower" quota ) and a state's q rounded up to the nearest whole number ( its "upper" quota ) .

each state receives its "lower" quota of seats and then may receive an additional seat if its quota , q , is greater than or equal to its geometric mean , g .

the initial calculation for a state's quota , q , under the method of equal proportions , is made by using the "ideal" district size , d , as the divisor .

table a - 4 provides a sample apportionment in which the sum of the rounded geometric means happens to result in the desired house size , h , of 20 seats , but , in practice , this often does not occur .

if the sum of the rounded geometric means for each state does not result in the desired number of house seats , there is an additional step: seats can be apportioned using a priority list , which essentially ranks each state's claim to the "next" house seat apportioned ( i.e. , the 51 st - 435 th seats ) , after each state receives the one seat it is constitutionally entitled to .

to generate a priority list , each state's apportionment population is multiplied by a series of multiplier values .

the multiplier values are created using the reciprocal of the geometric mean associated with each potential successive seat number for the state ( above its constitutionally mandated first seat ) .

for example , the multiplier value for a second house seat in any state would be 1 / √ ( 1 x 2 ) or 0.707 , the multiplier for a third house seat would be √ ( 2 x 3 ) or 0.408 , and so on .

the products that result from multiplying these values by each state's apportionment population are ranked from largest to smallest to create the priority list , and seats are distributed until h number of seats ( currently 385 , the number needed to get to a total of 435 seats once each of the 50 states receives its constitutionally required seat ) have been apportioned .

