household debt among older americans—including mainly residential debt , auto loans , student loans , and credit cards—has grown substantially from 1989 to 2016 .

the proportion of households headed by individuals aged 65 and older ( hereinafter referred to as elderly households ) who held any debt increased from 37.8% to 61.1% , and the real median household debt among elderly households with debt increased from $7,463 to $31,050 ( in 2016 dollars ) .

the increase in debt among older americans has raised concerns about financial security for people near or during retirement for several reasons .

first , americans aged 65 and older represent a large and growing proportion of the u.s. population .

over the next 20 years , the share of the u.s. population aged 65 and older is expected to increase from about 17% to 22% .

the increase in debt , together with the aging population , suggests that a large group of older americans are not retiring debt free .

second , many older americans , especially low - income people , rely on social security or other government - sponsored income transfers as their major sources of income .

increases in household debt might require retirees to devote a larger share of their fixed income and savings toward paying debt .

excessive debt payments may put more seniors , especially those living on limited incomes , at greater risk of financial insecurity .

third , researchers have shown that higher levels of debt may increase psychological stress and decrease physical health .

these effects may be exacerbated for older people , as they usually have fixed income and limited ability to offset higher monthly debt obligations by working more .

this report presents evidence of the increase in debt from 1989 to 2016 among households headed by those aged 65 and older , using survey of consumer finances ( scf ) data .

the discussion focuses on changes in the percentage of households holding debt ; in median and average household debts ; in selected types of debt ; and in relative measures , such as the debt payments - to - income ratio and the total debt - to - asset ratio .

this report also analyzes how household debt among older americans varies across different age groups and asset distributions , and it explores various groups of elderly households with the largest debt burdens .

major types of debt discussed in this report mainly include residential debt , auto loans , student loans , and credit card balances .

nonloan debt—such as medical debt , past - due utility and other bills , and government - assessed fines and fees—is not covered in this report , because the population with those debts tends to be underrepresented in the scf .

traditional life - cycle theories predict that people tend to borrow in young adulthood when incomes are low but some costs such as education and housing are high , continue to borrow but at a slower pace during middle age as income and expenses converge , and then slowly deleverage through old age as they pay down debt .

the scf data show that americans' debt experiences have generally conformed to life - cycle theories' predictions .

during 1989 to 2016 , the share of households who held any debt and the median and average level of household debts were highest among those headed by americans aged 35 to 54 and lower among younger and older ages .

in the past three decades , debt among households headed by individuals aged 65 and older grew faster than that among households headed by those aged 64 and younger .

in 2016 , average household debt increased from $59,134 in 1989 to $110,204 ( in 2016 dollars ) for households whose head was between the ages of 20 and 64 , an increase of 86% , whereas the average household debt grew from $11,278 to $53,269 ( in 2016 dollars ) for households headed by those aged 65 and older , an increase of 3 72% .

the average household debt nearly doubled for households in age groups younger than age 60 , but it increased by about 4 times for the age groups 60-64 , 65-69 , and 70-74 ; by about 7 times for the age group 75-79 ; and by more than 10 times for the age group 80 and older ( see figure 1 ) .

from 1989 to 2016 , debt increased among households whose head was aged 65 and older .

both the share of elderly households with any debt and the median and average levels of debt have increased .

household debt includes mortgages , auto loans , student loans , and credit cards , as well as other debt products .

although household debt rose over the past three decades for elderly households overall and on average , the oldest americans experienced the largest increase in debt .

among all elderly households , those headed by people aged 80 and older saw the fastest growth in the share of households with any debt , the median household debt , and the debt - to - asset ratio .

this section discusses changes in debt from 1989 to 2016 for elderly households with different asset levels .

it is important to analyze changes in debt across the household asset distribution for several reasons .

first , a small group of wealthy households hold high levels of assets and debt ; thus , average measures may not accurately reflect less wealthy households' financial situations .

second , elderly households are more likely than their nonelderly counterparts to draw down existing assets , such as withdrawing from retirement savings accounts and other investment accounts .

asset measurement may provide an important view of an elderly household's ability to afford debt obligations .

the change in household debt among elderly households from 1989 to 2016 varies widely across the household asset distribution .

during this time period , elderly households in the middle of the asset distribution had a relatively larger growth in the probability of holding any debt , and those in the middle and the top of the asset distribution had the largest growth in median and average household debt .

elderly households in the bottom of the asset distribution usually held the least debt , but had the largest debt burden as reflected in the debt - to - asset ratio , whereas elderly households in the top of the asset distribution held the most debt , but had the smallest debt - to - asset ratio .

debt among households headed by individuals aged 65 and older has increased substantially over the past 30 years .

the share of elderly households who held any debt almost doubled , and median debt among households with debt increased by about four times .

much of the rise in debt among older americans is not necessarily associated with financial insecurity in retirement .

much of the change in debt among elderly households , across some age groups and through most of the asset distribution , is well balanced by their assets .

as shown earlier , from 1989 to 2016 , the debt - to - asset ratio among elderly households with debt increased from 5.1% to 9.0% .

individuals may also adjust behavior to meet their debt obligations .

for instance , one study finds that both the presence and the level of debt increase the likelihood that older adults work and reduce the likelihood that they are retired .

data from the scf also show that the percentage of elderly households with either the head of the household or a spouse working increased from 19.8% in 1989 to 29.7% in 2016 .

rising debt among certain elderly households , however , has shown signs of an increase in debt burden .

for example , the debt - to - asset ratio among households headed by individuals aged 80 and older increased by 5 percentage points between 1989 and 2016 , and the ratio among elderly households with middle asset levels increased by more than 10 percentage points during the same time .

rising debt might be more problematic for persons aged 80 and older because they might be more vulnerable to income risks , as they are more likely to have lower or no earnings ( as they phase out of the labor force ) , exhaust existing retirement resources , have reduced purchasing power in certain defined benefit pensions , and incur higher medical expenses .

in addition , older americans now hold historically high levels of housing debt , which might make them more vulnerable to housing market swings than previous cohorts of retirees .

therefore , in addition to retirement income and saving adequacy , debt management may also be an important determinant of retirement security .

