the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant provides grants to states , the district of columbia , territories , and tribes to help them finance a wide range of benefits and services that address economic disadvantage among children .

it is best known as a source to help states finance public assistance benefits provided to needy families with children .

however , a state may use its tanf funds "in a ny manner that is reasonably calculated" to help achieve tanf's statutory goals to assist families so that children may live in their own homes or with relatives ; end dependence on government benefits for needy parents through work , job preparation , and marriage ; reduce out - of - wedlock pregnancies ; and promote the formation and maintenance of two - parent families .

tanf was created by the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( prwora ; p.l .

104-193 ) .

that law provided tanf program authority and funding through fy2002 .

since that original expiration of funding , tanf has been funded through a series of extensions ( one for five years , and others for shorter periods of time ) .

most current tanf policies date back to the 1996 law .

the major tanf issues facing the 116 th congress stem from questions about whether or not tanf's current policy framework allows states to de - emphasize addressing the original concerns that led to the creation of tanf , which centered on the terms and conditions under which needy families with children could receive public assistance benefits .

most families receiving public assistance in tanf's predecessor programs were headed by single mothers .

tanf public assistance ( for the remainder of this report , the term "assistance" will be used ) takes the form of payments to families to help them meet ongoing basic needs , such as food , clothing , and shelter .

the assistance is often paid in cash ( a monthly check ) , but it might also be paid on behalf of families in the form of vouchers or payments to third parties .

to be eligible for assistance , a family must have a minor child and be determined as "needy" according to the rules of the state .

the amount of the assistance benefit is also determined by the state .

in july 2017 , the monthly tanf assistance benefit for a family of three ranged from $170 a month in mississippi to $1,021 per month in new hampshire .

to provide context for a discussion of tanf issues in the 116 th congress , this report describes the main issues discussed in the debates leading to the enactment of prwora in 1996 ; provides an overview of the tanf block grant and its funding ; discusses current uses of tanf funds ; describes how states are held accountable for achieving the federal goals of tanf and the "work participation requirements" ; and discusses the decline in the tanf caseload and the implications for how it affects child poverty .

the report also describes legislation introduced in the 115 th and the 116 th congress as it relates to the issues of tanf funding levels and distribution , the uses of funds , and the "work participation" requirements .

this report does not address all potential issues related to tanf , particularly those related to issues of family structure ( a discussion of responsible fatherhood issues , for example , can be found in crs report rl31025 , fatherhood initiatives: connecting fathers to their children ) .

the modern form of assistance to needy families with children dates back to the mothers' pensions ( sometimes called "widows' pensions" ) funded by state and local governments beginning in the early 20 th century .

federal funding for these programs was first provided in the social security act of 1935 , through grants to states in the aid to dependent children ( adc ) program , later renamed the aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) program .

the purpose of these grants was to help states finance assistance to help mothers ( mostly single mothers and widows or women married to a disabled father ) stay at home and care for their children .

the goal of keeping mothers out of the labor force to rear their children was met by resistance from some states and localities .

politically , any consensus regarding this policy goal eroded over time , as increasing numbers of women—particularly married white women—joined the labor force .

additionally , those receiving assistance were increasingly african american families where the father was alive but absent .

benefits and the terms and conditions under which benefits were provided varied considerably by state .

a series of administrative and court decisions in the 1950s and 1960s made the terms under which afdc was provided more uniform across the states , though income eligibility thresholds and benefit levels continued to vary considerably among states up to the end of afdc and the enactment of tanf .

in 1969 , the nixon administration proposed ending afdc and replacing it with a negative income tax .

while the program would have provided an income guarantee , it also would have gradually phased out benefits as an incentive to work .

this proposal passed the house twice but never passed the senate .

in 1972 , the senate finance committee proposed to guarantee jobs to afdc recipients who had school - age children .

this proposal was not adopted in the full senate .

president carter proposed combining the negative income tax with a public service jobs proposal .

this , too , was not enacted .

in 1981 , during the reagan administration , the focus of debates over assistance to needy families shifted to a greater emphasis on work requirements and devolution of responsibility to the states .

in 1982 , president reagan proposed to shift all responsibility for afdc to the states , while the federal government would assume all responsibility for medicaid .

this was not enacted .

the 1980s also saw an increasing concern that single parents were becoming dependent on assistance .

research showed that while most individuals used afdc for short periods of time , some received assistance for long periods .

there was continuing concern that receipt of afdc—assistance generally limited to single mothers—led to more children being raised in single parent families .

the family support act of 1988 established an education and training program and expanded participation requirements for afdc recipients .

additionally , the federal government and states fielded numerous experiments that tested approaches to moving assistance recipients ( mostly single mothers ) into work .

these experiments indicated that mandatory participation in a program providing employment services could increase employment and earnings and reduce receipt of assistance .

the cash assistance caseload began to increase in 1988 , rising to its historical peak in march of 1994 .

amid that caseload increase , then - presidential candidate bill clinton pledged to "end welfare as we know it. .

the subsequent plan created by the clinton administration was not adopted ; instead , house republicans crafted a plan following the 1994 midterm elections that became the basis of the legislation enacted in 1996 .

prwora created tanf and established a statutorily set amount of funding to states under the tanf basic block grant through fy2002 ; new rules for assistance recipients , such as a five - year time limit on federally funded benefits ; and a broad - purpose block grant , giving states flexibility in how funds are used .

the bulk of tanf funding is in the form of a basic block grant .

both the total amount of the basic block grant ( $16.5 billion per year ) and each state's share of the grant are based on the amount of federal and state expenditures in tanf's predecessor programs ( afdc and related programs ) in the early to mid - 1990s .

states must also expend a minimum amount of their own funds on tanf or tanf - related programs under the maintenance of effort ( moe ) requirement .

that minimum totals $10.4 billion per year .

the moe is based on state expenditures in the predecessor programs in fy1994 .

prwora froze funding at both the national and state levels through fy2002 .

tanf has never been comprehensively reauthorized ; rather , it has been extended through a series of short - term extensions and one five - year extension .

thus , a funding freeze that originally was to run through fy2002 has now extended through fy2019 .

there have been no adjustments for changes—such as inflation , the size of the cash assistance caseload , or changes in the poverty population—to the total funding level or each state's level of funding .

though most of the debates leading to prwora in 1996 and the creation of tanf focused on assistance to needy families with children , the law as written created a broad - purpose block grant .

thus , tanf is not a program .

it is a funding stream that is used by states for a wide range of benefits and services .

a major focus of the debates that led to the enactment of prwora was how to move assistance recipients into employment .

under afdc law , most adult recipients were reported as not working ( at least , not working in the formal labor market ) .

in the 1980s and 1990s , both the federal government and the states conducted a series of demonstrations of different employment strategies for afdc recipients , which concluded that mandatory work participation requirements—in combination with funded employment services—could , on average , increase employment and earnings and reduce assistance expenditures .

these demonstrations also found that if such requirements and services were further combined with continued government support to supplement wages , family incomes could , on average , be increased .

mandatory participation requirements meant that if an individual did not comply with work requirements , they would be sanctioned through a reduction in their family's benefit .

tanf implemented work requirements through a performance system that applies to the state , rather than implementing requirements on individuals ; thus , the mandatory work participation requirements that apply to individual recipients are determined by the states rather than federal law .

states have considerable flexibility in how they may implement their requirements .

the debate that led to the creation of tanf in 1996 focused on assistance to needy families with children—primarily those with one parent , usually a mother without employment in the formal labor market .

as discussed earlier in this report , three provisions of law largely shaped the current tanf landscape: limited funding for tanf ; tanf's broad authority for states to use funds on a wide range of activities , which has allowed states to use tanf funds for activities unrelated to assistance and the population receiving assistance ; and the mandatory work participation rates , which provide states incentives to reduce the cash assistance caseload as well as expand aid to families with earnings .

the debates that led to the creation of tanf focused on the terms and conditions under which assistance for needy families with children had been provided .

however , congress created tanf as a broad - purpose block grant that funds a wide range of benefits and services related to childhood economic disadvantage .

since the mid - 1990s , states have shifted spending from assistance to those other tanf - funded benefits and services .

spending on assistance fell as the number of families and individuals receiving assistance fell .

much of the decline in the assistance caseload resulted from a drop in the share of eligible people receiving benefits .

a substantial number of children and their parents were eligible for tanf assistance but did not receive it ; in 2016 , an estimated total of 12.4 million individuals were eligible but did not receive tanf assistance , compared to 4.5 million individuals who received benefits at some point in that year .

the result was a diminished impact of assistance on alleviating child poverty .

other means - tested programs have grown in terms of spending and recipients ( eg , the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) , the child credit , the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) , and medicaid ) .

however , these programs do not provide ongoing cash assistance to families to meet basic needs .

snap provides food assistance , medicaid provides medical assistance , and the refundable tax credits—the eitc and the refundable portion of the child credit—provide families with income only once a year at tax refund time .

if policymakers conclude there is an unmet need for ongoing cash assistance to families to meet basic needs , they might consider changes to tanf or consider other alternatives outside of tanf .

a common feature of most of the bills discussed in this report is an attempt to focus a greater share of tanf dollars on activities related to assistance and work , and revamp the way state programs are assessed on their performance in engaging assistance recipients in work or job preparation activities .

the elimination of the caseload reduction credit would remove one of the incentives to reduce the number of families receiving assistance .

however , there are proposals that would go beyond changes to tanf to address issues related to economic security for families with children .

in 2019 , a national academy of sciences panel on child poverty proposed converting the child tax credit , with a refundable portion that is currently paid once a year through tax refunds , into a monthly , almost universal child allowance .

the nas proposal would provide the child allowance to families both with and without earnings .

the nas stated: the principal rationale for a child allowance paid on a monthly basis is that it would provide a steady , predictable source of income to counteract the irregularity and unpredictability of market income… .

because the child allowance would be available to both low - income and middle - class families , it would carry little stigma and would not be subject to the varying rules and administrative discretion of a means - tested program , thereby promoting social inclusion .

other proposals would seek to guarantee jobs or subsidize jobs .

for example , the elevate act ( h.r .

556 / s. 136 ) , introduced by representative danny davis and senator wyden , would provide matching grants to states ( 100% federally funded grants during recessions ) to subsidize wage paying jobs for individuals .

these proposals echo some of the proposals that were made during past debates .

guaranteed incomes—a child allowance is , in effect , a guaranteed income for families with children—and guaranteed or expanded jobs programs were both proposed in the past .

should congress again consider such proposals , they may raise issues that have been recurring themes in the debates on policies for low - income individuals , such as whether benefits should be universal or targeted ; whether intervention should be in the form of income , services , or employment ; whether there should be behavioral conditions ( eg , a requirement to work ) attached to aid ; and whether policies should be determined nationally or at the state and local levels .

