legislative proposals have been introduced since the 105 th congress to create a national electricity portfolio standard that would require electric utilities to procure a certain share of the electricity they sell from specified sources .

twenty - nine states , three u.s. territories , and the district of columbia are currently implementing mandatory portfolio standards , and an additional eight states and one territory have voluntary versions .

various existing and proposed portfolio standards use a range of terms for similar concepts .

a renewable portfolio standard ( rps ) typically means a requirement to procure electricity from renewable sources .

a clean energy standard ( ces ) typically means a variant of an rps that includes some nonrenewable sources , such as nuclear or selected fossil fuels , in the requirement .

some lawmakers and stakeholders use these terms interchangeably , and some use the term ces or "clean energy" to refer only to renewable sources .

this report uses the more general term "portfolio standard" to avoid confusion between rps and ces .

at both the federal and state level , lawmakers express multiple goals for portfolio standards .

these include greenhouse gas reduction , technology innovation , and job creation .

policy design choices , as discussed in this report , can influence the extent to which portfolio standards might achieve those or other goals .

other policies could potentially achieve the same goals as portfolio standards .

for example , tax incentives or funding for technology research , development , and deployment could promote the use of certain types of electricity generation sources by reducing their costs .

this report does not compare portfolio standards with other policy options , nor does it fully examine the costs and benefits of establishing a national portfolio standard compared to business - as - usual trends in the electric power sector .

this report provides background on portfolio standards and an overview of policy design elements to inform debate around proposals introduced in the 116 th congress , building on previous crs reports addressing this topic .

this report also analyzes potential effects of portfolio standard design choices , with an emphasis on economic effects , environmental effects , and potential interactions with state energy policies .

other potential effects that may be of congressional interest , but are outside the scope of this report , include public health , considerations regarding critical minerals used in some energy sources , electric reliability , cybersecurity , and geopolitics .

a number of government agencies , nongovernmental organizations , academic researchers , and private sector entities analyzed potential effects of a national portfolio standard in 2011 and 2012 because of congressional interest at that time .

since 2012 , the u.s. electric power sector has seen several changes in its generation profile that were unanticipated in those analyses .

these include an increase in generation from sources using natural gas and renewable energy , along with a decrease in coal - fired generation .

the current u.s. electricity generation profile and market trends may be important context for any congressional debate about a potential national portfolio standard .

the u.s. energy information administration ( eia ) reports that total electricity generation was 4,047,766 gigawatt - hours ( gwh ) in 2012 and 4,207,353 gwh in 2018 , an increase of 4% .

most of this increase occurred between 2017 and 2018 , as shown in figure 1 .

between 2012 and 2018 , the share of electricity generation from different sources has changed .

coal generated 37% of total generation in 2012 and 27% in 2018 .

natural gas generated 30% of total generation in 2012 and 35% in 2018 .

renewable sources , including hydropower , wind , solar , geothermal , and biomass , generated 12% of total generation in 2012 and 18% in 2018 .

many expect these trends to continue .

for example , eia's projection of current laws , regulations , and market trends show coal contributing 17% of total generation in 2050 , natural gas contributing 39% , and renewable sources contributing 31% .

electric power sector observers generally agree on the factors causing these trends , although the relative importance of each factor is subject to some debate .

the changes from 2012 to 2018 are due to a combination of ( 1 ) continued low natural gas prices and low wholesale electricity prices ; ( 2 ) federal environmental regulations , especially on coal - fired power plants ; ( 3 ) declining capital costs for wind and solar sources ; ( 4 ) federal tax incentives for wind and solar sources ; ( 5 ) state portfolio standards and other policies ; ( 6 ) changing consumer preferences , especially large corporations' and institutions' commitments to procure more electricity from renewable sources ; and ( 7 ) natural turnover as generators age .

differing perspectives over the relative influence of these factors could affect stakeholder views on the merits of a federal policy to promote greater use of certain energy sources for electricity generation .

some might argue that sources that are now cost competitive ( eg , natural gas , wind ) may not require policy support to increase their share of the electricity generation profile .

others may see electricity generation as solely an area for state policy as discussed further in the section " interaction with other state energy policies ," below .

a related consideration may be whether increasing the pace of change in the u.s. electricity portfolio could pose reliability risks .

key concepts in portfolio standard policymaking may or may not have identical meaning when used in other contexts .

for convenience and clarity , this section introduces key concepts used in this report .

as noted above , lawmakers and observers are not consistent in their use of terms related to portfolio standards .

renewable portfolio standard ( rps ) is the most frequently used term to describe a portfolio standard , though renewable energy standard , alternative energy portfolio standard , and others are in use .

the term clean energy standard ( ces ) is frequently used to refer to a variant of rps in which certain nonrenewable sources are eligible in addition to renewable sources , but some federal legislative proposals have used the term "clean energy" to refer only to renewable sources .

the appendix provides more information about previously introduced bills .

banking refers to the extent to which credits issued in the program may be used for compliance after their vintage year ( see definition , below ) .

banking provisions can equivalently be described in terms of expiration .

for example , if credits expire after two years , then banking for two years is allowed .

a related concept is borrowing which allows credits of future vintage years to be used for compliance .

base quantity of electricity is the sales volume to which the portfolio standard applies .

the base quantity could equal total electricity sales , but it need not .

excluding sources from the calculation of the base quantity changes the required amount of generation from eligible sources in absolute terms .

the base quantity to which the portfolio standard applies also affects the financial incentive that different sources receive .

even sources deemed ineligible under the portfolio standard could receive some policy support if they were excluded from the base quantity of electricity .

this concept is discussed further in the section " base quantity of electricity . .

carve outs , tiers , multipliers , partial crediting , and usage limits are all policy options for influencing the relative support that different types of eligible sources receive under a portfolio standard .

eligible sources will be available at different costs .

policymakers may want to avoid a situation where compliance is achieved mostly through the use of a single , low - cost source .

a carve out is a requirement within the overall policy requirement to achieve a minimum level of compliance by using a certain source .

carve outs have been used , for example , to require use of solar energy even when that was more expensive than other eligible sources .

the same goal might be accomplished through use of tiers .

typically , a carve out will apply to a single source type while a tier might apply to multiple source types .

a related concept is that of usage limits that set maximum levels for compliance from certain sources .

multipliers are rules under which selected sources receive more than the usual amount of credit for generating electricity , but the credits are completely fungible ( see definition , below ) with others .

sources that are eligible for multipliers would receive extra policy support , relative to other sources .

multipliers could be used , for example , to encourage demonstration and commercialization of new technologies .

p artial crediting would give selected sources less than the usual amount of credit and could be applied to sources lawmakers wanted to give less policy support .

clean energy , as used in this report , refers to the set of sources that lawmakers might choose to include in a portfolio standard .

these sources could include wind , solar , geothermal , biomass , hydropower , marine energy , nuclear , natural gas combined cycle generators , or fossil fuel - fired generators equipped with carbon capture and sequestration technology ( herein , ccs ) .

lawmakers could also choose to include nongenerating sources such as energy storage or energy efficiency .

other considerations about the choice of eligible sources are discussed in the section " source eligibility . .

covered entities are the entities with a compliance obligation under a portfolio standard .

most portfolio standards being implemented by states or proposed at the federal level have electricity distribution utilities as the covered entities .

these utilities may or may not own electricity generators , depending on state and local regulatory regimes .

typically , a utility procures electricity from a number of different generators using a variety of energy sources ( its portfolio ) .

other considerations about the choice of covered entities are discussed in the section " utility applicability . .

credits are the unit of accounting for portfolio standards and other market - based policies .

electricity cannot easily be traced from its point of generation to its point of consumption , so accounting measures are required to assess compliance with a portfolio standard .

in many existing portfolio standards , credits are issued by an administrator to a generator that uses a clean energy source .

the number of credits issued is based on actual measured electricity generation ( i.e. , ex post ) .

the generator can then sell credits to a utility , and the utility surrenders them to the program administrator to demonstrate compliance .

if a generator sells both electricity and associated credits to the same entity , the credit is bundled .

if a generator sells electricity and associated credits to different entities , the credit is unbundled .

lawmakers could allow entities other than generators and utilities ( eg , financial institutions ) to buy and sell credits , or they could allow only utilities with a compliance obligation to purchase credits .

the price that utilities would pay for credits would depend on the portfolio standard stringency , the overall volume of electricity generated by clean energy sources , and other market factors .

the sale of credits could create an additional source of revenue for a generator , potentially improving its economic performance relative to a business - as - usual scenario with no portfolio standard .

in some cases , the ability to sell credits might be the deciding factor for whether a new generator would be constructed ( or , for existing generators , whether a generator would remain operational instead of being retired ) .

in other cases , generators may be profitable without the sale of credits , and the credits might create a windfall profit .

the requirement to buy credits would likely increase the overall costs for a utility .

typically , a utility's costs for complying with a portfolio standard would be passed on to its customers .

if a utility were unable to fully pass on its compliance costs , it might see reduced profitability .

fungibility is the attribute of credits allowing them to be used interchangeably and without penalty .

since many state portfolio standards already exist , federal policymakers would have to decide if these state credits would be fungible with federal credits under a federal portfolio standard .

if they were , then current holders of state - issued credits could use them for compliance with a federal portfolio standard or sell them to another entity for that purpose .

if they were not , then state - issued credits could potentially lose value , depending on the relative stringency of a national portfolio standard and the state portfolio standard .

some states have implemented cap - and - trade programs in addition to portfolio standards , both of which aim to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from the electricity generation .

like portfolio standards , cap - and - trade uses credits ( also called allowances ) as an accounting mechanism and for compliance purposes .

under existing state policies and federal proposals , credits under portfolio standards are not fungible with allowances under cap - and - trade programs for greenhouse gases .

market - based policies attempt to use financial incentives to achieve policy goals .

many discussions contrast them with command - and - control policies that set specific permissions or prohibitions .

portfolio standards indirectly provide financial incentives because they create demand for generation from certain eligible sources in electricity markets , even if those eligible sources are more expensive than ineligible sources .

some observers argue this mechanism is a disruption of market forces .

in comparison , tax credits , grants , and loan guarantees provide direct financial incentives for eligible sources and therefore lower the cost of those sources in the market .

most portfolio standard proposals do not expressly prohibit use of ineligible sources , but they do create a financial disincentive to use them .

monitoring , reporting , and verification ( mrv ) are three distinct steps that ensure that market - based policies achieve the desired goals .

in the case of portfolio standards , mrv practices would measure the amount of electricity generated by eligible sources and verify that each unit of electricity from eligible sources was used only once for the purpose of compliance .

monitoring and reporting electricity generation is commonplace in the industry , at least for large - scale generators connected to the electricity transmission system .

verification for market - based policies is often completed by an independent third party .

qualifying facilities ( qfs ) are established in the public utility regulatory policies act of 1978 ( p.l .

95-617 ; purpa ) as certain small power production facilities and cogeneration facilities that receive special treatment .

utilities must purchase electricity from qfs at a price determined by what the utility would otherwise have to pay for electricity .

there is no direct relationship between qfs under purpa and sources that would be eligible under a portfolio standard , though the term "qualifying source" is sometimes used in both contexts .

to avoid confusion , this report refers to sources defined as clean energy under a portfolio standard as "eligible sources. .

registries , sometimes called tracking systems , are electronic databases used to facilitate credit issuance and transfer .

state portfolio standards typically make use of registries in the following way .

after an administrator verifies the amount of electricity generated from an eligible source , the administrator creates an appropriate number of credits .

these credits are assigned a serial number and placed in the account of the appropriate entity in the registry .

if the credit owner agrees to sell the credits to another entity , the owner files the necessary documentation with the administrator , who then authorizes the credits to be transferred to a different account in the registry .

a covered entity would demonstrate compliance by transferring the required number of credits from its account to the administrator's account .

the administrator would take action to retire the submitted credits to make sure they cannot be used again for compliance .

cybersecurity measures can help prevent theft of portfolio standard credits or other fraudulent activity .

some government agencies currently operate registries that could potentially be used to administer a national portfolio standard , and some private firms operate registries as well .

vintage refers to the time period in which a tradeable credit in a market - based policy is issued .

portfolio standards typically have annual compliance periods , with vintage expressed in years .

in policies with shorter or longer compliance periods , the vintage could be associated with a specific month or a series of years .

for example , if an eligible source generated electricity in the year 2025 , it would receive a vintage 2025 credit .

the banking and borrowing rules ( see definitions , above ) determine the years in which credits of a given vintage may be used for compliance .

if congress chose to establish a national portfolio standard , lawmakers would face choices about the design of the policy .

this section discusses some key design elements and potential effects of different choices .

often , design choices reflect a balance between increasing the certainty of achieving policy goals and decreasing the likelihood that consumers will experience undesirable cost increases .

design elements can interact with each other , so the potential effect of a choice about one element may be influenced by choices about others .

not all portfolio standard design choices must be made in legislation .

congress could direct an agency to promulgate regulations that implement a portfolio standard .

the previous federal proposals summarized in the appendix take different approaches .

some proposals made very few design choices and left most decisions to an agency , while others specified most design choices and left few decisions to an agency .

specifying details in legislation could add complexity that potentially impedes the legislative process or creates challenges in policy implementation .

on the other hand , specifying details in legislation would give lawmakers greater control over policy design decisions .

the previous section discussed some potential effects of different choices about design elements for a portfolio standard .

a key theme in discussion of design elements is the balance between achieving policy objectives and minimizing electricity cost increases for consumers , assuming a portfolio standard were implemented .

the potential effects discussed in this section might be characterized instead as the potential effect of a portfolio standard compared to business as usual .

while the previous section addressed the question "how can a portfolio standard be designed ? ," this section addresses the question "what might happen if a portfolio standard were implemented ? .

any projections of the effects of a policy on the u.s. electric power sector are subject to uncertainty around various factors .

these include future economic activity , electricity demand , energy costs ( eg , natural gas prices ) , and technology costs .

some factors may be more strongly influenced by decisions made by foreign governments than by the federal government .

for example , international demand for electricity from solar energy could lower the cost to produce solar panels , or countries with large critical mineral resources could impose export bans , increasing the cost in the united states of any technology using those minerals .

the overall effect on the american economy of a national portfolio standard would be influenced by multiple factors .

increased electricity costs could reduce economic activity , depending on the price response throughout the economy .

potential price responses are reduced electricity consumption , increased investment in efficiency measures , or reduced spending on other goods or services .

some price responses might have minimal effect on overall economic activity , for example if consumers shifted spending from electricity consumption to energy efficiency improvements .

potential economic effects might not be uniformly distributed .

there could be regional differences in electricity price changes , given the geographic variability in energy resources .

utilities in regions with relatively less potential to develop eligible sources ( i.e. , regions in which eligible sources are relatively costlier ) might buy credits from eligible generators in other regions .

the cost of credits might result in higher electricity prices for customers of the utility buying credits .

at the same time , customers of any utilities selling credits might see lower electricity prices .

as discussed above , the ability to use unbundled credits for compliance could reduce overall compliance costs relative to the case where only bundled credits were allowed because utilities across the country could take advantage of low cost eligible sources .

at the same time , unbundled credits could result in wealth transfer between different regions of the country .

policy design choices might affect any potential wealth transfer .

electricity prices already vary across the country as a result of differences in resource availability , electricity demand , and utility regulatory models .

there might also be differences in cost distribution among household income levels .

generally , poorer americans spend a larger portion of their income on electricity than wealthier americans , so electricity cost increases could disproportionately affect them .

within the electric power sector , businesses associated with eligible sources might be positively affected while businesses associated with ineligible sources might be negatively affected .

the affected businesses might be individual generators and also firms associated with their supply chains .

for negatively affected businesses , the potential impacts might include loss of capital investment ( sometimes referred to as stranded costs ) and reduced employment .

communities surrounding a negatively affected generator might experience negative effects such as loss of tax revenue base and increased demands on social services .

for positively affected businesses and communities , the opposite might be true , namely increased capital investment , increased employment , and other positive economic effects .

additionally , american businesses that develop goods or services used to comply with a portfolio standard could potentially expand into international markets , depending on whether eligible sources also experienced demand growth internationally .

depending on policy design details , local electricity market factors , and local energy resources , some existing businesses in the electric power sector could experience negligible effects of a potential national portfolio standard .

proponents of portfolio standards describe multiple environmental benefits , such as reduced greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions ( i.e. , climate change mitigation ) and reduced air pollutants ( i.e. , improved air quality ) .

the extent to which a portfolio standard might produce potential environmental benefits would depend in part on choices about source eligibility and stringency .

potential eligible sources vary in their ghg and air pollutant emissions , as well as other attributes such as water consumption and power density ( which can affect land requirements ) .

implementation could affect environmental outcomes too .

for example , some eligible sources might be deployable in either large - scale or small - scale installations , with differing effects on environmental factors such as land use .

some would argue these potential effects should be compared with potential effects of other energy options .

a comprehensive comparison of potential environmental effects of various energy sources is beyond the scope of this report .

the conditions under which federal law preempts state law can vary , and determination of federal preemption can be complex .

twenty - nine states , three u.s. territories , and the district of columbia are currently implementing mandatory portfolio standards , and an additional eight states and one territory have voluntary versions .

as of september 6 , 2019 , nine of these have targets of 100% .

if congress implemented a national portfolio standard , it could expressly preempt existing state portfolio standards .

if a national portfolio standard were enacted that did not preempt state portfolio standards , utilities in states with existing portfolio standards might have to comply with both simultaneously .

in practice , whichever standard had the higher stringency would determine the amount of eligible sources in a utility's portfolio .

in this case , the relevant stringency could be either the required percentage of generation from eligible sources or the set of eligible sources itself .

for example , some existing state portfolio standards include nuclear energy as an eligible source .

if a national portfolio standard did not include nuclear energy , then a utility might be out of compliance with the federal standard even if it were in compliance with the state standard and the state and federal standard required the same amount of electricity from eligible sources .

assuming a generator were eligible for both a state and national program , a utility could procure electricity ( or credits ) from that generator to demonstrate compliance with both .

in other words , the presence of two portfolio standards would not necessarily double the amount of procurement from eligible sources required .

a utility covered under two portfolio standards might , however , face increased administrative costs associated with compliance .

although few technical barriers exist to the simultaneous operation of state and federal portfolio standards , other concerns may make this undesirable .

administrative cost burden for covered entities is one such concern .

another might be confusion for eligible sources about whether and how to receive credits for two portfolio standards .

if congress chose to preempt state programs , this could potentially disrupt project finances for recently developed or proposed sources and lead to investment losses in clean energy industries .

congress might also consider exempting utilities facing state portfolio standards of equal or greater stringency than the federal portfolio standards .

congress could also allow credits issued by states to be used for compliance with a federal program .

this option would , effectively , allow a utility to use one credit to demonstrate compliance with two portfolio standards , though it could also reduce the policy outcomes relative to a utility having two distinct compliance obligations .

an option included in some of the bills listed in the appendix is to compensate utilities facing a state standard with a specified number of federal credits .

alternatively , congress could choose not to explicitly address the question , and instead let state governments or judicial review decide whether state programs would be suspended if a national one were implemented .

under current law , state and local governments have authority for approving electricity generation and transmission assets .

compliance with a national portfolio standard might require new generation and transmission assets , but it is unclear to what extent state approval processes would consider national clean energy policy goals .

some stakeholders have argued that state approval processes for new electricity transmission lines , in particular , create barriers for deployment of certain electricity generation sources , especially wind .

to the extent that a national portfolio standard required new transmission capacity , interest might increase in a stronger federal role in approving electricity transmission infrastructure .

congress has considered this in the past .

for example , the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) authorized federal approval for some transmission infrastructure under certain conditions , though this authority has never been used .

as noted in " potential environmental effects " a national portfolio standard might alternatively incentivize distributed energy development or projects in other locations that might not require new transmission capacity .

some states have adopted policies to create competition among electricity generators , an effort known as deregulation or restructuring .

in these states ( and some portions of states ) , competitive electricity markets create price signals meant to , among other things , drive long - term investment decisions .

congress demonstrated support for restructuring efforts in the energy policy act of 1992 ( p.l .

102-486 ) .

portfolio standards require utilities to purchase electricity from sources that might be more expensive than other sources .

this creates so - called out - of - market payments , sometimes characterized as subsidies , for eligible sources that could distort the operation of electricity markets .

eligible sources would still compete with each other for market share , creating some competitive pressure on prices among eligible sources .

this section lists previously introduced legislation that would have established national portfolio standards .

crs searched congress.gov using the phrases "renewable portfolio standard," "clean energy standard," "renewable energy standard," "renewable electricity standard," "renewable energy," and "clean energy," in full bill text or bill summaries for all congresses .

the earliest bill identified in this search was introduced in the 105 th congress .

search results were refined by including only the subject - policy area terms "energy" and "environmental protection. .

table a - 1 provides selected policy design elements of the bills that would have established national portfolio standards that were identified using this search methodology .

bills are listed in order of introduction by congress , with house bills listed first and senate bills listed second .

this table only provides information related to the bills' portfolio standards .

some of the bills in the table had multiple provisions , including some that might also affect the electric power sector , but those are not described here .

