this report focuses on selected precision - guided munitions ( pgms ) fielded by the air force , army , navy , and marine corps .

over the years , the u.s. military has relied on pgms to execute ground , air , and naval military operations .

pgms have become ubiquitous in u.s. military operations ; funding for these weapons has increased dramatically from fy1998 to the present as depicted in .

in fy2021 , the department of defense ( dod ) requested approximately $4.1 billion for more than 41,337 weapons in 15 munitions programs .

dod projects requesting approximately $3.3 billion for 20,456 weapons in fy2022 , $3.9 billion for 23,306 weapons in fy2023 , $3.9 billion for 18,376 weapons in fy2024 , and $3.6 billion for 16,325 weapons in fy2025 .

congress , through the defense authorization and appropriations bills , has historically exercised its role in the decision to approve , reject , or modify dod's proposals for pgms .

in addition , these programs pose a number of potential oversight issues for congress .

congress's decisions on these issues could affect future u.s. military capabilities and funding requirements .

potential issues for congress include planned procurement quantities and stockpile assessments , defense industrial base production capacity , development timelines , supply chain security , affordability and cost - effectiveness , and emerging factors that may affect pgm programs .

dod defines a pgm as "[a] guided weapon intended to destroy a point target and minimize collateral damage. .

in addition to these virtues , pgms also offer other advantages over unguided weapons , namely range and the reduction in numbers of combat sorties required to deliver the desired effects on the battle field .

the main disadvantage of these weapons is cost ; particularly long range missiles .

pgms include air - and ship - launched missiles , multiple launched rockets , and guided bombs .

current munitions typically use a combination of radio signals from the global positioning system ( gps ) , laser guidance , and inertial navigation systems ( ins ) —using gyroscopes—to improve a weapon's accuracy to reportedly less than 3 meters ( approximately 10 feet ) .

pgms have transformed attack operations from the air ; instead of using hundreds of bomber sorties to attack a single target , a single sortie from a pgm - carrying platform can attack multiple targets while minimizing collateral damage .

guided munitions were first developed in the 1940s , when the u.s. army air corps tested radio guidance to glide bombs onto a target .

prior to precision guidance , bomber missions reported an accuracy of 1,200 feet ; 16% of munitions dropped by crews landed within 1,000 feet of their intended target .

according to defense analyst barry watts , guidance systems showed promise in improving weapon accuracy ; however , these systems were not fully fielded during the second world war .

this can partly be attributed to technological challenges in developing guidance systems , as well as relatively large unit costs per munition used .

guidance systems during this era used television signals , and required a chase aircraft to provide command and control for the weapon to strike its target .

dod continued to develop pgms through the 1950s and 1960s , where they gained prominence during the vietnam war with the introduction of the laser - guided bomb .

laser - guided bombs became a preferred munition for bombing operations ; an air force study in 1973 found that the u.s. military used more than 10,500 laser - guided bombs the previous year , with 5,107 weapons achieving a direct hit and another 4,000 achieving a circular error probable of 25 feet .

during the 1970s and 1980s , all of the military services developed guided missiles capable of attacking fixed and moving targets .

laser - guided bombs gained prominence during operation desert storm in 1991 .

although pgms represented only 6% of the total munitions used during the campaign , they struck a number of critical targets , reduced the number of combat sorties required , and limited collateral damage to civilian structures .

operations over the past decade in afghanistan , iraq , and syria have demonstrated dod's increasing reliance on pgms and how important they have become for modern military operations .

the air force reports that nearly 139,000 weapons have been used in combat operations in the middle east since 2014 .

counter - islamic state ( is ) operations in iraq and syria have used numerous weapons: in 2015 , coalition air forces used more than 28,000 weapons ; in 2016 , the campaign used an additional 30,700 weapons ; and in 2017 ( the height of operations ) , the campaign used 39,500 weapons ( see figure 2 for a graphical representation of operational usage compared to dod procurement ) .

nearly all of the weapons employed were pgms , particularly joint direct attack munitions ( jdams ) and hellfire missiles .

in addition to pgm use in current operations , the proliferation of anti - access / area denial ( a2 / ad ) systems is likely to increase the operational utility of pgms .

anti - access systems can be defined as capabilities "associated with denying access to major fixed - point targets , especially large forward bases. .

area denial systems can be defined as capabilities "that threaten mobile targets over an area of operations , principally maritime forces , to include those beyond the littorals. .

peer competitors like china and russia have developed sophisticated air defenses , such as the s - 300pmu ( sa - 20 ) and s - 400 ( sa - 21 ) , the hq - 9 surface - to - air missile ( china ) , the df - 21d and df - 26 anti - ship ballistic missiles ( china ) , and the 3m - 54 kaliber anti - ship cruise missile ( russia ) .

figure 3 illustrates ranges of potential a2 / ad systems .

these systems outrange u.s. weapons systems at what experts assess as unacceptable risk—some of these weapons have reported ranges in excess of 1,000 nautical miles .

as a result , u.s. ships and aircraft would need to engage targets at long ranges in order to not put themselves in danger .

for instance , naval ships could be threatened at ranges of 809 nautical miles from bases that field df - 21d anti - ship ballistic missiles .

the effectiveness of these missiles is often debated , as is the amount of risk an anti - ship ballistic missile presents to naval forces .

some analysts argue that in a combat situation , aircraft carriers would not enter these weapons' engagement zones because of the threat .

others argue that while there is some risk posed to naval forces , aircraft carriers and major surface combatants would nonetheless be able to operate effectively .

similarly , an s - 400 ( sa - 21 ) presents risks to aircraft at ranges of up to 215 nautical miles .

many weapons in the u.s. inventory have relatively short ranges .

figure 4 illustrates the impact that a2 / ad systems have on potential military operations .

some analysts argue that u.s. forces would substantially increase their operational risk at ranges in excess of 500 nautical miles ( nm ) .

planned procurement quantities and stockpile assessment .

one potential issue for congress is whether dod's desired quantities of standoff munitions are appropriate .

current operations have demonstrated a large demand for all types of pgms .

a potential high - intensity conflict would potentially require large stockpiles of all types of weapons .

several of these types of munitions—particularly jassm , lrasm , and aargm—are being procured in relatively small quantities , given their potential use rates in a high - intensity conflict scenario , along with the time it would take for replacement spent munitions once initial inventories are exhausted .

a related issue is whether dod has adequately assessed the sufficiency of existing and planned pgm stockpiles , particularly in light of recent use rates for such weapons .

congress has from time to time required dod to assess munitions requirements , as well as to report on combatant command munitions requirements .

more recently , congress required dod to provide an annual report on the munitions inventory , along with an unconstrained assessment of munitions requirements .

defense industrial base production capacity .

another potential issue for congress concerns the defense industrial base's capacity for building pgms , particularly for meeting increased demands for such weapons during an extended - duration , high - intensity conflict .

the question is part of a larger issue of whether various parts of the u.s. defense industrial base are adequate , in an era of renewed great power competition , to meet potential wartime mobilization demands .

supply chain security .

another potential issue for congress concerns supply chain security , meaning whether u.s. pgms incorporate components , materials , or software of foreign origin .

supply chain security could affect wartime reliability of these weapons as well as the ability of the u.s. industrial base to build replacement pgms in a timely manner during an extended - duration , high - intensity conflict .

development timelines .

congress may be concerned about the development timeline of pgms compared with development timelines of adversary a2 / ad capabilities .

china and russia have developed sophisticated systems over the past 10 years , while dod has developed relatively few systems .

some analysts argue that these systems can exceed dod munitions capabilities ( such as range and speed ) .

can and , if so , should dod develop new systems and at a pace that can match or exceed that of chinese or russian weapons systems ? .

affordability and cost - effectiveness .

congress may also be concerned about the affordability of dod's plans for procuring various pgms in large numbers , and the cost - effectiveness of pgms relative to other potential means of accomplishing certain dod missions , particularly in a context of finite dod resources and competing dod program priorities .

another aspect of cost - effectiveness concerns the cost of the weapon compared to the cost of a target .

for instance , in 2017 a u.s. ally used a $3 million patriot missile to engage a $300 quadcopter drone .

emerging factors that may affect pgm programs .

another potential issue for congress is how dod's programs for developing and procuring pgms might be affected by emerging factors such as the u.s. withdrawal from the intermediate nuclear force ( inf ) treaty ; new u.s. military operational concepts for countering chinese a2 / ad forces in the indo - pacific region , such as the army's new multi - domain operations ( mdo ) operational concept and the marine corps' new expeditionary advanced base operations ( eabo ) concept , both of which possibly feature the potential use of such weapons from island locations in the pacific as a way of countering china's a2 / ad forces ; and emerging technologies such as hypersonics and artificial intelligence ( ai ) .

appendix a .

prior year procurement by service appendix b .

prior year procurement by progra .

