the william d. ford federal direct loan ( direct loan ) program makes several types of federal student loans available to individuals to assist them with financing postsecondary education expenses .

it represents the single largest source of federal financial assistance to support students' postsecondary educational pursuits .

the u.s. department of education ( ed ) estimates that in fy2020 , 15.9 million new loans , averaging $6,299 each and totaling $100.2 billion , will be made through the direct loan pro gram to undergraduate and graduate students , and to the parents of undergraduate students .

in addition , ed estimates that 755,000 direct consolidation loans , averaging $61,433 each and totaling $46.4 billion , will be made to existing borrowers of federal student loans .

as of the end of the second quarter of fy2019 , $1.2 trillion in principal and interest on direct loan program loans , borrowed by or on behalf of 34.5 million individuals , remained outstanding .

this report presents a comprehensive overview of the terms and conditions that apply to federal student loans made through the direct loan program .

it begins by providing background information on the history of the direct loan program .

this is followed by a brief description of the various types of loans that are offered through the program .

the report then presents a thorough description of the terms and conditions for loans made through the direct loan program .

in identifying and describing loan terms and conditions , it focuses on provisions applicable to loans that are currently being made or that have been made in recent years .

emphasis is placed on discussing direct loan program provisions that are related to borrower eligibility , amounts that may be borrowed , interest rates and fees , procedures for loan repayment , repayment relief , the availability of loan discharge and loan forgiveness benefits , and the consequences of defaulting .

the final section of the report provides a summary of the methods that are used to ensure that borrowers are informed about the terms and conditions of the loans they obtain and their obligation to repay them .

this report has been prepared as a resource for members of congress , congressional committees , and congressional staff to support them in their legislative , oversight , and representational roles related to federal student loan policy .

it is intended to provide a thorough , but nonexhaustive , description of loan terms and conditions and borrower benefits .

it is not intended to be relied upon by borrowers as a resource for validating individual eligibility for specific borrower benefits .

appendix a to this report contains a directory of resources from which additional information may be obtained about loans made available through the direct loan program .

appendix b consists of a glossary of terms .

appendix c contains a set of tables that present historical information on borrowing limits , interest rates , and fees that have applied to loans made through the direct loan program .

the direct loan program is authorized under title iv , part d of the higher education act of 1965 ( hea ; p.l .

89-329 , as amended ) .

it was established by the student loan reform act of 1993 ( slra ) , title iv of the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 ( p.l .

103-66 ) .

federal student loans were first made through the direct loan program in 1994 .

in the direct loan program , loans are made by the government using federal capital ( i.e. , funds from the u.s. treasury ) , and once made , outstanding loans constitute an asset of the federal government .

some important characteristics of loans made through the direct loan program are that the federal government assumes the risk for losses that may occur as a result of borrower default , and that it pays for the discharge of loans in cases of borrower death , total and permanent disability , and other limited instances .

the federal government also assumes the cost of loans that are not required to be paid in full due to borrowers satisfying criteria that make them eligible to have a portion or all of the balance of their loans discharged under any of several loan forgiveness programs .

for federal budgeting purposes , the program is classified as a direct loan program , which is a type of federal credit program for which mandatory spending authority is provided .

ed's office of federal student aid ( fsa ) is the primary entity tasked with administering the direct loan program .

the institutions of higher education ( ihes ) that participate in the direct loan program originate loans to borrowers through fsa's common origination and disbursement ( cod ) system .

contractors hired by ed service and collect on the program's loans .

when the direct loan program was first established , it was intended gradually to expand and then ultimately fully replace the federal family education loan ( ffel ) program , a guaranteed student loan program authorized under title iv , part b of the hea , and through which most federal student loans were being made .

the ffel program had descended from the guaranteed student loan ( gsl ) program , which was enacted under title iv of the hea in 1965 to enhance access to postsecondary education for students from low - and middle - income families by providing them access to low - interest federal student loans .

in the ffel program , loan capital was provided by private lenders who also originated and serviced loans .

the federal government guaranteed lenders against loss due to factors such as borrower default , death , total and permanent disability , and in limited instances , bankruptcy .

state and nonprofit guaranty agencies administered the federal guarantee .

the federal government was also responsible for making several different types of payments to lenders and guaranty agencies to support the operation of the program .

the ffel program was administratively complex and the direct loan program was established with the aims of streamlining the federal student loan delivery system and achieving cost savings .

several years into the implementation of the direct loan program , statutory provisions specifying that it ultimately succeed the ffel program were repealed by the higher education amendments of 1998 ( p.l .

105-244 ) .

from 1994 to 2010 , the direct loan program and the ffel program operated side - by - side .

during this period , ihes could elect to participate in the program of their choice .

as this decision was made at the institutional level , the program through which an individual could borrow federal student loans was dependent upon the program participation decisions made by the institution a student attended .

during the period while loans were being made through both the ffel and direct loan programs , from the perspective of the borrower the terms and conditions of loans offered through the programs were similar in most respects .

however , the degree of similarity varied over time .

notable differences included certain characteristics of the repayment plans offered and , beginning in 2008 , the availability of the public service loan forgiveness ( pslf ) program only to borrowers of loans made through the direct loan program .

the authority to make loans through the ffel program was terminated , effective july 1 , 2010 , by the safra act , title ii of the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( hcera ; p.l .

111-152 ) .

while loans are no longer being made through the ffel program , as of the end of the second quarter of fy2019 , $271.6 billion in principal and interest on ffel program loans , borrowed by or on behalf of 12.8 million students , remained outstanding and due to be repaid over the coming years .

over the history of the direct loan program , congress has periodically made changes to loan terms and conditions .

such changes have often been made as part of comprehensive amendments to the hea , which authorizes the direct loan program ; as part of amendments contained in budget reconciliation measures ; or as part of amendments included in annual appropriations measures .

congress may well contemplate making future changes to loan terms and conditions .

the following types of loans are currently made available to borrowers through the direct loan program: direct subsidized loans .

these loans are available only to undergraduate students who demonstrate financial need .

direct subsidized loans are characterized by having an interest subsidy that applies during an in - school period when a borrower is enrolled in an eligible program on at least a half - time basis , during a six - month grace period , during periods of authorized deferment , and during certain other periods .

the direct subsidized loans currently being made have a fixed interest rate that remains constant for the duration of the loan .

direct unsubsidized loans .

these loans are available to undergraduate students , graduate students , and professional students , without regard to the student's financial need .

direct unsubsidized loans generally do not have an interest subsidy .

the direct unsubsidized loans currently being made have a fixed interest rate that remains constant for the duration of the loan .

the interest rate on loans made to graduate and professional students is higher than the rate on loans made to undergraduate students .

direct plus loans .

these loans are available to graduate and professional students , and to the parents of undergraduate students who are dependent upon them for financial support .

they are made without regard to financial need and generally do not have an interest subsidy .

the direct plus loans currently being made have a fixed interest rate , which remains constant for the duration of the loan ; and the interest rate is higher than the rate on both direct subsidized loans and direct unsubsidized loans .

direct consolidation loans .

these loans allow individuals who have at least one loan borrowed through either the direct loan program or the ffel program to refinance their eligible federal student loan debt by borrowing a new loan and using the proceeds to pay off their existing federal student loan obligations , including loans that are in default .

direct consolidation loans may be obtained without regard to financial need .

the direct consolidation loans currently being made have fixed interest rates , which are determined by calculating the weighted average of the interest rates on the loans that are consolidated , rounded up the result to the next higher one - eighth of a percentage point .

upon an individual obtaining a direct consolidation loan , a new repayment period begins , which may be for a longer term than applied to the loans originally borrowed .

a direct consolidation loan may have a subsidized component 18 and an unsubsidized component .

eligibility for an individual to borrow a loan through the direct loan program and the amount that he or she may borrow are governed by provisions in the hea and by policies and procedures implemented by ed .

all loan types except direct plus loans are made available without consideration of a borrower's ability to repay the loan .

eligibility to borrow a direct plus loan depends on an individual's creditworthiness .

the section that follows identifies and describes factors that determine an individual's eligibility to borrow one or more types of loans made available through the direct loan program .

this is followed by a section that describes policies and procedures for determining amounts that may be borrowed .

interest is charged on loans made through the direct loan program .

it constitutes a charge for the use of borrowed money over a specified period of time .

in the direct loan program , interest is calculated based on rates that are set according to formulas specified in the hea .

interest accrual is calculated using a simple daily interest formula .

the federal government offers several types of interest subsidies that may limit the amount of interest that accrues on the outstanding principal balance of a loan .

in certain circumstances , a borrower may be permitted to defer paying some or all of the interest that has accrued on his or her loan ( s ) until a later point in time .

if a borrower does not pay the interest that has accrued , it may , in certain circumstances , be capitalized ( i.e. , added to the outstanding principal balance of the borrower's loan ) .

loan origination fees are charged to borrowers of direct subsidized loans , direct unsubsidized loans , and direct plus loans .

no fees are charged to borrowers of direct consolidation loans .

these fees help offset federal loan subsidy costs by passing along some of the costs to borrowers .

loan origination fees are calculated as a proportion of the loan principal borrowed and are deducted proportionately from the proceeds of each loan disbursement to the borrower .

the amount to be charged for loan origination fees is specified in statute .

for direct subsidized loans and direct unsubsidized loans made on or after july 1 , 2010 , the hea specifies a loan origination fee of 1% .

 ( higher loan origination fees were charged on loans made prior to july 1 , 2010. ) .

since the inception of the direct loan program , the hea has specified a loan origination fee of 4% for direct plus loans .

during periods when a budget sequestration order that applies to direct ( or mandatory ) spending programs is in effect , such as for the direct loan program , special rules apply to loan origination fees .

in instances where the first disbursement of a loan is made during a period that is subject to a sequestration order , the loan origination fee is required to be increased by the uniform percentage sequestration amount that is applicable to nondefense , mandatory spending programs .

loan origination fees that apply to loans made during fy2019 and fy2020 ( periods of budget sequestration ) are presented below in table 3 .

a history of loan origination fees that previously applied to loans made through the direct loan program is presented in appendix c in table c - 5 .

borrowers are required to make payments on loans made through the direct loan program during a repayment period that , depending on the loan type , commences either upon the loan being fully disbursed ( direct plus loans and direct consolidation loans made on or after july 1 , 2006 ) or after a six - month grace period ( direct subsidized loans , direct unsubsidized loans , and pre - july 1 , 2006 , direct consolidation loans ) .

borrowers are afforded the opportunity to choose from among a selection of numerous loan repayment plan options to repay their loans .

the repayment plan selected is a determining factor in the duration of the repayment period .

borrowers may prepay all or any part of a loan made through the direct loan program at any time without being subject to a prepayment penalty .

periods of deferment and forbearance provide borrowers with temporary relief from the obligation to make monthly payments that would otherwise be due on their loans .

in certain instances , interest subsidies may be provided during periods of deferment ; however , interest subsidies are not available during periods of forbearance .

in general , periods during which borrowers are in a deferment or forbearance are excluded from the repayment period .

however , for borrowers who are repaying according to any of the idr plans , periods of up to three years while in receipt of an economic hardship deferment are included as part of the repayment period .

the various forms of deferment and forbearance that are available to borrowers of loans made through the direct loan program are described below .

an important benefit to borrowers of federal student loans made through the direct loan program is that their obligation to repay these loans may be discharged or forgiven in a variety of circumstances .

several types of loan discharge and loan forgiveness benefits are available .

these may be grouped into three broad categories: loan discharge for borrower hardship , loan forgiveness following idr plan repayment , and loan forgiveness for public service .

a loan made through the direct loan program is considered to be in default once the borrower has failed to make payments when due or has otherwise not adhered to the terms of the promissory note for 270 days .

defaulting on a federal student loan can result in a number of adverse consequences for the borrower .

upon default , the borrower's obligation to repay the loan is accelerated ( i.e. , the entire unpaid balance of principal and accrued interest becomes due in full ) .

in addition , upon defaulting a borrower loses eligibility for certain borrower benefits ( eg , deferment , forbearance , loan forgiveness ) , as well as eligibility to receive additional title iv federal student aid .

defaulting may also result in other adverse effects for the borrower and may present a major obstacle to the borrower's future economic well - being .

the secretary will report defaulted loans to consumer reporting agencies and will take action to collect on them through one or more means .

the borrower of a defaulted loan may be assessed a variety of charges for the costs of collecting on it .

several options are available to borrowers to bring defaulted loans back into good standing .

a borrower may remove a loan from default status by rehabilitating the loan , consolidating the loan into a new direct consolidation loan , or paying off the defaulted loan balance .

this report seeks to provide a comprehensive overview of the terms and conditions of federal student loans made through the direct loan program .

these loan terms and conditions are voluminous and complex .

for many individuals , the process of borrowing a federal student loan may be among their first experiences with making a major financial transaction ; thus , it is imperative for borrowers to understand the terms and conditions of the loans they obtain and their associated rights and responsibilities as borrowers .

as part of the process of obtaining a federal student loan , borrowers are required to undergo financial counseling that provides them with information about their loans and the obligations they assume as borrowers .

first - time borrowers must be provided with entrance counseling , which provides them with comprehensive information on the loans they are about to obtain .

borrowers who have received an adverse credit determination but have been able to establish eligibility to borrow direct plus loans must receive plus loan credit counseling .

at the time of obtaining a loan , borrowers are required to sign a promissory note , which is a contract that establishes the borrower's legal obligation to repay .

the promissory note is accompanied by a rights and responsibilities statement that uses plain language to disclose the terms and conditions of the loan .

prior to a borrower ceasing to be enrolled on at least a half - time basis , he or she must be provided with exit counseling .

the institution attended by a first - time borrower of a direct subsidized loan or a direct unsubsidized loan , or by a first - time graduate or professional student borrower of a direct plus loan is required to ensure that he or she receives entrance counseling prior to the first installment of the loan being disbursed .

entrance counseling may be provided through an in - person counseling session , a written document provided to the borrower , or an online interactive medium .

irrespective of the means through which entrance counseling is provided , the institution must ensure that an individual who has expertise in federal student aid is available shortly after the session to respond to any questions a borrower might have .

entrance counseling is designed to provide a borrower with comprehensive information on both the terms and conditions of the loan and the borrower's rights and responsibilities with regard to the loan .

entrance counseling must satisfy the following requirements: explain the master promissory note ; emphasize to the borrower the seriousness and importance of the obligation to repay the loan ; describe the likely consequences of default , which include adverse credit reports , the collection of delinquent debt , and litigation ; emphasize that the borrower is required to repay the loan in full , irrespective of whether he or she completes the program of study on time or at all , is unable to obtain employment , or is dissatisfied with the program ; provide the borrower with sample monthly payment amounts based on either a range of amounts that might be borrowed or the average cumulative amount borrowed by other students in the same program ; explain potential implications that accepting the loan might have on the borrower's eligibility to receive other forms of student aid ; provide information on interest accrual and capitalization ; inform the borrower of the option to pay the interest that accrues on direct unsubsidized loans and direct plus loans while he or she is enrolled in school ; explain the meaning of half - time enrollment and the consequences of not maintaining half - time enrollment ; explain the importance of informing the school if the borrower chooses to withdraw so that exit counseling can be provided ; provide information about , and how the borrower can access , the national student loan data system ( nslds ) ; provide the name of and contact information for an individual the borrower may ask any questions about the terms and conditions of the loan and the borrower's rights and responsibilities with regard to the loan ; explain to post - july 1 , 2013 , first - time borrowers the direct subsidized loan limitations for post - july 1 , 2013 , first - time borrowers provision for direct subsidized loans and its implications ; and explain to first - time graduate student borrowers of a direct plus loan who have previously borrowed a direct subsidized loan or a direct unsubsidized loan the differences between these loan types with regard to interest rates , the accrual of interest , and the start of the repayment period .

any parent borrower or graduate or professional student borrower with an adverse credit determination who becomes eligible to borrow a direct plus loan , either by obtaining an endorser or by providing documentation of extenuating circumstances , must receive special plus loan credit counseling .

the counseling is also available on a voluntary basis to direct plus loan borrowers who have not received an adverse credit determination .

this counseling includes information similar to what is currently provided in plus loan entrance counseling .

the terms and conditions of federal student loans made through the direct loan program are specified in a promissory note , which is a contract that establishes the borrower's obligation to repay the loan .

a master promissory note ( mpn ) is a type of promissory note under which loans may be made to a borrower for a single academic year or for multiple academic years .

one type of mpn is used for making direct subsidized loans and direct unsubsidized loans and another type of mpn is used for making direct plus loans .

a different type of promissory note is used for making direct consolidation loans .

the mpn must be read and signed by a student or parent borrower before loan funds may be disbursed .

the ihe a student attends may choose to use a mpn with either a single - year or a multiyear feature .

ihes that use a single - year mpn may only make loans under the mpn for one academic year .

ihes that use the multiyear feature may make one or more loans under the same mpn for up to 10 academic years .

ihes that use a multiyear mpn must confirm a borrower's acceptance of a new loan for each subsequent year by either obtaining a borrower's written confirmation of acceptance ( affirmative confirmation ) or by not receiving a borrower's notification that he or she is specifically declining the loan in whole or in part ( passive confirmation ) .

under current regulations , ihes are encouraged , but not required , to obtain affirmative confirmation from the student that he or she accepts the loan before disbursing loan funds .

attached to the mpn is a plain language disclosure ( pld ) form that explains loan terms and conditions and the borrower's rights and responsibilities in simplified terms .

the pld is provided to borrowers prior to each disbursement of a loan made through the direct loan program , regardless of whether an ihe uses a single - year or multiyear mpn .

prior to a student borrower ceasing to be enrolled on at least a half - time basis , the institution a borrower attends must provide him or her with exit counseling .

it may be provided through an in - person counseling session , an audiovisual presentation , or an online interactive medium .

irrespective of the means through which exit counseling is provided , the institution must ensure that an individual who has expertise in federal student aid is available shortly after the session to respond to any questions a borrower might have .

exit counseling is designed to provide the borrower with comprehensive information on both the terms and conditions of the loan and the borrower's rights and responsibilities with regard to the obligation to repay the loan .

exit counseling must satisfy the following requirements: inform the borrower of the average anticipated monthly payment amount based on either the individual's actual student loan debt or the average cumulative amount borrowed by other students at the same school ; provide a review of the repayment plan options available to the borrower , along with a description of the various features of each plan and sample information showing average anticipated monthly payment amounts and differences in interest and total payments under each plan ; explain options to prepay a loan , to repay according to a shorter schedule , and to change repayment plans ; provide information on loan consolidation and how it affects the length of repayment and total interest paid ; how it affects borrower benefits , such as grace periods , loan forgiveness , loan cancellation , and deferment ; and options to prepay a loan or change repayment plans ; explain how to contact the borrower's loan servicer ; explain the master promissory note ; emphasize to the borrower the seriousness and importance of the obligation to repay the loan ; emphasize that the borrower is required to repay the loan in full , irrespective of whether he or she completes the program of study on time or at all , is unable to obtain employment , or is dissatisfied with the program ; describe the likely consequences of default , which include adverse credit reports , the collection of delinquent debt , and litigation ; provide a general description of the terms and conditions under which a borrower may receive full or partial discharge or forgiveness of principal and interest , may defer repayment of principal or interest , or may be granted forbearance ; and descriptions of federal student assistance programs and other information and ed publications as required by hea section 485 ( d ) ; review information on the availability of the fsa ombudsman group ; provide information about , and how the borrower can access , the nslds ; explain to post - july 1 , 2013 , first - time borrowers the direct subsidized loan limitations for post - july 1 , 2013 , first - time borrowers provision for direct subsidized loans and its implications ; provide a general description of tax benefits that may be available to borrowers ; and require the borrower to provide current and expected future contact information , next of kin , and ( if known ) expected employer .

the loan counseling and disclosures described above are designed to ensure that borrowers are provided with information about the terms and conditions of their loans , as required by law .

appendix a presents a list of additional resources that may be accessed by policymakers and others who may be interested in obtaining more detailed information about borrowers' rights , responsibilities , and obligations with regard to direct loan program loans .

appendix a. directory of resources directory of resources appendix b. glossary of terms appendix c. historical tables on selected loan terms and condition .

