the long - term objective of the world trade organization's ( wto's ) agreement on agriculture ( aoa ) is to establish a fair and market - oriented agricultural trading system .

the principal approach for achieving this goal is , first , to achieve specific binding commitments by all wto members in each of the three pillars of agricultural trade policy reform—market access , domestic support , and export subsidies—and second , to provide for substantial progressive reductions in domestic agricultural support and border protection from foreign products .

as a signatory member of the wto agreements , the united states has committed to abide by wto rules and disciplines , including those that govern domestic farm policy as spelled out in the aoa .

since the wto was established on january 1 , 1995 , the united states has generally met its wto commitments , including spending limits on market - distorting types of farm program outlays .

farm support programs can violate wto commitments in two principal ways: first , by exceeding spending limits on certain market - distorting programs , or second , by generating market distortions that spill over into the international marketplace and cause significant adverse effects for other market participants .

in general , u.s. farm support outlays should be evaluated against both of these criteria for a potential violation of wto commitments .

however , this report focuses on the first potential pathway for a violation: excessive spending .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) implements four general types of farm programs that provide payments ( classified as ams ) directly to individual producers: traditional farm p rograms authorized under title i of the 2018 farm bill ( p.l .

115-334 ) .

these include the market assistance loan ( mal ) , agricultural risk coverage ( arc ) , price loss coverage ( plc ) , dairy margin coverage ( dmc ) , and sugar programs .

payments under these programs during crop years 2014-2018 were authorized by the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) .

these programs were modified by the 2018 farm bill and include payments made for crop years 2019-2023 .

because of the way their payments are triggered , outlays under the mal , dmc , and sugar programs are notified as product - specific ams , whereas arc and plc payments are notified as non - product - specific ams .

permanent disaster assistance programs include the livestock forage disaster program ( lfp ) , livestock indemnity program ( lip ) , tree assistance program ( tap ) , and emergency assistance for livestock , honeybees , and farm - raised fish program ( elap ) .

payments under all of these permanent disaster assistance programs are coupled to producer choices and notified as product - specific ams .

the federal crop insurance program provides premium subsidies to producers .

premium subsidies are statutorily defined as a percentage of a policy's total premium , and premiums vary with insured units , coverage levels , and crop values .

since 2012 , usda has notified crop insurance premium subsidies to the wto as product - specific ams , since they are coupled to producer crop choices .

a d hoc programs may be authorized by the secretary of agriculture , outside of congress , using authority under the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) charter act to make payments in support of u.s. agriculture .

two such programs are the trade assistance programs of 2018 and 2019 .

usda has not yet notified any trade assistance payments to the wto , nor has usda announced the wto classification it intends to use for such payments .

payments under u.s. conservation programs are generally deemed non - market - distorting and are notified as green box , where they are not subject to any spending limit .

the traditional revenue support programs , as well as the disaster assistance and ad hoc payment programs , are implemented by usda's farm service agency ( fsa ) using mandatory ccc funding .

the federal crop insurance program is implemented by usda's risk management agency ( rma ) using mandatory funding from the federal crop insurance corporation .

the united states has notified its farm program support outlays through the crop year 2016 .

under a normal timeline , usda would notify spending for the crop year 2017 in the fall of 2019 .

notification of domestic support for crop year 2018 would not be expected before 2020 .

similarly , notification of domestic support outlays for crop year 2019 is not expected before 2021 .

u.s. compliance with wto spending limits for 2018 and 2019 cannot be definitively known until notifications for those crop years have been released .

as a result , the delay in notification may inhibit or deter another wto member from bringing a case , assuming that mfp payments are not extended beyond 2019 .

this section analyzes available data on u.s. farm program payments for crop years 2017 , 2018 , and 2019 to evaluate the potential for the united states to remain in compliance with its amber box spending limit of $19.1 billion , particularly with the addition of large mfp payments in 2018 and 2019 .

there are several questions that will largely determine whether the united states remains in compliance with its amber box spending limit .

1 .

how will usda classify the mfp payments for 2018 and 2019 in its notifications to the wto ? .

2 .

how will market conditions and commodity prices evolve in 2019 with respect to final crop values and product - specific de minimis exemptions ? .

3 .

what will be the final value of total u.s. farm output in 2019 for evaluating the 5% non - product - specific de minimis exemption threshold against total non - product - specific ams outlays ? .

4 .

how will market conditions affect decoupled arc and plc payments and total non - product - specific outlays in 2019 ? .

5 .

will the u.s. - china trade dispute continue into 2020 , and if so , will a third year of trade assistance be in the offing ? .

in response to the first question , the 2018 mfp payments appear to be coupled , product - specific ams , whereas 2019 mfp payments appear to be non - product - specific ams .

thus , different de minimis exemptions will be important for these two programs when evaluating compliance in 2018 and 2019 .

according to the scenarios developed in this analysis , including a projected set of market conditions , the united states may potentially exceed its cumulative amber box spending limit of $19.1 billion in 2019 .

excessive amber box payments in 2019 could result from the addition of large mfp payments to the traditional decoupled revenue support programs arc and plc .

however , this analysis found that u.s. compliance with wto amber box spending limits was very sensitive to a change in market conditions and market valuations .

noncompliance hinges on many key market factors that are currently unknown but would have to occur in such a manner as to broadly depress commodity prices through the 2019 marketing year ( which extends through august 31 , 2020 , for corn and soybeans ) .

another crucial uncertainty is how the u.s. - china trade dispute—with its deleterious effects on u.s. agricultural markets—will evolve .

resolution of the u.s. - china trade dispute and an improved demand outlook could lead to higher commodity prices and output values while lowering payments under countercyclical farm programs such as mal , plc , and arc .

such a turn of events could help facilitate u.s. compliance with its wto spending limits .

appendix a. wto domestic support commitments wto member nations have agreed to limit spending on their market - distorting farm policies .

with respect to farm program outlays , the aoa spells out the rules for countries to determine whether their policies are potentially trade - distorting , how to calculate the costs of any distortion , and how to report those costs to the wto in a public and transparent manner .

aggregate measure of support ( ams ) domestic support is measured in monetary terms and expressed as the ams .

domestic support includes both direct and indirect support in favor of agricultural producers—in other words , it includes any government measure that benefits producers , including revenue support , input subsidies , and marketing - cost reductions .

domestic subsidies include both budgetary outlays and revenue forgone by governments .

such support is measured at both the national and subnational level ( i.e. , state , county , or other local level ) .

producer - paid fees are deducted from the ams .

domestic support should be calculated as closely as practical to the point of first sale of the basic agricultural product concerned—preferably at the farm gate .

support measures directed at processors should be included to the extent that such measures benefit producers .

ams encompasses two types of support provided as a benefit to agricultural producers: product - specific support ( that is , benefits linked to a specific commodity ) and non - product - specific support ( a general benefit not linked to a specific commodity ) .

certain ams outlays may be exempt from counting against any wto spending limit if they comply with criteria defined under either the green or blue box or if their sum is sufficiently small as to be deemed benign under the de minimis exemption .

 ( exemptions are described below. ) .

amber box outlays non - exempt ams outlays are referred to ( or classified ) as "amber box" spending and subject to a strict spending limit .

under wto commitments , cumulative u.s. amber box outlays are limited to $19.1 billion annually .

goal of ams exemptions by leaving no constraint on green or blue box compliant spending , while imposing limits on amber box spending , the wto's aoa classification structure encourages countries to design their domestic farm support programs to be more green and blue box compliant and less market - distorting .

green box exemptions green box programs are minimally or non - trade - distorting and are not included in the ams—thus they are not subject to any spending limits .

examples of green box programs include domestic food assistance programs , conservation and environmental programs , and general services such as research , inspection services , and extension activities .

in its most recent notification to the wto , the united states declared $119.5 billion in outlays for programs that met green box criteria during the 2016 crop year .

a key to evaluating whether a program's annual outlays qualify for the green box exemption is to assess how payments are triggered .

if payments are fully decoupled from producer behavior and market conditions and instead are based on some other independent criteria such as historical planted acres , then they could potentially be excluded from the ams under the green box criteria .

for example , direct payment outlays under the 1996 , 2002 , and 2008 farm bills were fully decoupled and thus exempted from the ams under green box criteria .

if , instead , payments are coupled to current producer behavior ( such as planted acres or harvested output ) or to market conditions ( such as price movements or trade levels ) , then they likely are not eligible for exemption from the ams under green box criteria .

blue box exemptions blue box programs are described as market - distorting but production - limiting .

blue box programs generally have a supply - control feature that partially offsets their trade - distorting effects .

for example , payments may be based on either a fixed area or yield or a fixed number of livestock or are made on less than 85% of base production .

as such , blue box programs are not included in the ams—thus they are not subject to any spending limits .

the united states has not notified any program spending under the blue box criteria since 1995 .

de minimis exemptions from ams programs outlays that fail to meet green or blue box criteria are part of the ams .

however , there are two additional exemptions that may prevent ams outlays for certain programs from counting against the amber box spending limit .

if ams spending is sufficiently small ( as described below ) , then it is deemed to be benign and excluded from counting under the ams's amber box .

there are two types of de minimis exemptions: product - specific and non - product - specific .

product - specific outlays include all coupled outlays that are linked to the current planting or production of a specific commodity .

under the product - specific de minimis exemption , if total product - specific program outlays for a commodity are less than 5% of the value of production for that commodity , then such spending may be excluded from the country's ams .

product - specific outlays are evaluated on a commodity - by - commodity basis against the 5% de minimis threshold .

n on - product - specific outlays include all ams outlays that are decoupled from the specific commodities that are actually produced but are coupled to a non - commodity - specific measure such as market conditions or national average prices .

all non - commodity - specific ams outlays are aggregated and evaluated against 5% of the total value of u.s. agricultural output .

coupled , product - specific payments if the payment is based on the planted or harvested area or output of a specific commodity during the crop year , then program payments would be coupled directly to farmer behavior .

such payments would likely be notified as product - specific ams spending and would count against the amber box ceiling .

however , product - specific payments could potentially be excluded from counting against the ams total by the product - specific de minimis exclusion—if they are less than 5% of the value of that specific commodity's output during that crop year .

coupled or partially coupled , non - product - specific payments if the payment is based on a formula that pools the planted or harvested area or output of several commodities—for example , as a single county - level payment—but where the farmer need only have produced at least one of the pooled commodities to be eligible for the full county payment , then the payment could potentially be notified as coupled , non - product - specific ams .

both arc and plc outlays on base acres are notified this way .

however , arc and plc payments made on generic base under the 2014 farm bill were notified as commodity - specific payments , since the farmer had to plant the specific crop to receive a payment .

if the payment is based on a historical measure such as planted or harvested acres or output for some past period of time , but where some production of an eligible crop must occur during the current crop year to be eligible for a payment , then the payments would likely be notified as partially decoupled , non - product - specific payments .

annual notification of compliance to provide for monitoring and compliance of wto policy commitments , each wto member is expected to submit annual notification reports of domestic support program spending within the context of the agreed - to wto commitments .

however , there is no enforcement mechanism or penalty for late notifications .

the annual period used by each wto member—calendar , fiscal , or marketing year—is specified in the "schedule of concessions" ( also referred to as the country schedule ) .

the wto's committee on agriculture reviews the annual notifications .

however , the notification reports are public documents—they are posted online by the wto where they are available for review ( and possible challenge ) by any other member or third party .

appendix b. u.s .

domestic support notifications the most recent u.s. notification to the wto of domestic support outlays ( made on october 31 , 2018 ) is for the 2016 crop year .

the majority of u.s. domestic agricultural program outlays have been categorized as indirect support that adhere to green box criteria ( $119.5 billion ) and thus have not been subject to any payment limit .

in addition , the united states has traditionally relied on the de minimis exemptions to exempt substantial program outlays from counting against the amber box spending limit .

in 2016 , the united states notified $16 billion in ams outlays ( prior to applying eligible exemptions ) , including $8.6 billion of product - specific spending and $7.4 billion of non - product - specific spending .

however , the united states notified $12.2 billion in de minimis exemptions , thus reducing the original $16 billion ams to just $3.8 billion in amber box spending to count against the $19.1 billion spending limit .

with respect to the non - product - specific de minimis exemption , the total value of u.s. national agricultural output in 2016 was $355.5 billion .

as a result , the 5% de minimis non - product - specific threshold was $17.8 billion .

since non - product - specific outlays of $7.4 billion were well below this threshold , they were exempted in total from counting against the amber box spending limit .

in addition , the united states notified $4.8 billion in product - specific de minimis exemptions .

an example of a product - specific de minimis exemption is corn .

in 2016 , u.s. corn production was valued at $51.3 billion .

thus the product - specific 5% value threshold for corn was $2.565 billion .

the united states notified $2.345 billion in ams for corn in 2016 , but since it was less than the 5% threshold , the entire amount was exempted from counting against the amber box limit .

similarly , product - specific exemptions for other crops made up the difference for the $4.8 billion in total product - specific exemptions .

the de minimis exemption aids u.s .

compliance since 1995 , the united states has stayed within its amber box spending limits ( figure b - 1 ) , but this compliance has hinged on use of the de minimis exemptions in a number of years ( eg , 1999-2001 and 2005 ) to exclude substantial ams spending from counting against the amber box limit .

since the 2002 farm bill ( p.l .

107-171 ) , the united states has designed several of its major farm revenue support programs to meet non - product - specific criteria .

since the non - product - specific de minimis exemption threshold is measured as a share of the total value of u.s. agricultural output , it is associated with a very large exemption threshold .

from 2010 to 2016 , the value of total u.s. agricultural output has averaged $376.8 billion , which implies an average non - product - specific 5% de minimis threshold of $18.8 billion .

the manner by which the united states has notified its amber box outlays—that is , non - product - specific versus product - specific—has changed over the years ( particularly for federal crop insurance subsidies ) in such a way as to facilitate compliance with the amber box spending limit .

generally , non - product - specific de minimis exemptions are much larger than product - specific de minimis exemptions ( figure b - 1 ) .

since 201 0 , non - product - specific de minimis exclusions have averaged $4.8 billion annually , compared with average product - specific exclusions of $3.8 billion .

the largest non - product - specific exemption was reached in 2011 , when $7.5 billion in net crop insurance indemnities was exempted .

in 2011 , u.s. agricultural output value was $380.8 billion , which , in turn , yielded a non - product - specific 5% value threshold of $19.0 billion .

starting in 2012 , usda switched to notifying crop insurance premium subsidies for each individual insured commodity as product - specific .

since then , crop insurance premiums are evaluated at the individual crop level and eligible to be exempted under the product - specific de minimis exemption if they do not exceed 5% of the value of that commodity's output when combined with other ps outlays for that commodity .

since 2012 , over $5 billion in product - specific crop insurance premium subsidies have been exempted each year .

as a result of this crop insurance notification switch , coupled with relatively high farm prices during 2012 and 2013 that reduced payments on the non - product - specific revenue support programs , product - specific de minimis exemptions surpassed non - product - specific exemptions during those two years .

then , starting in 2014 , under program changes authorized by the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) , the value of non - product - specific exemptions again surpassed product - specific exemptions .

this was driven by large non - product - specific outlays under the new , decoupled revenue support programs arc ( which incorporated high farm prices into its payment formula ) and plc .

annual arc and plc outlays averaged a combined $6.7 billion during 2014-2016 , including $4.7 billion for arc and $2.0 billion for plc .

