the social security program , or old - age , survivors , and disability insurance ( oasdi ) , pays monthly benefits to retired or disabled workers and their families and to the family members of deceased workers .

the oasdi program's ability to meet scheduled benefit payments rests upon sufficient revenues from payroll taxes , taxation on social security benefits , and interest earned on trust funds assets .

the year 2020 marks the first since 1982 in which the oasdi program's total cost is projected to be greater than its total income .

because of annual cash surpluses amassed in the old - age and survivors insurance trust fund and the disability insurance trust fund in the period spanning 1983 through 2019 , the oasdi program is able to meet its benefit obligations by drawing on these assets to supplement annual revenues .

the board of trustees of the federal old - age and survivors insurance and federal disability insurance trust funds estimates that drawing down the trust funds can augment oasdi program revenues and allow it to pay full benefits until 2035 .

should the trust funds be depleted in 2035 , as the trustees project , the oasdi program would have tax revenues sufficient to pay about 80% of scheduled benefits .

the oasdi program , and its financing , are affected by economic , program - specific , and demographic factors .

economic factors include issues such as productivity , price inflation , unemployment , and gross domestic product ; program - specific factors include issues such as covered and taxable earnings , revenues from taxation of benefits , and average benefits indexed to growth in average national wages .

demographic factors include fertility , mortality , and immigration .

this report focuses on two demographic factors—specifically fertility and mortality—and how they interact to affect the program's ability to pay full scheduled benefits .

the trustees' 2019 annual report states the following: projected oasdi cost increases more rapidly than projected non - interest income through 2040 primarily because the retirement of the baby - boom generation will increase the number of beneficiaries much faster than the number of covered workers increases , as subsequent lower - birth - rate generations replace the baby - boom generation at working ages .

from 2040 to 2051 , the cost rate ( the ratio of program cost to taxable payroll ) generally declines because the aging baby - boom generation is gradually replaced at retirement ages by subsequent lower - birth - rate generations .

thereafter , increases in life expectancy cause oasdi cost to increase generally relative to non - interest income , but more slowly than between 2010 and 2040 .

a remaining demographic factor—immigration—is not examined in this report because the board of trustees analysis shows that combined changes in fertility and mortality are the leading causes of financial pressure on the oasdi program .

the social security population , both covered workers paying into the system and those collecting benefits , is experiencing shifts in age distribution .

decreased fertility rates for generations after the baby boomers ( those born between 1946 and 1964 ) are contributing to an overall older population .

in addition , increases in average life expectancy are also contributing to the aging of the u.s. population .

the combination of decreasing fertility and longer life expectancies results in higher costs , as presented in figure 1 , which shows oasdi costs increasing as a percentage of taxable payroll .

as costs remain above income , the trust funds' assets are used to fulfill scheduled monthly benefit payments .

the board of trustees projects this process will continue into 2034 , after which the trust funds' assets are exhausted and reserves no longer exist .

the oasdi program can pay scheduled benefits while operating with a cash flow deficit ( i.e. , costs exceed revenues ) during periods of positive trust funds balances because assets held in the trust funds can be redeemed to augment continuing income .

however , this process cannot last indefinitely .

as shown in figure 1 , a cash flow deficit is projected to persist throughout the 75-year projection period ( 2019-2093 ) .

this report presents data showing that the projected deficits are the result of rising costs associated with demographic changes , outlines how these demographic changes will impact the oasdi program's ability to fulfill benefit payments , and discusses some options policymakers have to address the program's financial shortfall .

driven by reduced fertility rates and increasing longevity , the social security population is aging .

in other words , the percentage of the social security population at the older end of the age distribution is increasing .

this point is underscored by considering three broad age subgroups: ( 1 ) those aged 65 and older ; ( 2 ) those aged 20 through 64 ; and ( 3 ) those under age 20 .

analyzing the population using these broad age groups highlights the concentration of those likely to be retired or close to retirement ( i.e. , aged 65 and older ) , those in ages commonly seen as prime working years ( i.e. , aged 20 through 64 ) , and those generally considered not yet in the paid workforce ( i.e. , under age 20 ) .

table 1 shows population growth rates for the 70-year period from 1945 to 2015 , the first and the most recent years , respectively , for which the trustees publish historical data .

it also shows the trustees' projections for growth in the population , and its subgroups , for the ensuing 70-year period of 2015 through 2085 .

from 1945 through 2015 , the social security population more than doubled .

table 1 shows that , although the population grew by 120% over this period , growth in major age groups varied .

on a percentage - change basis , the largest growth was observed in the 65 and over age group .

from 1945 through 2015 , this age group grew by 338% , indicating that the number of people in the united states aged 65 and older more than tripled .

this demographic trend underscores the degree to which the united states is growing older ; in 1945 , those 65 and older accounted for 7% of the total population , whereas in 2015 , those 65 and older accounted for about 15% of the total population .

this trend has implications for the social security program's ability to meet all of its projected scheduled benefits as the younger and slower - growing age groups of working age ( i.e. , those aged 20 to 64 ) are paying into the system while the older and faster - growing age groups ( i.e. , those aged 65 and older ) are likely to be collecting benefits .

the right - hand column in table 1 shows that the trustees projected future years will continue to see growth in the 65 and older age group outpace that of the overall population .

by 2085 , the 65 and older age group is projected to make up about 22% of the total population .

as this trend persists , which it is projected to do under the trustees' intermediate assumptions , it will cause oasdi program costs to rise more rapidly than revenues , thereby degrading the program's ability to pay full scheduled benefits .

table 1 also shows how the working - age population is projected to be a smaller percentage of the overall population .

this is an essential consequence of an aging population .

that is , as the percentage of those aged 65 and older is increasing , the percentages in the other age group ( i.e. , working ages between 20 and 64 ) are decreasing .

this point is reinforced by examining dependency ratios .

the changes in the social security population's composition can also be expressed as dependency ratios .

dependency ratios indicate a dependent population's burden on the working - age population .

table 1 shows that in 1945 , about 59% of the total population was working age , between the ages of 20 and 64 .

the next - largest age group was the under 20 age group , which accounted for about 33% of the population .

in 1945 , the united states could be described as youth dependent because the working - age population was supporting the next - larger , under 20 population .

the same could be said for the united states in 2015 , when the 20 to 64 age group was about 59% of the total population and those in the under 20 age group accounted for 26% of the total population ( table 1 ) .

that is , from 1945 to 2015 , the united states became less youth dependent .

over this time period , the percentage of the total population aged 65 and older increased from 7% to 15% , indicating that the united states was becoming more aged dependent .

the united states is projected to age from a youth - dependent population to an aged - dependent population , where the working - age population will be supporting the next - larger , 65 and older population .

the transition to a more aged - dependent population is important for social security purposes because the program's ability to continue to pay beneficiaries relies on taxes paid by current workers .

as discussed , the dependency ratios have changed over time and are projected to continue to change .

figure 2 presents a more detailed look at the dependency ratios and shows how they have changed in a historical context and how they are projected to change throughout the trustees' 75-year projection period .

the aging of the social security population is partially driven by a decline in the total fertility rate after 1965 .

the total fertility rate ( tfr ) is the average number of children that would be born to a woman throughout her lifetime if she were to experience , at each age of her life , the birth rate observed in that year .

in 1920 , the tfr was 3.26 children per woman .

by 1940 , the tfr was comparatively lower , at a rate of 2.23 children per woman ; this was the lowest tfr that had been observed to date .

this decrease was reversed within the decade when a period of high fertility created the baby boom generation , those born between 1946 and 1964 ( appendix a ) .

this period of high fertility is shown in figure 3 and is marked on either side by periods of low fertility .

in fact , fertility rates after 1964 ( i.e. , immediately following the baby boomers ) decreased to the lowest levels recorded in the united states .

much of what makes the baby boom generation so impactful is that the cohort was both preceded and followed by low fertility rates .

figure 3 shows the historical fertility rates as measured by the national center for health statistics ( centers for disease control and prevention ) and the trustees , as well as the trustees' projected fertility rates under their intermediate assumptions .

the u.s. tfr reached a minimum of 1.77 children per woman in 1975 .

the tfr has remained at relatively low levels in the years that followed , a trend that is projected to continue .

the board of trustees projects that the tfr will remain close to 2.0 children per woman throughout the 75-year projection period .

on average , the social security population is living longer .

this demographic trend is observed in two complementary measures: a decreasing mortality rate and increasing life expectancy .

more individuals within the social security population are surviving to retirement age , and once in retirement they are collecting benefits for a greater number of years than previous generations of beneficiaries .

for instance , in 1945 , one year before the baby boom began , a male at birth could expect to live on average for 62.9 years .

in 1965 , one year after the baby boom ended , a male at birth could expect to live 66.8 years on average , an increase of almost 4 years .

during that same period , the average life expectancy for a female at birth increased by 5.4 years .

population aging has consequences for the social security system's financial sustainability .

as a result of lower fertility rates and increased life expectancy , in 2035 the social security system is projected to experience aged dependency ratios ( figure 2 ) not observed during the program's history .

the aged dependency ratios are projected to trend higher as the baby boom generation retires .

in 2018 , approximately 10,200 baby boomers per day attained age 65 ; this figure is expected to reach 11,000 per day by 2029 .

this demographic trend suggests that the ratio of persons collecting benefits—or soon to be—to those paying into social security will increase .

the more this ratio increases , the more strain is placed on the oasdi program's financial position .

policy measures seeking to improve trust funds solvency can generally be categorized as reducing benefits or increasing revenues .

for illustrative purposes , the trustees estimate changes to the current payroll tax rates and benefit schedule that would maintain trust funds solvency throughout the 75-year projection period .

to give a sense of the funding shortfall's magnitude , if measures to maintain trust funds solvency were enacted in 2019 , they would require a permanent increase in the payroll tax from its current rate of 12.40% to 15.10% , or a reduction in scheduled benefits of 17% for all current and future beneficiaries , or a combination of both .

the increasing costs associated with the oasdi program indicate that more substantial measures are necessary as time elapses .

if similar policies were enacted in 2035 , the projected year of trust funds depletion , the permanent payroll tax rate needed to restore solvency would increase to 16.05% .

similarly , the necessary permanent reduction of scheduled benefits would increase to 23% .

lawmakers have a wide range of policy options at their disposal to address the projected funding shortfall .

this section highlights several policy options that address the funding shortfall's demographic drivers .

on average , increases in life expectancy have allowed current social security beneficiaries to collect benefits for a longer period of time .

however , the increase in life expectancies , when paired with low fertility rates , will negatively impact the program's long - range financial position and weaken its ability to pay all scheduled benefits as projected under current law .

these demographic trends—increasing life expectancy and decreasing fertility—have resulted in an aging social security population .

as the baby boom generation retires , the ratio of beneficiaries relative to people in covered employment will grow .

as this ratio rises , social security costs rise as well .

the rising ratio of beneficiaries to covered workers can exist so long as trust funds assets remain to supplement the program's annual tax revenues .

rising costs are projected to deplete trust funds reserves in 2035 .

after such time , social security program revenues will no longer be sufficient to pay full benefits .

under current law , the social security program's sustainability , and its ability to pay full benefits , is largely a demographic issue .

policy measures aimed at addressing the changing demographics , specifically those increasing retirement ages to reflect increasing life expectancy , improve the program's solvency and long - range financial status .

such policy measures are estimated to reduce program costs .

however , the reduction in benefits implied by such measures would not be evenly distributed across all segments of the population .

in addition , increasing eligibility ages ( i.e. , reducing costs ) alone is not projected to restore solvency throughout the projection period .

given the magnitude of the oasdi program's projected long - range funding shortfall , policy measures that include both a revenue - increasing and a benefit - reducing mechanism to restore solvency increase the likelihood that full benefits will be maintained .

appendix a .

the baby boomers in the united states the first baby boomers were born in 1946 ; the last baby boomers were born in 1964 .

the period of 1946-1964 is marked on either side by low birth rates .

as a result of the low fertility rates that followed the baby boomers , they are being replaced in the workforce by cohorts resulting from lower fertility rates .

the baby boom's births spanned nearly two decades , denoted with i in figure a - 1 .

the older baby boomers started to enter the workforce as the youngest were just being born ( ii in the figure below ) .

time period iii denotes the stage at which all baby boomers are at least 20 years of age , an age commonly associated with working age .

in period iv , baby boomers are attaining full retirement age and beginning to exit the workforce .

in period v , all baby boomers are eligible for retirement with full benefits .

in 1945 , a year before the first baby boomer was born , 7.3% of the social security population was aged 65 or older .

in 2035 , after all baby boomers are eligible for social security , 20.5% of the population will be aged 65 or older .

the demographic forces that created an aging population evolved over decades .

this is important to policymakers because demographic trends in the social security population are contributing to rising costs .

these demographic trends result in an imbalance between costs and revenues and are projected to continue beyond the baby - boom generation .

this imbalance can also be thought of as a persistent imbalance between those in covered employment and those collecting benefits .

appendix b .

birth rates , by age group appendix c. causes of deat .

