this report provides background on department of defense's legacy electronic health record ( ehr ) systems , reviews previous ehr modernization efforts , and describes dod's process to acquire and implement a new ehr system known as mhs genesis .

dod's new ehr system presents several potential issu es for congress , including how to conduct oversight on a program that spans three federal departments , how to ensure an adequate governance structure for the program , and how to monitor the program's cost and effectiveness .

although this report mentions ehr modernization efforts by the department of veterans affairs ( va ) and u.s. coast guard ( uscg ) , as well as dod's joint operational medical information system ( jomis ) ; it does not provide an in - depth discussion of these programs .

appendix a provides a list of acronyms used throughout this report .

for decades , the department of defense ( dod ) has developed , procured , and sustained a variety of electronic systems to document the health care services delivered to servicemembers , military retirees , and their family members .

dod currently operates a number of legacy ehr systems and is , at the direction of congress , in the process of implementing a new ehr called mhs genesis .

dod's new ehr system is to be integrated with other ehr systems utilized by the va , uscg , and civilian health care providers .

dod operates a military health system ( mhs ) that delivers to military personnel , retirees , and their families certain health entitlements under chapter 55 of title 10 , u.s. code .

the mhs administers the tricare program , which offers health care services worldwide to over 9.5 million beneficiaries in dod hospitals and clinics – also known as military treatment facilities ( mtfs ) – or through participating civilian health care providers ( i.e. , tricare providers ) .

there are currently 723 mtfs located in the united states and overseas that provide a range of clinical services depending on size , mission , and level of capabilities .

health care services delivered in mtfs or by tricare providers are documented in at least one of the following components of the dod health record: service treatment record ( str ) – documentation of all medical and dental care received by a servicemember through their military career ; nonservice treatment record ( nstr ) – documentation of all medical and dental care received by a nonservicemember beneficiary ( i.e. , military retiree , family member ) ; and occupational health civilian employee treatment record ( ohtr ) – documentation of all occupational - related care provided by dod ( typically to dod civilian or contractor employees ) .

dod maintains numerous legacy ehr systems that allow health care providers to input , share , and archive all documentation required to be in a beneficiary's health record .

mtf or tricare providers can document medical and dental care directly in a dod legacy ehr system , or can scan and upload paper records .

servicemembers and their families frequently change duty stations ; the dod health record can be accessed at most mtfs .

however , sometimes beneficiaries are relocated to an area that lacks access to dod's legacy ehr systems .

in such cases , beneficiaries are required to maintain a paper copy of the health record .

after operation desert storm concluded in 1991 , concern about deficient interoperability between dod and va health record systems began to grow .

a number of committees and commissions issued reports highlighting the need for dod and va to standardize record - keeping ; to improve health data sharing ; and to develop a comprehensive , life - long medical record for servicemembers .

table 1 summarizes their recommendations .

between 1998 and 2009 , dod and va established various methods to exchange limited patient health information across both departments , including: federal health information exchange ( fhie ) .

completed in 2004 , the fhie enables monthly data transmissions from dod to va comprised of patient demographics , laboratory / radiology results , outpatient pharmacy , allergies , and hospital admission data .

bidirectional health information exchange ( bhie ) .

completed in 2004 , the bhie enables real - time , two - way data transmissions ( dod - to - va and va - to - dod ) comprised of fhie information , additional patient history and assessments , theater clinical data , and additional inpatient data .

clinical data repository / health data repository ( chdr ) .

completed in 2006 , chdr enables real - time , two - way data transmissions comprised of pharmacy and drug allergy information and a capability to add information to the patient's permanent medical record in the other department's repository .

virtual lifetime electronic record ( vler ) .

initiated in 2009 , the vler enables real - time , health information exchange between dod and va , as well as certain civilian health care providers .

while these information exchange systems enable dod and va health care providers to view or modify limited health care data , both departments continue to operate separate , disparate health record systems .

given congress's new mandate for both departments to implement an interoperable ehr , dod conducted a 30-day review of the iehr program in order to "determine the best approach" to meeting the law .

while conducting its review , dod identified two ehr modernization options that would support healthcare data interoperability with the va: ( 1 ) adopt vista and ( 2 ) acquire a commercial ehr system .

since mid - 1980s , congress has kept abreast of dod's efforts to implement , sustain , or modernize its ehr systems .

previous congressional oversight activities have primarily focused on ( 1 ) understanding dod's ehr modernization strategy and how the strategy would integrate interoperability and improve coordination with the va , or ( 2 ) describing certain barriers that delayed previous modernization initiatives .

currently , 12 congressional committees may exercise oversight authority of the broader ehr modernization efforts taking place in dod , va and uscg .

the committees include: house appropriations committee .

house armed services committee .

house committee on oversight and reform .

house committee on transportation and infrastructure .

house veterans affairs committee .

senate appropriations committee .

senate armed services committee .

senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation .

senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

given the complexity , size , and timeline of dod's ehr modernization effort , as well as parallel efforts by the uscg and va , a coordinated oversight strategy may be necessary .

such a strategy could allow congress to conduct a wide range of oversight activities without creating redundancies for committee staff and executive branch officials and could facilitate information - sharing among congressional stakeholders .

since the initial deployment of mhs genesis , there have been no congressional oversight hearings held solely on dod's ehr modernization effort .

on june 20 , 2018 , the house committee on veterans' affairs established the subcommittee on technology modernization .

the role of the new subcommittee is to "focus on conducting oversight of the ehr modernization program and other major technology projects at the department of veterans affairs. .

both dod and va officials testified before the subcommittee at its june 2019 oversight hearing .

in september 2018 , then - secdef james mattis and current secva robert wilkie signed a joint statement ( see appendix g ) that outlined each department's commitment to "implementing a single , seamlessly integrated [ehr] that will accurately and efficiently share health data … and ensure health record interoperability with our networks of supporting community healthcare providers. .

on april 3 , 2019 , dod announced plans to re - charter the ipo into the "federal electronic health record modernization ( fehrm ) " program office .

the new office would serve as an interagency governance group that provides oversight on dod and va's ehr modernization efforts and would have the "authority to direct each department to execute joint decisions for technical , programmatic , and functional functions. .

dod stated that the fehrm director and deputy director will be appointed positions and will report to both the deputy secdef and deputy secva .

while congress directed the creation of the ipo in 2008 , neither dod nor va has indicated if additional authorities , funding , or changes to current law are required to sustain the fehrm program office .

congress may also examine the relationships between existing interagency governance groups ( eg , joint executive committee ) , peo dhms , va ehr modernization office , and the newly established fehrm program office .

because mhs genesis is being deployed across all mtfs and all uscg sites , as well as va sites transitioning to a cerner - based ehr system , observers have noted that this is the "largest ehr undertaking in the country. .

implementing a single ehr platform across three federal departments can produce certain economies of scale and standardization .

however , the scale of these efforts can also result in future acquisition challenges particularly with conducting a full and open competition to procuring new requirements , or with follow - on contracts to sustain each ehr system .

congress may seek to understand how dod and va exercised their statutory authorities , provided through the competition in contracting act of 1984 ( p.l .

98-369 ) , to procure their ehr systems , as well as the possible impact of limited competition in future procurement activities needed to sustain both mhs genesis and the va's new ehr system .

generally , all federal departments procuring property , goods , or services are required to employ an acquisition process that allows for full and open competition .

this process permits all potential vendors to "submit sealed bids or competitive proposals on the procurement. .

for mhs genesis , dod's initial acquisition process included full and open competition .

however , the process was not employed for subsequent requirements that were discovered after the initial award to lpdh .

these additional requirements included upgrading dod network infrastructure ; incorporating uscg - specific requirements and clinic sites ; and establishing common standards among dod , va , and uscg .

the estimated value of the additional requirements was over $1.2 billion .

dod exercised its statutory authority to award a sole source contract modification to lpdh , citing that contracting with any other vendor would potentially "create significant redundancies , inefficiencies , and other issues. .

dod's acquisition strategy anticipates "one or more competitive follow - on contracts to sustain the ehr solution , for which the government owns a perpetual license , at the conclusion of the performance of the basic contract. .

however , cerner declined dod's request to enter into negotiations regarding the rights of its intellectual property .

if dod does not retain certain intellectual property rights on mhs genesis , the department may be limited in what ehr vendors it can consider when it becomes necessary to solicit for an mhs genesis sustainment contract .

appendix a .

acronyms appendix b. mhs genesis functional capability requirements appendix c. stages of electronic medical record adoption and utilization appendix d. iot&e summary results appendix e. methodology for crs focus groups on mhs genesis background on july 8-13 , 2018 , analysts from the congressional research service ( crs ) participated in a congressional staff delegation visit to various dod facilities in the puget sound area of washington state .

dod facilities visited were madigan army medical center , naval hospital bremerton , and the puyallup community medical home .

the purpose of the visit was to: review milestones , achievements , and challenges associated with the implementation of mhs genesis ; and understand implementation and continuous improvement processes utilized at initial operational capability sites .

methodology at each site , crs conducted numerous focus groups comprised of various mtf staff members .

each focus group was comprised of 5–15 staff members selected by the mtf commander or his / her designee .

madigan army medical center focus group #1: patient administration division , managed care and scheduling , and patient satisfaction department representatives focus group #2: health care providers ( eg , physicians , dentists , psychologists , physicians assistants ) focus group #3: nurses naval hospital bremerton focus group #1: nurses focus group #2: health care providers ( eg , physicians , dentists , psychologists , physicians assistants ) focus group #3: enlisted personnel focus group #4: patient administration , referral management , and patient relations representatives puyallup community medical home focus group #1: health care providers , nurses , health care administrators , enlisted personnel prior to each site visit , crs provided each mtf with questions for discussion during each focus group .

crs documented the themes and responses to each of the following questions: what challenges have you experienced with implementing mhs genesis ? .

how have you locally mitigated these issues ? .

are the mitigation processes in place working ? .

have these challenges impacted force readiness , access to care , quality of care , cost of care , or patient experience ? .

appendix f. mhs genesis deployment schedule appendix g. dod and va ehr joint commitment statement background on july 8-13 , 2018 , analysts from the congressional research service ( crs ) participated in a congressional staff delegation visit to various dod facilities in the puget sound area of washington state .

dod facilities visited were madigan army medical center , naval hospital bremerton , and the puyallup community medical home .

the purpose of the visit was to: review milestones , achievements , and challenges associated with the implementation of mhs genesis ; and understand implementation and continuous improvement processes utilized at initial operational capability sites .

methodology at each site , crs conducted numerous focus groups comprised of various mtf staff members .

each focus group was comprised of 5–15 staff members selected by the mtf commander or his / her designee .

madigan army medical center focus group #1: patient administration division , managed care and scheduling , and patient satisfaction department representatives focus group #2: health care providers ( eg , physicians , dentists , psychologists , physicians assistants ) focus group #3: nurses naval hospital bremerton focus group #1: nurses focus group #2: health care providers ( eg , physicians , dentists , psychologists , physicians assistants ) focus group #3: enlisted personnel focus group #4: patient administration , referral management , and patient relations representatives puyallup community medical home focus group #1: health care providers , nurses , health care administrators , enlisted personnel prior to each site visit , crs provided each mtf with questions for discussion during each focus group .

crs documented the themes and responses to each of the following questions: what challenges have you experienced with implementing mhs genesis ? .

how have you locally mitigated these issues ? .

are the mitigation processes in place working ? .

have these challenges impacted force readiness , access to care , quality of care , cost of care , or patient experience ? .

