in 2019 , the united states stands atop the international natural gas world .

the united states is the largest producer of natural gas ( ng ) ( figure 11 ) , is the largest consumer of natural gas , has the most natural gas storage capacity , and has the biggest and most expansive pipeline network .

production from shale formations ( figure 7 ) has transformed the united states from a growing importer of natural gas to an increasing exporter ( figure 12 ) , with some of the lowest prices in the world ( figure 10 ) .

the united states is the 4 th largest exporter of natural gas ( figure 17 ) , but its capacity by pipeline and by ship is growing .

how the united states transformed its natural gas sector is a story of market competition , technological innovation , and other factors .

as natural gas has played a bigger role in the u.s. economy , congressional interest in it has grown , as measured by the number of bills introduced ( figure 19 ) .

in 1998 , the united states was the 2 nd largest national producer of natural gas behind russia ( figure 11 ) , and the largest consumer .

u.s. consumption outpaced production that year by more than 1,400 billion cubic feet ( bcf ) or 7% of consumption , and the united states was viewed as a growing importer of natural gas .

natural gas comprised 24% of the u.s. energy mix in 1998 , and that figure remained unchanged in 2008 .

canada supplied about 97% of u.s. imports in 1998 .

between 1998 and 2008 , the difference between u.s. production and consumption averaged 1,764 bcf annually .

in 1998 , u.s. natural gas consumption was mainly in the industrial sector , but by 2008 natural gas used to generate electricity equaled its use in the industrial sector .

during this same time period , average annual u.s. natural gas prices quadrupled , reaching a peak in june , 2008 .

from 1998 to 2008 , the united states added to its lng import capacity by expanding existing facilities and constructing new import terminals .

import capacity in 2008 was almost 4,800 bcf , with an additional 2,000 bcf added later .

there were also more than 20 additional import projects at various stages of development , most of which were never built because the market did not need additional import capacity as the united states moved toward being an exporter .

in the mid - 2000s , as lng import terminals were capturing headlines in the u.s. effort to meet growing demand , some small and mid - size production companies were trying to figure out how to produce the massive resources of natural gas that were trapped in shale formations .

multi - stage hydraulic fracturing and improved directional drilling capability were the keys to unlocking these resources .

during this time , there were wide swings in u.s. daily natural gas prices as market conditions changed , sometimes quickly .

nevertheless , prices trended upward until the loss of economic activity from the great recession decreased demand .

as prices rose , interest in developing shale gas grew .

shale gas started to come to market near the end of 2008 concurrent with the start of the great recession .

the increased supply of natural gas , together with reduced demand , caused prices globally to plummet ( figure 10 ) .

new production in the northeast , especially in pennsylvania , began to grow rapidly .

the percentage of u.s. natural gas production from shale also started to rise .

between 2008 and 2018 , u.s. production and consumption of natural gas rose , 51% and 28% , respectively , while domestic prices fell about 65% .

despite the fall in prices , u.s. production continued to increase almost every year between 2008 and 2018 .

the cost of producing shale gas fell as the industry innovated to remain competitive .

in 2011 , u.s. production started to outpace consumption and the interest in exporting u.s. natural gas took hold .

during this period , natural gas became more incorporated in the nation's energy mix , especially in the electrical sector .

as u.s. prices fell , the world took note .

in 2010 , cheniere energy became the first u.s. company to apply for a permit to export u.s. natural gas from the lower - 48 states from its sabine pass facility ( which was originally an import terminal ) , transporting it as lng .

liquefaction facilities like sabine pass liquefy natural gas—convert it to lng—and store it in liquid state so that it can be shipped globally in specialized tankers .

liquefaction of natural gas is achieved by cooling the gas to - 260" f. at this temperature , the natural gas becomes a liquid and occupies only 1 / 600 th of its gaseous volume making it economical to send by ship .

u.s. companies were looking to exports of natural gas for additional demand and a way to access higher world prices .

as the global economy improved , natural gas prices outside the united states began to climb , which increased the number of companies looking to export u.s. natural gas .

by the end of 2009 , the united states surpassed russia as the world's largest producer of natural gas .

global production of natural gas rose 28% between 2008 and 2018 .

u.s. production outpaced other producers and its share of the global natural gas market rose from 18% to 22% , while russia's fell from 20% to 17% .

between 2016 and the first half of 2019 , u.s. lng exports have grown by 489% .

on a monthly basis , lng exports were largest in may 2019 and are expected to continue to grow as additional port facilities become operational .

meanwhile , there has been no corresponding rise in u.s. natural gas prices due to increased exports .

since february 2016 , there has been about , on average , a $1.74 price differential between u.s. spot prices and u.s. lng export prices .

in addition to the price of u.s. spot natural gas , the current price at which natural gas can be bought or sold , importers take into account the cost of liquefying the natural gas , transporting it , regasifying it , and moving it to consumers .

natural gas is expensive to liquefy and transport and requires sophisticated technology .

even though the united states is the largest producer of natural gas in the world , it is not the largest exporter .

russia , mainly through its pipeline exports to europe , remains the largest overall exporter of natural gas .

qatar was the largest exporter of lng in 2018 , but australia is projected to surpass it in 2019 .

whereas the united states was the target market for lng exporters in 2008 , it is now a net exporter of natural gas and has seen its imports diminish by 27% since 2008 .

industry analysts expect u.s. exports to rise significantly over the next few years .

lng now accounts for 35% of global natural gas trade .

energy issues have been a perennial topic of interest to congress .

natural gas , especially since the advent of shale gas , has grown in importance and congressional interest .

exports of natural gas by pipeline and particularly lng by ship have added to the significance of natural gas' interest to congress .

in the 116 th congress , 100 bills have been introduced covering a wide variety natural gas related topics , from production , exports , infrastructure , the environment , and employment , among other things .

