this report describes the structure , activities , legislative history , and funding history of seven federally - chartered regional commissions and authorities: the appalachian regional commission ( arc ) ; the delta regional authority ( dra ) ; the denali commission ; the northern border regional commission ( nbrc ) ; the northern great plains regional authority ( ngpra ) ; the southeast crescent regional commission ( scrc ) ; and the southwest border regional commission ( sbrc ) ( table a - 1 ) .

the federal regional commissions are also functioning examples of place - based and intergovernmental approaches to economic development , which receive regular congressional interest .

the federal regional commissions and authorities integrate federal and state economic development priorities alongside regional and local considerations ( figure a - 1 ) .

as federally - chartered agencies created by acts of congress , the federal regional commissions and authorities depend on congressional appropriations for their activities and administration , and are subject to congressional oversight .

seven federal regional commissions and authorities were authorized by congress to address instances of major economic distress in certain defined socio - economic regions , with all but one ( alaska's denali commission ) being multi - state regions ( figure b - 1 ) .

the first such federal regional commission , the appalachian regional commission , was founded in 1965 .

the other commissions and authorities may have roots in the intervening decades , but were not founded until 1998 ( denali ) , 2000 ( delta regional authority ) , and 2002 ( the northern great plains regional authority ) .

the most recent commissions—northern border regional commission , southeast crescent regional commission , and southwest border regional commission—were authorized in 2008 .

four of the seven entities—the appalachian regional commission , the delta regional authority , the denali commission , and the northern border regional commission—are currently active and receive regular annual appropriations .

certain strategic emphases and programs have evolved over time in each of the functioning federal regional commissions and authorities .

however , their overarching missions to address economic distress have not changed , and their associated activities have broadly remained consistent to those goals as funding has allowed .

in practice , the functioning federal regional commissions and authorities engage in their respective economic development efforts through multiple program areas , which may include , but are not limited to basic infrastructure ; energy ; ecology / environment and natural resources ; workforce / labor ; and business development .

the appalachian regional commission was established in 1965 to address economic distress in the appalachian region .

the arc's jurisdiction spans 420 counties in alabama , georgia , kentucky , maryland , mississippi , new york , north carolina , ohio , pennsylvania , south carolina , tennessee , virginia , and west virginia ( figure 1 ) .

the arc was originally created to address severe economic disparities between appalachia and that of the broader united states ; recently , its mission has grown to include regional competitiveness in a global economic environment .

the delta regional authority was established in 2000 to address economic distress in the mississippi river delta region .

the dra aims to "improve regional economic opportunity by helping to create jobs , build communities , and improve the lives of the 10 million people" in 252 designated counties and parishes in alabama , arkansas , illinois , kentucky , louisiana , mississippi , missouri , and tennessee ( figure 2 ) .

the denali commission was established in 1998 to support rural economic development in alaska .

it is "designed to provide critical utilities , infrastructure , and economic support throughout alaska. .

the denali commission is unique as a single - state commission , and in its reliance on federal funding for both administration and activities .

the northern border regional commission ( nbrc ) was created by the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 , otherwise known as the 2008 farm bill .

the act also created the southeast crescent regional commission ( scrc ) and the southwest border regional commission ( sbrc ) .

all three commissions share common authorizing language modeled after the arc .

the nbrc is the only one of the three new commissions that has been both reauthorized and received progressively increasing annual appropriations since it was established in 2008 .

the nbrc was founded to alleviate economic distress in the northern border areas of maine , new hampshire , new york , and , as of 2018 , the entire state of vermont ( figure 4 ) .

the stated mission of the nbrc is "to catalyze regional , collaborative , and transformative community economic development approaches that alleviate economic distress and position the region for economic growth. .

eligible counties within the nbrc's jurisdiction may receive funding "for community and economic development" projects pursuant to regional , state , and local planning and priorities ( table c - 4 ) .

the northern great plains regional authority was created by the 2002 farm bill .

the ngpra was created to address economic distress in iowa , minnesota , missouri ( other than counties included in the delta regional authority ) , north dakota , nebraska , and south dakota .

the ngpra appears to have been briefly active shortly after it was created , when it received its only annual appropriation from congress .

the ngpra's funding authorization lapsed at the end of fy2018 ; it was not reauthorized .

the southeast crescent regional commission ( scrc ) was created by the 2008 farm bill , which also created the nbrc and the southwest border regional commission .

all three commissions share common authorizing language modeled after the arc .

the scrc is not currently active .

the scrc was created to address economic distress in areas of virginia , north carolina , south carolina , georgia , alabama , mississippi , and florida ( figure 6 ) not served by the arc or the dra ( table 13 ) .

the southwest border regional commission ( sbrc ) was created with the enactment of the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 , or the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-234 ) , which also created the nbrc and the scrc .

all three commissions share common statutory authorizing language modeled after the arc .

the sbrc was created to address economic distress in the southern border regions of arizona , california , new mexico , and texas ( figure 7 ; table 1 5 ) .

the sbrc has not received an annual appropriation since it was created and is not currently active .

given their geographic reach , broad activities , and integrated intergovernmental structures , the federal regional commissions and authorities are a significant element of federal economic development efforts .

at the same time , as organizations that are largely governed by the respective state - based commissioners , the federal regional commissions and authorities are not typical federal agencies but federally - chartered entities that integrate federal funding and direction with state and local economic development priorities .

this structure provides congress with a flexible platform for economic development efforts .

the intergovernmental structure allows for strategic - level economic development initiatives to be launched at the federal level and implemented across multi - state jurisdictions with extensive state and local input , and more adaptable to regional needs .

the federal regional commissions and authorities reflect an emphasis by the federal government on place - based economic development strategies sensitive to regional and local contexts .

however , the geographic specificity and varying functionality of the statutorily authorized federal regional commissions and authorities , both active and inactive , potentially raise questions about the efficacy and equity of federal economic development policies .

more in - depth analysis of these and other such issues related to the federal regional authorities and commissions , and their role as instruments for federal economic development efforts , is reserved for possible future companion products to this report .

appendix a .

basic information at a glance contact information ( for active commissions and authorities ) appalachian regional commission address:1666 connecticut avenue , nw suite 700 washington , dc 20009-1068 phone:[phone number scrubbed] website: http: / / www.arc.gov delta regional authority address:236 sharkey avenue suite 400 clarksdale , ms 38614 phone:[phone number scrubbed] website: http: / / www.dra.gov denali commission address:510 l street suite 410 anchorage , ak 99501 phone:[phone number scrubbed] website: http: / / www.denali.gov northern border regional commission address:james cleveland federal building , suite 1201 53 pleasant street concord , nh 03301 phone:[phone number scrubbed] website: http: / / www.nbrc.gov appendix b. map of federal regional commissions and authorities appendix c. service areas of federal regional commissions and authorities appalachian regional commission delta regional authority denali commission northern border regional commission northern great plains regional authority southeast crescent regional commission southwest border regional commissio .

