f or more than a decade , federal agencies have grappled with how to address climate change effects when implementing the endangered species act of 1973 ( esa , or the act ) .

the esa aims to protect threatened and endangered fish , wildlife , and plants from extinction .

as set forth by congress , one of the main purposes of the esa is to "provide a means whereby the ecosystems upon which endangered species and threatened species depend may be conserved. .

to conserve threatened and endangered species , the act seeks to identify threatened or endangered species , facilitate recovery and conservation of these species , and minimize the effect of federal and private actions on these species and their habitats .

the supreme court has stated that "[t]he plain intent of congress in enacting this statute was to reverse the trend toward species extinction , whatever the cost. .

to achieve that purpose , congress declared that "all federal departments and agencies shall seek to conserve endangered species and threatened species and shall utilize their authorities" to further the esa purposes .

under the esa , two federal agencies—the u.s .

fish and wildlife service ( fws ) within the department of the interior and the national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) within the department of commerce ( collectively , the services ) —are primarily responsible for implementing the esa .

according to the services , over 1,500 species of plants and animals receive some type of protection under the esa .

since the early 21st century , some members of congress have urged the services to factor in climate change effects when implementing the esa .

the services , along with scholars and scientists , have acknowledged that the changing climate may threaten the survival of and habitat for some species .

as noted by courts and legal scholars , the esa does not expressly require the services to consider the effect of climate change in their esa decisions .

however , the esa and its implementing regulations ( 1 ) direct the services to consider "natural or manmade factors affecting [a species'] continued existence" when determining whether a species should be protected under the esa ; and ( 2 ) require the services to analyze cumulative effects on a species' survival when analyzing whether federal actions jeopardize a species protected under the act .

the courts and the services have interpreted these provisions as requiring the services to consider climate change effects into the esa decisionmaking process .

various lawsuits have challenged the services' interpretation of complex scientific data or models that predict short - and long - term effects from a changing global climate on specific species and their habitats .

these lawsuits typically focus on two main issues: ( 1 ) when the services should list , delist , or reclassify a species as threatened or endangered because of climate change effects ; and ( 2 ) whether the services can or should regulate activities that affect the climate to protect the species .

judicial review has helped to ensure that the services consider projected climate change effects on species in their esa decisions , but the courts have not required the services to curb activities that may contribute to climate change to protect threatened or endangered species .

this report analyzes the courts' role in shaping how the services have factored climate change effects into esa decisions and recent regulatory developments that seek to clarify how the services consider and address climate change in their esa decisions .

in general , stakeholders challenge the services' esa actions or inactions under the administrative procedure act ( apa ) .

the apa authorizes reviewing courts to "hold unlawful and set aside agency actions , findings , and conclusions found to be arbitrary , capricious , [or] an abuse of discretion. .

under the arbitrary and capricious standard , courts must determine whether the agency "examine[d] the relevant data and articulate[d] a satisfactory explanation for its action , including a 'rational connection between the facts found and the choice made,'" but the standard prohibits courts from "substitut[ing] its judgment for that of the agency. .

under this deferential standard , courts have generally deferred to the services' decisions related to climate change .

however , courts have not deferred to the services when the court concludes that the record does not support the services' decision or the services failed to consider climate change adequately .

the sections below offer selected examples , drawn from various court decisions , legal documents , and regulatory developments , to illustrate the range of issues that the services and the courts have addressed related to the esa and climate change .

each section of the report reviews the applicable legal framework and discusses the relevant regulatory revisions finalized by the trump administration in august 2019 .

this report does not aim to provide a comprehensive or representative preview of all the judicial decisions that have addressed this area .

many legal challenges involving the esa and climate change have centered on whether to list a species as endangered or threatened under the esa .

to trigger protections and prohibitions under the esa , the services must first list a species as threatened or endangered .

under esa section 4 , the services list a species as endangered or threatened based on assessments of the risk of their extinction .

the act defines an "endangered species" as a species "in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range. .

a "threatened species" is a species "likely to become endangered within the foreseeable future in all or a significant portion of its range. .

for listing decisions , the esa requires the services to determine whether the species "is a threatened or endangered species because of any of the following factors: ( a ) the present or threatened destruction , modification , or curtailment of its habitat or range ; ( b ) overutilization for commercial , recreational , scientific , or educational purposes ; ( c ) disease or predation ; ( d ) the inadequacy of existing regulatory mechanisms ; or ( e ) other natural or manmade factors affecting its continued existence. .

when listing a species , the services must make their decision "solely on the basis of the best scientific and commercial data available .

 .

 .

after conducting a review of the status of the species," taking into account any state's or foreign nation's actions to protect such species .

courts have consistently held that the services must consider climate change as a factor in their listing decisions if it may affect the survival of the species .

however , stakeholders have disputed the extent to which climate change affects species and the science underpinning listing decisions .

some stakeholders have sought through petitions and legal challenges to compel the services to list species whose survival has been or may be threatened by climate change effects .

other stakeholders have challenged the listing of species or petitioned the service to delist a species , questioning whether model - based climate predictions constitute the "best scientific and commercial data available" on which to base esa listing decisions .

scientific uncertainty and undefined terms in the esa have opened the door to litigation challenging the services' interpretation of ambiguous terms and their assessment of the climate science that supports their listing decisions .

courts often uphold the services' interpretation of ambiguous terms because judicial review of agency decisions is narrow and highly deferential ; the court will not set aside an esa listing decision so long as it is rational and reasonably based on supporting evidence .

however , courts have faulted the services for inadequately considering climate change effects or relying on the scientific uncertainty of climate modeling to deny a petition to list a species .

the two sections below discuss various court decisions that have reviewed how the services ( 1 ) interpret the undefined "foreseeable future" in their listing decisions , and ( 2 ) address the scientific uncertainty of climate change effects .

the services have also considered climate change effects in designating critical habitat .

when listing a species as threatened or endangered , the esa requires the services to "designate any habitat of such species which is then considered to be critical habitat. .

as a threshold matter , as made clear by the supreme court's 2018 decision in weyerhauser co. v. fws , an area must be "habitat" for a species for the services to consider whether it is "critical habitat. .

under the esa , the services may designate two types of habitat as critical habitat: ( 1 ) specific areas within the geographical area occupied by the species , which contain the "physical or biological features essential to the conservation of the species" and may require special management protections ( occupied habitat ) ; and ( 2 ) areas outside the geographical areas occupied by the species if the secretary determines that such unoccupied areas are "essential for the conservation of the species" ( unoccupied habitat ) .

once an area is designated as critical habitat , federal agencies may not ( unless exempted ) authorize , fund , or carry out actions that are likely to "result in the destruction or adverse modification" of critical habitat .

the services face unique challenges when designating critical habitat based on modeled habitat shifts for species affected by climate change .

the legal challenges to fws's designation of the polar bear's critical habitat show how a court deferred to the fws's interpretation of climate change data and models to determine whether unoccupied areas are "essential for the conservation of the species. .

in a 2016 decision , alaska oil & gas association v. jewell , the ninth circuit upheld fws's designation of 187,000 square miles as critical habitat for the polar bear .

fws based its critical habitat designation in part on long - term projections of habitat destruction from climate change .

fws designated three areas on alaska's coast and in its waters that contain elements essential to the polar bear: a sea ice habitat , a terrestrial denning habitat , and a barrier island habitat .

for two of the designated areas , the district court concluded that fws failed to provide evidence that the two areas included all of the elements required for the survival of the polar bear .

the district court asked fws to establish that polar bears currently use those two areas as habitat .

the ninth circuit disagreed with the lower court's narrow interpretation of the esa critical habitat requirements .

the court rejected the lower court's finding that the esa required fws to limit the critical habitat designation to specific areas that are currently used by polar bears , explaining that "[n]o such limitation to existing use appears in the esa , and such a narrow construction of critical habitat runs directly counter to the act's conservation purposes .

the act is concerned with protecting the future of the species , not merely the preservation of existing bears .

and it requires use of the best available technology , not perfection. .

the court concluded that fws properly relied on climate science and sea ice data in designating habitat that has the elements required to sustain and preserve the polar bear population .

similar to cases regarding foreseeability and scientific uncertainty , the court appeared to defer to fws's reasoned consideration of climate change effects based on evidence in the record .

if fws or nmfs bases its listing decision on climate change effects , fws or nmfs must also determine whether federal actions that contribute to climate change jeopardize the species under esa section 7 or whether an entity that may contribute to climate change is "taking" the species in violation of esa section 9 .

the services may tailor the section 9 "take" prohibitions for species listed as threatened under the esa by using section 4 ( d ) rules .

this section reviews how the services address climate change effects when protecting listed species under esa sections 4 ( d ) , 7 , and 9 .

when the esa was enacted in 1973 , congress did not consider climate change as a significant factor in conserving endangered species .

although the services and the courts have acknowledged that actions taken under the esa must consider climate change effects on species and their habitats , the debate continues on whether the esa can adequately protect and conserve species threatened by climate change effects .

stakeholders disagree on what role the esa should play in addressing climate change , with some arguing that the esa is not equipped to mitigate climate change effects .

other stakeholders believe that the services can and should wield the esa to protect species threatened by climate change and to curb activities contributing to climate change .

generally , legal scholars agree that litigation has influenced how the services factor climate change effects into esa decisions .

legal challenges have helped to ensure that the services consider projected climate change effects on species in their esa decisions .

in light of the judicial deference afforded to the services , the courts have not expanded the esa as a tool to protect listed species by regulating activities that contribute to climate change .

from the services' viewpoint , the best available scientific and commercial data have been insufficient to determine that ghg emissions from a proposed activity cause detrimental effects on the species or its habitat .

however , as climate modeling and technology advance , the services may be able to predict the causes and effects from climate change on species with greater scientific certainty and data .

members of congress may be interested in the implications of revising the esa to clarify its treatment of climate change effects .

legislation could clarify whether esa section 9 prohibitions or section 7 consultation requirements apply to indirect harms that contribute to climate changes that may affect a species' survival , or how the services should address scientific uncertainty associated with projected climate change effects when making listing determinations .

as legislative proposals continue to develop , legal battles over the how the services interpret climate change effects in their esa decisions will likely continue .

