family reunification and the admission of immigrants with needed skills are two of the major principles underlying u.s. immigration policy .

as a result , current law weights the allocation of immigrant visas heavily toward individuals with close family in the united states and , to a lesser extent , toward individuals who meet particular employment needs .

the diversity immigrant category was added to the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) by the immigration act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-649 ) to stimulate "new seed" immigration ( i.e. , to foster new , more varied migration from other parts of the world ) .

diversity visas are allocated to natives of countries from which the combination of immediate relatives , family preference , and employment preference immigrant admissions were lower than a total of 50,000 over the preceding five years combined .

the diversity immigrant visa program currently makes 50,000 visas available annually to natives of countries from which immigrant admissions were lower than a total of 50,000 over the preceding five years .

uscis implements a formula for allocating visas according to statutory specifications: visas are divided among six global geographic regions , and each region and country is identified as either high admission or low admission based on how many immigrant visas each received over the previous five - year period .

higher proportions of diversity visas are allocated to low - admission regions and low - admission countries .

each country is limited to 7% , or 3,500 , of the total , and the ina provides that northern ireland be treated as a separate foreign state .

the distribution of diversity visas by global region of origin has shifted over time ( see figure 2 ) .

from fy1995 through fy2001 , foreign nationals from europe garnered a plurality of diversity visas , ranging from 38% to 47% of the total .

in the early 2000s , the share of dv recipients from africa was on par with those from europe .

europe's share dropped by nine percentage points from fy2005 to fy2006 as the shares from african and asian countries continued to increase .

since fy2008 , europe has accounted for smaller shares than africa or asia .

latin america ( which includes south america , mexico , central america , and the caribbean ) , oceania , and north america accounted for less than 8% each year .

in total , from fy1995 through fy2017 immigrants from africa accounted for 40% of diversity immigrants , while europeans accounted for 31% and asians for 25% .

these trends are consistent with the statutory formula congress outlined to allocate diversity visas .

figure 3 presents the countries from which at least 1,000 dv immigrants were admitted in the first five years that the program was in full effect ( fy1995-fy1999 ) and the most recent five years for which data are available ( fy2013-fy2017 ) .

early in the program , most of the top countries were in europe ( particularly eastern europe ) and africa .

in more recent years , there has been a shift toward africa and asia .

certain countries—such as ethiopia , ukraine , and egypt—rank high across many years of the program , while others—such as ireland , poland , and venezuela—are limited to particular periods of time .

from fy1995-fy2017 , natives of six countries received at least 40,000 diversity visas in total: ethiopia ( 67,832 ) , nigeria ( 58,563 ) , egypt ( 56,862 ) , ukraine ( 52,654 ) , albania ( 47,136 ) , and bangladesh ( 40,847 ) .

given its name and the discourse about "new seed" immigrants that preceded the creation of the diversity visa , the question arises whether the dv program has led to an increase in the diversity of immigrant flows to the united states .

leading up to and since its enactment , some observers have noted that , regardless of its name , the dv program was intended to benefit irish and italian constituents who had been negatively affected by the immigration act of 1965 that resulted in an increase in immigration from asia and latin america .

during the transition period after the program was created ( fy1992-fy1994 ) , at least 40% of diversity visas were earmarked for irish immigrants , and 92% of diversity visas in fy1994 went to europeans .

since its full implementation in fy1995 , however , immigrants from a wider range of countries and regions have entered via the program ( see " regions of birth " above ) .

the dv program's small size relative to total annual immigrant admissions ( dv admissions make up about 5% of annual lpr admissions ) limits its impact on the make - up of the immigrant population .

former representative bruce morrison , who helped create the program , stated in a 2005 hearing that it was not congress's intent to diversify the immigrant flow as a whole ( "it could not have possibly done so at the 50,000 number" ) , but rather to add a new pathway for those who would not be able to enter under the family - or employment - based systems .

by that standard , the program arguably fulfills its objectives , having admitted more than 1 million immigrants from under - represented countries since fy1995 ( see figure 3 ) .

another way to assess the program's impact is to analyze the diversity of annual lpr flows before and after the dv program was established .

using a measure of diversity called the entropy index , crs found that in fy1990 , before the dv program was in effect , the diversity of lpr admissions was 0.52 .

in every year from fy1995 ( when the dv program went into full effect ) through fy2017 ( the most recent data available ) , the diversity of annual lpr admissions was higher than in 1990 , ranging from 0.67 to 0.72 .

in each of those years , the diversity of lpr admissions not including the dv admissions was lower than it was with dv admissions included ( see the appendix ) , indicating that the admission of dv immigrants does increase the diversity of annual lpr admissions .

a full analysis of the impacts of the dv program on admission numbers would also take into account individuals whom dv immigrants subsequently sponsor through the family - based admissions system .

because administrative data on immigrant admissions do not specify these linkages , this type of direct analysis is not currently possible .

however , admissions data suggest that , at least for africans , the dv has led to an increase in immigration via the family - based system ( particularly immediate relatives ) .

from 1992 to 2007 , admissions of africans based on family sponsorship grew faster than other categories of admissions for africans , including diversity , which remained fairly stable over the time period .

the dv seems to have diversified the african flow itself by boosting emigration from non - english speaking african countries ( whereas english - speaking african countries have longer histories of u.s. immigration and are therefore more likely to be the source of sponsoring immigrant family members ) .

legislation related to the diversity immigrant visa has focused largely on eliminating the program .

bills to eliminate the diversity visa category have been introduced in nearly every congress since the program was created and have passed one chamber on more than one occasion .

most recently , s. 744 in the 113 th congress , a comprehensive immigration reform bill that the senate passed in 2013 by a vote of 68 to 32 , would have eliminated the program .

other bills introduced in the past would have raised the annual limit of diversity visas or temporarily re - allocated diversity visas for other purposes .

in the 116 th congress , several bills to eliminate the dv program have been introduced , including h.r .

479 , h.r .

2278 , s. 1103 , and s. 1632 .

in contrast , h.r .

3799 would raise the annual diversity visa allocation to 80,000 .

as congress weighs whether to eliminate or revise the diversity visa category , it may want to consider various policy questions pertinent to this discussion .

given the 3.7 million approved family - based and employment - based petitions waiting for a visa to become available at the close of fy2018 , some argue that the 50,000 diversity visas should be used for backlog reduction in these visa categories .

others might observe that the family - based , employment - based , and diversity visa categories are statutorily designed as independent pathways to lpr status and that the problems of the family - based and employment - based backlogs should be addressed separately .

some also argue that the dv program increases fairness in the immigration system by making visas available to individuals who would not otherwise have a chance of obtaining one and by discouraging illegal immigration through expanding access to the legal immigration system .

some argue that the diversity visa program reverts to discriminatory national origin quotas , which congress eliminated through the 1965 amendments to the immigration and nationality act .

however , there are other examples of admissions policies that effectively discriminate based on nationality ( eg , h - 2a , h - 2b , e , and tn nonimmigrant visas , the visa waiver program , and the per country caps on family - and employment - based lpr admissions , all of which limit admissions by nationality ) .

some also argue that admissions decisions should be based on higher levels of education , job experience , and language skills , or family ties to u.s. residents , rather than country of origin and being selected at random via a lottery .

in contrast , others argue that the program bolsters equity of opportunity—a quintessential american value—by providing a pathway for individuals—particularly those from africa , eastern europe , and the former soviet union—who do not have family or employer connections in the united states .

some also argue that the more than one million immigrants who have moved to the united states as a result of the program have enriched the united states culturally and economically , and strengthened the nation's global connections .

some also argue that efforts to end it are racially motivated or point out that for most of u.s. history , africans in particular had little opportunity to come to the united states other than as slaves .

some equate the use of a lottery system in the dv program to awarding "green cards" at random and argue that luck should not come into play in u.s. admissions decisions .

others argue that , given the millions of interested applicants every year , a lottery is a fair method of reducing the applicant pool because it gives all entrants who meet the program's qualifications an equal chance to apply for a diversity visa .

they also cite the use of a lottery in other over - subscribed visa categories such as the h - 1b and h - 2b temporary worker classifications to illustrate that u.s. immigration policy considers it a reasonable tool .

some observers concerned about immigration fraud surrounding the dv program reference a 2003 state department office of inspector general report and a 2007 gao report which found fraud vulnerabilities in the dv program .

they may also cite the 2017 and 2018 complaints filed by the department of justice ( doj ) in two cases seeking the denaturalization of individuals who had gained admission ( in 1997 and 2001 ) to the united states through the dv program .

in the first case , doj filed a complaint to denaturalize four somali - born diversity visa recipients who falsely claimed to be a family .

in the second case , doj filed a complaint to denaturalize a diversity visa recipient who obtained naturalization without having disclosed two prior orders of removal .

those defending the fraud protections of the dv program counter that dos has since revised the diversity lottery procedures to address fraud vulnerabilities , including a requirement to submit a recent photograph , the addition of biographic and facial recognition checks to reduce duplicate entries , a policy requiring the disqualification of entrants who fail to list their spouse and children on their entries , and technical improvements to limit manipulation of entries by automated bots .

they also argue that the risk of fraud is not unique to the dv program and refer to the numerous fraud investigations and arrests of immigrants who entered the united states via other visa categories and the significant resources that dos commits to fraud prevention for all immigrant and nonimmigrant visa applications through its fraud prevention units at posts overseas .

in addition , on june 5 , 2019 , dos published an interim final rule to require diversity visa entrants to provide certain information from a valid , unexpired passport on the electronic entry form .

this rule is intended to make it more difficult for third parties to submit unauthorized entries , because third parties are less likely to have individuals' passport numbers .

some assert that the difficulties of performing background checks in many of the countries whose natives currently qualify for the dv program , as well as broader concerns about terrorism , justify the elimination of the category .

some cite the 2004 warning of the dos deputy inspector general that the diversity visa lottery "contains significant vulnerabilities to national security" from state sponsors of terrorism .

they argue that dv immigrants , by definition , are not required to have employer or family ties in the united states and thus may be more likely to have nefarious intent .

they cite the case of a new jersey resident responsible for killing eight people with his rental truck in lower manhattan in 2017 , who had immigrated to the united states from uzbekistan on a diversity visa .

in response to that event , the trump administration called on congress to immediately terminate the diversity visa lottery program .

others respond that immigrants coming to the united states in other immigrant visa categories are not restricted if they come from these same countries , and further argue that background checks for national security risks are performed on all prospective immigrants seeking to come to the united states .

they also point to the 2005 dos inspector general's testimony that dos's bureau of consular affairs strengthened the dv program by complying with most of the recommendations in the oig's 2003 report .

they similarly note the testimony of one of the creators of the dv program who contended that "it is absurd to think that a lottery would be the vehicle of choice for terrorists" and that attention should instead be focused on greater security risks .

they also point out that since the creation of the visa security program in 2003 , dhs has aided consular officers in extensively vetting individuals applying for visas .

they also reference a 2007 gao report stating: "we found no documented evidence that dv immigrants from these , or other , countries posed a terrorist or other threat .

however , experts familiar with immigration fraud believe that some individuals , including terrorists and criminals , could use fraudulent means to enter or remain in the united states. .

citing the millions of diversity visa lottery entries every year from around the world , some argue that the dv program is an efficient means of boosting american goodwill and "soft power" abroad , and that a diversity of immigrant origins helps the united states better respond to the challenges of globalization .

some also cite the value of remittances sent by diversity immigrants to their countries of origin as international development assistance without u.s. government expense .

others argue that the dv program encourages "brain drain" from developing countries , a concern which acknowledges that many dv immigrants—particularly from africa—possess education and skills beyond the minimum requirements for program eligibility .

supporters of the dv program argue that it honors the united states' history as a destination for enterprising immigrants—the "self - selected strivers" —who arrive without family ties but with a desire to work hard for a better life .

some point to the present - day preponderance of immigrants from a handful of countries and argue that the diversity visa fosters new and more varied migration to counterbalance an admissions system weighted disproportionately to family - based immigration , which tends to perpetuate the dominance of certain countries .

they also point to wide support for legislation that would remove or raise the 7% per - country limits on family - and employment - based immigrant admissions , which would likely result in further concentration of immigrant flows from the top sending countries .

even with the per - country limits and dv program in place , the total foreign - born population has become more concentrated in the top ten source countries compared to 1990 ( see " impact of the dv program on immigrant diversity " ) .

others argue that , after almost 30 years , the diversity visa category has run its course .

they might cite the countries—such as pakistan , brazil , nigeria , and bangladesh—that formerly qualified for the dv program and no longer do due to their increase in admissions , or the growth in immigration from africa , eastern europe , and parts of asia as an indication that the need for "new seed" immigration has been met .

others counter that these trends indicate that the program is meeting its goals and should be continued .

they further argue that in many countries around the world , the diversity visa remains the only accessible avenue for immigrating to the united states .

the entropy index ( also called the shannon index ) is a measure of the diversity of a population .

diversity can be defined as the "relative heterogeneity of a population. .

it is at its maximum when all subpopulations are present in equal proportions ( for the purposes of this report , when each country of birth receives an equal number of lpr admissions ) .

the formula for the entropy index is where h is the entropy index , k is the country - of - origin group , and p is the proportion of the total from each country - of - origin group .

the index can be standardized by dividing by its maximum , log k. doing so results in a range of 0 ( for the case where all of the population is in one subpopulation ) to 1.0 ( for the case where all subpopulations are present in equal proportions ) .

for this report , the standardized entropy index was calculated by year for country of birth of total lpr admissions , lpr admissions minus dv admissions , and dv admissions .

this was calculated after creating a standardized list of countries across all years so that k was held constant .

as shown in figure a - 1 , between fy1995 and fy2017 , the entropy index varied , but in all years the index was higher when dv lprs were included .

