the primary source of federal aid to elementary and secondary education is the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) —particularly its title i - a program , which authorizes federal aid for the education of disadvantaged students .

the esea was initially enacted in 1965 ( p.l .

89-10 ) "to strengthen and improve educational quality and educational opportunities in the nation's elementary and secondary schools. .

it was most recently comprehensively amended and reauthorized by the every student succeeds act ( essa ; p.l .

114-95 ) , which was enacted "to ensure that every child achieves. .

the essa authorized appropriations for esea programs through fy2020 .

fy2019 appropriation for esea programs are $25.2 billion .

under title i - a , the esea as amended by the essa continues to require states and public schools systems to focus on educational accountability as a condition for the receipt of grant funds .

public school systems and individual public schools are held accountable for monitoring and improving achievement outcomes for students and closing achievement gaps , sustaining a focus that was initiated by amendments to the esea made by the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb ; p.l .

107-110 ) but modified under the essa .

while states were given more latitude to develop their educational accountability systems under the essa provisions , as a condition for receiving title i - a funds each state must continue to have content and academic achievement standards and aligned assessments in reading / language arts ( rla ) , mathematics , and science for specific grade levels .

states must now have an accountability system that incorporates ( 1 ) long - term and interim performance goals for specified measures ; ( 2 ) weighted indicators based , in part , on these goals ; and ( 3 ) an annual system for meaningful differentiation that is used to identify schools that need additional support to improve student achievement .

beyond title i - a , other authorized esea programs provide , for example , grants to support: the education of migratory students ; recruitment and professional development of teachers ; language instruction for english learners ( els ) ; well - rounded education , safe and healthy students , and technology initiatives ; after - school instruction and care programs ; expansion of charter schools and other forms of public school choice ; education services for native american , native hawaiian , and alaska native students ; impact aid to compensate local educational agencies ( leas ) for taxes forgone due to certain federal activities ; and innovative educational approaches or instruction to meet particular student needs .

in order to receive funds under title i - a and several other formula grant programs authorized by the esea , each state educational agency ( sea ) must submit a state plan to the u.s. department of education ( ed ) .

these plans can be submitted for individual formula grant programs or , if permitted by the secretary of education ( hereinafter referred to as the secretary ) , the sea may submit a consolidated state plan based on requirements established by the secretary .

following the enactment of the essa , all seas submitted consolidated state plans .

the secretary has approved these plans for all 50 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico .

this report provides a brief overview of major provisions of the esea .

it is organized by title and part of the act .

annual appropriations for esea programs are provided through the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies ( l - hhs - ed ) appropriations act , and are shown in this report based on the most recent data available from the u.s. department of education , budget service for fy2017 through fy2019 .

table 2 provides esea appropriations for fy2016 and fy2017 to depict the transition from the esea as amended by the nclb to the esea as amended by the essa .

table 3 provides authorizations of appropriations included in the esea as amended by the essa .

the appendix provides a list of selected acronyms used in the report .

the introductory text for esea title i includes the purpose of title i and authorizations of appropriations for fy2017 through fy2020 for each part of the title .

the purpose of title i is "to provide all children significant opportunity to receive a fair , equitable , and high - quality education , and to close educational achievement gaps. .

the introductory text prior to title i - a also requires states to reserve funds provided under title i - a for school improvement activities and allows them to reserve title i - a funds for direct students services .

as such , while these reservations of funds appear before title i - a in the esea , they are examined following the title i - a discussion to provide greater context .

the introductory text prior to title i - a also provides authority for states to reserve funds for state administration for title i - a , title i - c , and title i - d .

title ii includes programs centered on teachers , school leaders ( eg , principals ) , literacy , and american history and civics education .

programs focused on teachers and school leaders support activities and initiatives such as professional development , staff recruitment and retention , performance - based compensation systems , and the establishment of a statewide science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) master teacher corps .

other title ii programs focus on literacy education , providing grants to support literacy efforts from birth through grade 12 and supporting school library programs , early literacy services , and the provision of high - quality books to children and adolescents .

title ii also includes american history and civic education programs that provide academies for teachers and students to learn more about these topics and authorizes national activities related to american history and civics education .

title ii's introductory text includes the purpose of the title , several definitions , and authorizations of appropriations for fy2017 through fy2020 for the programs authorized in title ii .

title iii authorizes programs that are focused on improving the academic attainment of els , including immigrant students .

under the title iii - a state grants program , funds are used at the state level to support activities such as consultation to develop statewide standardized entrance and exit procedures .

funds are used by leas for activities such as effective language instructional programs , professional development , and supplemental activities .

title iii also authorizes two national programs , a professional development project and a clearinghouse related to the education of els .

the introductory text to title iii authorizes appropriations for fy2017 through fy2020 .

title iv authorizes a range of programs and activities including a block grant program , a program to support learning opportunities during non - school hours , programs to support charter schools and magnet schools , a family engagement program , an innovation and research program , programs to provide community support for student success , national activities for school safety , and programs focused on arts education , video programming for preschool and elementary school children , and gifted and talented education .

title v includes both funding transferability authority and programs to support rural education .

funding transferability authority allows states and leas to transfer federal funds from certain esea programs to other esea programs to enable them to address their particular needs .

the rural education assistance program ( reap ) provides additional resources to rural leas that might lack the resources to compete effectively for federal grants or might receive formula grant allocations that are too small to meet their intended purposes .

the two rural education programs included in title v provide leas with substantial flexibility in how they use their grant funds .

title vi provides funds specifically for the education of indian , native hawaiian , and alaska native children .

with respect to indian education , the esea authorizes formula grants to leas , indian tribes and organizations , bie schools , and other entities to support elementary and secondary school programs that meet the unique cultural , language , and educational needs of indian children .

funds are also provided for competitive grants to examine the effectiveness of services for indian children and to provide support and training for indian individuals to work in various capacities in the education system .

title vi also authorizes competitive grants to organizations with experience in operating native hawaiian programs to provide services to improve native hawaiian education .

a native hawaiian education council is also authorized under title vi .

in addition , title vi authorizes competitive grants for activities and services intended to improve education for alaska natives , such as the development of curricular materials and professional development .

title vii compensates leas for the "substantial and continuing financial burden" resulting from federal activities .

these activities include federal ownership of certain lands , as well as the enrollments in leas of children of parents who work and / or live on federal land ( eg , children of parents in the military and children living on indian lands ) .

the federal government provides compensation via impact aid for lost tax revenue because these activities deprive leas of the ability to collect property or other taxes from these individuals ( eg , members of the armed forces living on military bases ) even though the leas are obligated to provide free public education to their children .

title vii authorizes several types of impact aid payments .

these include payments under section 7002 , section 7003 , section 7007 , and section 7008 , which are discussed briefly below .

payments relating to federal acquisition of real property ( section 7 002 ) .

section 7002 compensates leas for the federal ownership of certain property .

to qualify for compensation , the federal government must have acquired the property , in general , after 1938 and the assessed value of the land at the time it was acquired must have represented at least 10% of the assessed value of all real property within an lea's area of service .

payments for eligible federally connected children ( basic support payments , section 7 003 ) .

section 7003 compensates leas for enrolling "federally connected" children .

these are children who reside with a parent who is a member of the uniformed services living on or off federal property , reside with a parent who is an accredited foreign military officer living on or off federal property , reside on indian lands , reside in low - rent public housing , or reside with a parent who is a civilian working and / or living on federal land .

two payments are made under section 7003 .

section 7003 ( b ) authorizes "basic support payments" for federally connected children .

basic support payments are allocated directly to leas by ed based on a formula that uses weights assigned to different categories of federally connected children and cost factors to determine maximum payment amounts .

section 7003 ( d ) authorizes additional payments to leas based on the number of certain children with disabilities who are eligible to receive services under the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) .

payments are limited to idea - eligible children whose parents are members of the uniformed services ( residing on or off federal property ) and those residing on indian lands .

construction ( section 7 007 ) .

section 7007 provides funds for construction and facilities upgrading to certain leas with high percentages of children living on indian lands or children of military parents .

these funds are used to make formula and competitive grants .

facilities maintenance ( section 7 008 ) .

section 7008 provides funds for emergency repairs and comprehensive capital improvements at schools that ed currently owns but leas use to serve federally connected military dependent children .

appropriations included in table 1 are based on the most recent data available from ed's budget service office .

the amounts shown reflect any reprogramming or transfers of funds done by ed as of the time this table was prepared to provide the actual level of funding allocated to each program / activity .

this list of "programs / activities" does not take into account the number of programs , projects , or activities that may be funded under a single line - item appropriation , so the actual number of esea programs , projects , or activities being supported through appropriations is not shown .

it should be noted that ed considers all of the funds provided in an appropriations act for a given fiscal year , including advance appropriations provided for the following fiscal year , to be appropriations for the given fiscal year .

for example , for the purposes of appropriations , ed considers all of the funds provided in the fy2019 appropriations act , including advance appropriations provided in fy2020 , to be fy2019 appropriations .

table 2 provides esea appropriations for fy2016 and fy2017 to depict the transition from the esea as amended by the nclb to the esea as amended by the essa .

programs authorized under the esea as amended by either the nclb or the essa are included .

programs and activities are referred to by their names in the esea as amended by the essa if a program was in both the esea as amended by the essa and by the nclb .

if the program had a different name in the esea as amended by the nclb , the name is included in parentheses .

programs are listed in the order in which they appear in the esea as amended by the essa if they also appeared in the esea as amended by the nclb .

for programs that appear in only the esea as amended by either the essa or the nclb , programs are listed in the order they appear or appeared in law .

for some programs that were funded in fy2016 but not in fy2017 , it is possible that another program authorized in fy2017 provided funding for similar purposes .

for example , the elementary and secondary school counseling program was funded in fy2016 but not in fy2017 .

school counseling activities are an allowable use of funds under the ssae program created under the essa .

the same methodology as discussed above was used in determining appropriations amounts for each program .

table 3 provides the authorized level of appropriations for each program included in the esea that has a specified authorization of appropriations .

the esea includes authorizations of appropriations for fy2017 through fy2020 .

