s afe and affordable financial services are an important tool for most american households to avoid financial hardship , build assets , and achieve financial security over the course of their lives .

in the united states , robust consumer credit markets allow most consumers to access financial services and credit products to meet their needs in traditional financial markets .

the vast majority of consumers have , for example , a bank account , a credit score , a credit card , and other types of credit products .

however , some consumers—who tend to be younger adults , low - and moderate - income ( lmi ) consumers or possess imperfect credit repayment history—can find gaining access to these prod ucts and services difficult .

for those excluded , consumers may find managing their financial lives expensive and difficult .

this report provides an overview on financial inclusion .

it then focuses on three areas: ( 1 ) access to bank and other payment accounts ; ( 2 ) inclusion in the credit reporting system ; and ( 3 ) access to affordable short - term credit .

these areas are generally considered foundational for households to successfully manage their financial affairs and graduate to wealth building activities in the future .

wealth building activities—such as access to homeownership , education , and other financial investments—are outside the scope of this report .

financial inclusion refers to the idea that individuals "have access to useful and affordable financial products and services that meet their needs—transactions , payments , savings , credit , and insurance—delivered in a responsible and sustainable way. .

access to financial products allows households to better manage their financial lives , such as storing funds safely , making payments in exchange for goods and services , and coping with unforeseen financial emergencies , such as medical expenses or car or home repairs .

in the united states , most households rely on financial products found at traditional depository intuitions—commercial banks or credit unions .

some households also use financial products and services outside of the banking system , either by choice or due to a lack of access to traditional institutions .

while products outside the banking sector may better suit some households' needs , these products might also lack consumer protections or other benefits that traditional financial institutions tend to provide .

different barriers affect different populations .

for some younger consumers , a lack of a co - signer might make it more difficult to build a credit report history or a lack of knowledge or familiarity with financial institutions may be a barrier to obtaining a bank account .

for consumers living paycheck to paycheck , a bad credit history or a lack of money could serve as barriers to obtaining affordable credit or a bank account .

for immigrants , the absence of a credit history in the united states or language differences could be critical access barriers .

for consumers who do not have familiarity or access to the internet or mobile phones , a group in which older americans may be overrepresented , technology can be a barrier to accessing financial products and services .

the banking sector provides valuable financial services for households that allow them to save , make payments , and access credit .

most u.s. consumers choose to open a bank account because it is a safe and secure way to store money .

for example , the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) insures up to $250,000 per depositor against an institution's failure .

in addition , consumers gain access to payment services through checking accounts , such as bill pay and paper checks .

frequently , a checking account includes access to a debit card , which increases a consumer's ability to make payment transactions through the account .

for most consumers , a checking or savings account is less expensive than alternative ways to access these types of services .

some studies suggest that affordable access to payment transactions may be particularly important for consumers to manage their financial lives .

for most consumers , opening a bank account is relatively easy .

consumers undergo an account verification process and sometimes provide a small initial opening deposit of money into the account .

many consumers open their first depository account when they get their first job or start post - secondary education .

checking and savings accounts are often the first relationship that a consumer has with a financial institution , which can later progress into other types of financial products and services , such as loan products or financial investments .

safe and affordable financial services , especially for families with unpredictable income or expenses , have the potential to help households avoid financial hardship .

however , many u.s. households—often those with low incomes , lack of credit histories , or credit histories marked with missed debt payments—do not use banking services .

the credit reporting industry collects information on consumers and uses it to estimate the probability of future financial behaviors , such as successfully repaying a loan or defaulting on it .

the information collected has largely related to consumers' past financial performance and repayment history on traditional credit products .

consumer files generally do not contain information on consumer income or assets or on alternative financial services .

credit bureaus collect and store payment data reported to them by financial firms , and they or other credit scoring companies use this data to estimate individual consumers' creditworthiness , generally expressed as a numerical "score. .

the three largest credit bureaus—equifax , experian , and transunion—provide credit reports nationwide that include repayment histories .

credit reports generally may not include information on items such as race or ethnicity , religious or political preference , or medical history .

this industry significantly affects consumer access to financial products , because lenders and other financial firms use consumer data when deciding whether to provide credit or other products to an individual and under what terms .

consumers who find it challenging to enter the traditional credit reporting system face challenges accessing many consumer credit products , such as mortgages or credit cards , because creditors are unable to assess the consumer's credit worthiness .

this section examines some consumer credit reporting issues and related developments and policy issues .

short - term , small - dollar loans are consumer loans with relatively low initial principal amounts , often less than $1,000 , with relatively short repayment periods , generally for a small number of weeks or months .

small - dollar loans can be offered in various forms and by both traditional financial institutions ( eg , banks ) and alternative financial services providers ( eg , payday lenders ) .

many u.s. consumers do not have access to affordable small - dollar credit ; often for these consumers , small - dollar credit is either expensive or difficult to access .

the extent to which borrowers' financial situations would be harmed by using expensive credit or having limited access to credit is widely debated .

credit is an important way households pay for unexpected expenses and compensate for emergencies , such as a car or home repair , a medical expense , or a pay cut .

credit that can be paid back flexibly is particularly valued by consumers , especially those living paycheck to paycheck .

research suggests that access to this type of short - term credit can help households during short - term emergencies , yet unsustainable debt can harm households .

consumer groups often raise concerns regarding the affordability of small - dollar loans .

some borrowers may fall into debt traps , situations where borrowers repeatedly roll over existing loans into new loans and find it difficult to repay outstanding balances .

regulations aimed at reducing costs for borrowers may result in higher costs for lenders , possibly limiting or reducing credit availability for financially distressed individuals .

this section focuses on expanding access to affordable small - dollar credit .

policymakers continue to be interested in ways to increase access to affordable credit because it is an important step in achieving financial stability .

access to bank and other payment accounts , the credit reporting system , and affordable short - term small - dollar credit are generally considered foundational for households to manage their financial affairs , improve their financial well - being , and graduate to wealth building activities in the future .

in the united states , robust consumer credit markets allow most consumers to access financial services and credit products to meet their needs in traditional financial markets .

yet currently , consumers tend to rely on family or community connections to get their first bank account , establish a credit history , and gain access to affordable and safe credit .

given the importance of financial inclusion to financial well - being , and the challenges facing certain segments of the population , this topic is likely to continue to be the subject of congressional interest and legislative proposals .

as markets develop and technology continues to change , new financial products have the potential to lower costs and expand access .

yet , as this report described , relevant laws and regulations may need to be reconsidered or updated in response to these technological developments .

moreover , policymakers may consider whether other policy changes could help expand consumers' affordable access to these financial products and services .

disagreements will continue to exist around whether government programs or regulation should be used to directly support financial inclusion or whether laws and regulations make it more difficult for the private sector to create new or existing products targeted at underserved consumers .

