fully autonomous vehicles , which would carry out many or all of their functions without the intervention of a driver , may someday bring sweeping social and economic changes and "lead to breakthrough gains in transportation safety. .

motor vehicle crashes caused an estimated 36,560 fatalities in 2018 ; a study by the national highway traffic safety administration ( nhtsa ) has shown that 94% of crashes are due to human errors .

legislation that would encourage development and testing of autonomous vehicles has faced controversy in congress .

in the 115 th congress , the house of representatives passed an autonomous vehicle bill , h.r .

3388 , by voice vote in september 2017 .

the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation reported a different bill , s. 1885 , in november 2017 , but after some senators raised concerns about the preemption of state laws and the possibility of large numbers of vehicles being exempted from some federal motor vehicle safety standards , the senate bill did not reach the floor .

no further action was taken on either bill before the 115 th congress adjourned .

although some members of congress remain interested in autonomous vehicles , no legislative proposals have become law .

several fatal accidents involving autonomous vehicles raised new questions about how federal and state governments should regulate vehicle testing and the introduction of new technologies into vehicles offered for sale .

a pedestrian was killed in arizona by an autonomous vehicle operated by uber on march 18 , 2018 , and three tesla drivers died when they failed to respond to hazards not recognized by the vehicles .

these accidents suggest that the challenge of producing fully autonomous vehicles that can operate safely on public roads may be greater than developers had envisioned , a new outlook voiced by several executives , including the ford motor co. ceo .

however , with the authorization of federal highway and public transportation programs set to expire at the end of fy2020 , a surface transportation reauthorization bill could become a focus of efforts to also enact autonomous vehicle legislation .

while fully autonomous vehicles may lie well in the future , a range of new technologies is already improving vehicle performance and safety while bringing automation to vehicular functions once performed only by the driver .

the technologies involved are very different from the predominantly mechanical , driver - controlled technology of the 1960s , when the first federal vehicle safety laws were enacted .

these new features automate lighting and braking , connect the car and driver to the global positioning system ( gps ) and smartphones , and keep the vehicle in the correct lane .

three forces are driving these innovations: technological advances enabled by new materials and more powerful , compact electronics ; consumer demand for telecommunications connectivity and new types of vehicle ownership and ridesharing ; and regulatory mandates pertaining to emissions , fuel efficiency , and safety .

manufacturers are combining these innovations to produce vehicles with higher levels of automation .

vehicles do not fall neatly into the categories of "automated" or "nonautomated," because all new motor vehicles have some element of automation .

the society of automotive engineers international ( sae ) , an international standards - setting organization , has developed six categories of vehicle automation—ranging from a human driver doing everything to fully autonomous systems performing all the tasks once performed by a driver .

this classification system ( table 1 ) has been adopted by the u.s. department of transportation ( dot ) to foster standardized nomenclature to aid clarity and consistency in discussions about vehicle automation and safety .

vehicles sold today are in levels 1 and 2 of sae's automation rating system .

although some experts forecast market - ready autonomous vehicles at level 3 will be available in a few years , deployment of fully autonomous vehicles in all parts of the country at level 5 appears to be more distant , except perhaps within closed systems that allow fully autonomous vehicles to operate without encountering other types of vehicles .

testing and development of autonomous vehicles continue in many states and cities .

technologies that could guide an autonomous vehicle ( figure 1 ) include a wide variety of electronic sensors that would determine the distance between the vehicle and obstacles ; park the vehicle ; use gps , inertial navigation , and a system of built - in maps to guide the vehicle's direction and location ; and employ cameras that provide 360-degree views around the vehicle .

to successfully navigate roadways , an autonomous vehicle's computers , sensors and cameras will need to accomplish four tasks that a human driver undertakes automatically: detect objects in the vehicle's path ; classify those objects as to their likely makeup ( eg , plastic bag in the wind , a pedestrian or a moving bicycle ) ; predict the likely path of the object ; and plan an appropriate response .

most autonomous vehicles use dedicated short - range communication ( dsrc ) to monitor road conditions , congestion , crashes , and possible rerouting .

as 5g wireless communications infrastructure is installed more widely , dsrc may evolve and become integrated with it , enabling vehicles to offer greater interoperability , bandwidth , and cybersecurity .

some versions of these autonomous vehicle technologies , such as gps and rear - facing cameras , are being offered on vehicles currently on the market , while manufacturers are studying how to add others to safely transport passengers without drivers .

manufacturers of conventional vehicles , such as general motors and honda , are competing in this space with autonomous vehicle "developers" such as alphabet's waymo .

in addition , automakers are aligning themselves with new partners that have experience with ride - sharing and artificial intelligence: ford and volkswagen have announced that they expect to use autonomous vehicle technology in a new ride - sharing service in pittsburgh , pa , as early as 2021 ; gm acquired cruise automation , a company that is developing self - driving technology for level 4 and 5 vehicles .

gm has also invested $500 million in the lyft ride - sharing service ; honda , after breaking off talks about partnering with waymo , purchased a stake in gm's cruise automation ; volvo and daimler have announced partnerships with ride - sharing service uber ; and bmw partnered with the mobileye division of intel , a semiconductor manufacturer , to design autonomous vehicle software .

autonomous vehicles are being developed and tested in many countries , including those that produce most of the world's motor vehicles .

several analyses have evaluated the factors that are contributing to the advancement of autonomous vehicles in various countries: innovation .

benchmarks in this area include the number and engagement of domestic automakers and technology developers working on automation , the partnerships they forge with academic and related businesses , the prevalence of ride - sharing services , and autonomous vehicle patents issued .

v ehicle infrastructure .

autonomous vehicles will need new types of infrastructure support and maintenance , including advanced telecommunications links and near - perfect pavement and signage markings .

planning and implementing these highway improvements may enable autonomous vehicles to be fully functional sooner .

in addition , many test vehicles are currently powered by electricity , so the availability of refueling stations could be a factor in their acceptance .

wo rkforce training .

the increased reliance on autonomous vehicle technologies may require different workforce skills .

many traditional mechanical parts may disappear , especially if autonomous vehicles operate entirely on battery power , while the arrangement and function of dashboards and seating may be reinvented .

components suppliers that are already addressing this new product demand and reorienting their workforces will assist in the transition to autonomous vehicles .

g overnment laws and regulations that encourage development and testing .

fully autonomous vehicles may not have standard features of today's cars , such as steering wheels and brake pedals , as there will not be a driver .

by law or regulation , motor vehicles built today are required to have many of these features .

some governments are taking a lead by modifying vehicle requirements for purposes of pilot programs and tests .

permanent changes in standards will most likely be necessary if autonomous vehicle technologies are to be commercialized .

l evel of consumer acceptance .

markets are more likely to embrace autonomous vehicles if many residents in cities see autonomous vehicles on the road , a high level of technology is in use ( including internet access and mobile broadband ) , and ride - hailing services are more widely used .

several surveys have been conducted analyzing many of these factors .

for example , a 2018 harvard university report highlights plans in china , south korea , japan , and the united states to "seize the benefits" of autonomous vehicles .

in a report on innovation policies in four asian countries ( china , japan , south korea , and singapore ) , the united nations economic and social commission for asia and the pacific ranked singapore first in autonomous vehicle readiness because of its policies and new laws governing their deployment and its high consumer acceptance .

the report also notes that south korea's k - city facility is "intended to be the world's largest testbed for self - driving cars. .

a more detailed comparison of factors affecting autonomous vehicle development and deployment has been conducted by kpmg international , which has developed an index to measure how 25 countries are guiding autonomous vehicles ( table 2 ) .

the netherlands ranked first overall in the kpmg report , where it was cited as "an example of how to ready a country for avs by performing strongly in many areas , " as well as first in infrastructure .

singapore came in first on policy and legislation because it has a single government entity overseeing autonomous vehicle regulations , it is funding autonomous vehicle pilots , and it has enacted a national standard to promote safe deployment .

contributing to its rank was a world economic forum ( wef ) report that ranked it first among 139 countries in having an effective national legislature and efficient resolution of legal disputes .

singapore also scored first place on the consumer acceptance metric , primarily because its extensive autonomous testing is being conducted throughout the island nation , thereby familiarizing residents with autonomous passenger vehicles and buses .

two other major auto - producing countries—germany and japan—fall just below the united states on technology and innovation , according to kpmg , while japan ranks higher on autonomous vehicle infrastructure ( table 3 ) .

vehicles operating on public roads are subject to dual regulation by the federal government and the states in which they are registered and driven .

traditionally , nhtsa , within dot , has regulated auto safety , while states have licensed automobile drivers , established traffic regulations , and regulated automobile insurance .

proponents of autonomous vehicles note that lengthy revisions to current vehicle safety regulations could impede innovation , as the rules could be obsolete by the time they take effect .

in 2016 , the obama administration issued the first report on federal regulations affecting autonomous vehicles .

since then , dot has issued two follow - up reports and has said it anticipates issuing annual updates to its regulatory guidance .

in addition , the federal communications commission ( fcc ) is reconsidering the allocation of electromagnetic spectrum currently reserved for motor vehicle communications , and its decisions may affect how autonomous vehicles evolve .

federal regulation of the spectrum used in vehicle communications may affect how automation proceeds .

autonomous vehicles , whose artificial intelligence and technology are generally self - contained in each vehicle , are part of a larger category of connected vehicles and infrastructure .

federal , state , and industry research and testing of vehicle - to - vehicle ( v2v ) and vehicle - to - infrastructure ( v2i ) communications has been under way since the 1990s .

together , these two sets of technologies , known as v2x , are expected to reduce the number of accidents by improving detection of oncoming vehicles , providing warnings to drivers , and establishing communications infrastructure along roadways that would prevent many vehicles from leaving the road and striking pedestrians .

these technologies fall within the broad category of intelligent transportation systems , which have received strong support from congress due to their potential to improve traffic flow and safety .

for vehicles to communicate wirelessly , they use radio frequencies , or spectrum , which are regulated by the federal communications commission ( fcc ) .

in 1999 , the fcc allocated the 5.9 gigahertz ( ghz ) band solely for motor vehicle safety purposes for vehicles using dsrc .

over the past two decades , industry and government agencies have collaborated to develop , test , and deploy dsrc technologies .

states have invested in dsrc - based improvements , and this technology is operating in dozens of states and cities .

as industry has continued to explore vehicle automation , an alternative , cellular - based technology has recently emerged , known as c - v2x .

in december 2019 , the fcc proposed rules that would reallocate the lower 45 mhz of the 5.9 ghz band for unlicensed use ( eg , wi - fi ) , and allocate the remaining 30 mhz for transportation and vehicle - related use .

of the 30 mhz , the fcc proposed to grant c - v2x exclusive use of 20 mhz of the segment .

it is seeking comment on whether the remaining 10 mhz should remain dedicated to dsrc or be dedicated to c - v2x .

the fcc commissioners noted that dsrc has evolved slowly and has not been widely deployed , and the rules are intended to ensure the spectrum supports its highest and best use .

this decision has competitive implications for the automotive , electronics , and telecommunications industries , and may affect the availability of safety technologies and the path toward vehicle automation .

dot has called for retaining the entire 5.9 ghz band for exclusive transportation use .

figure 3 shows that these two technologies facilitate somewhat different types of vehicle and infrastructure communications .

in light of their different characteristics , the european commission has approved dsrc use for direct v2v and v2i communications , while endorsing cellular - based technology for vehicle access to the cloud and remote infrastructure .

industry groups in the united states took varying positions in the fcc proceedings .

dsrc advocates argued that this technology has been proven by years of testing and is already deployed in many areas .

they generally supported retaining the 5.9 ghz band for exclusive use for dsrc .

c - v2x supporters contended that its cellular - based solution is aligned with international telecommunications standards for 5g technologies and should be allowed to use the 5.9 ghz band alongside dsrc .

a group of technology companies , including device makers , argued that additional spectrum is needed to accommodate the increasing number of interconnected devices , and that the 5.9ghz band can safely be shared among transportation and non - transportation uses .

during the 115 th congress , committees in the house of representatives and the senate held numerous hearings in 2017 on the technology of autonomous vehicles and possible federal issues that could result from their deployment .

initially , bipartisan consensus existed on major issues: h.r .

3388 , the self drive act , was reported unanimously by the house committee on energy and commerce , and on september 6 , 2017 , the house of representatives passed it without amendment by voice vote .

a similar bipartisan initiative began in the senate .

prior to markup in the committee on commerce , science , and transportation , the then - chairman and ranking member issued a set of principles they viewed as central to new legislation: prioritize safety , acknowledging that federal standards will eventually be as important for self - driving vehicles as they are for conventional vehicles ; promote innovation and address the incompatibility of old regulations written before the advent of self - driving vehicles ; remain technology - neutral , not favoring one business model over another ; reinforce separate but complementary federal and state regulatory roles ; strengthen cybersecurity so that manufacturers address potential vulnerabilities before occupant safety is compromised ; and educate the public through government and industry efforts so that the differences between conventional and self - driving vehicles are understood .

legislation slightly different from the house - passed bill emerged: s. 1885 , the av start act , was reported by the committee on commerce , science , and transportation on november 28 , 2017 .

it was not scheduled for a floor vote prior to adjournment in december 2018 because of unresolved concerns raised by several senators .

to address some of those concerns , a committee staff draft bill that would have revised s. 1885 was circulated in december 2018 that could form the basis of future legislation .

the house and senate bills addressed concerns about state action replacing some federal regulation , while also empowering nhtsa to take unique regulatory actions to ensure safety and encouraging innovation in autonomous vehicles .

the bills retained the current arrangement of states controlling most driver - related functions and the federal government being responsible for vehicle safety .

the house and senate bills included the following major provisions .

where the december 2018 commerce committee staff draft proposed significant changes , they are noted in this analysis .

p reemption of state laws .

h.r .

3388 would have barred states from regulating the design , construction , or performance of highly autonomous vehicles , automated driving systems , or their components unless those laws are identical to federal law .

the house - passed bill reiterated that vehicle registration , driver licensing , driving education , insurance , law enforcement , and crash investigations should remain under state jurisdiction as long as state laws and regulations do not restrict autonomous - vehicle development .

h.r .

3388 provided that nothing in the preemption section should prohibit states from enforcing their laws and regulations on the sale and repair of motor vehicles .

s. 1885 would also have preempted states from adopting laws , regulations , and standards that would regulate many aspects of autonomous vehicles , but would have omitted some of the specific powers reserved to the states under the house - passed bill .

states would not have been required to issue drivers licenses for autonomous - vehicle operations , but states that chose to issue such licenses would not have been allowed to discriminate based on a disability .

the bill provided that preemption would end when nhtsa establishes standards covering these vehicles .

the senate staff draft sought to clarify that state and local governments would not lose their traditional authority over traffic laws .

it also would have added provisions that state common law and statutory liability would be unaffected by preemption , and would have limited use of arbitration in death or bodily injury cases until new federal safety standards are in effect .

exemption authority .

both the house and senate bills would have expanded dot's ability to issue exemptions from existing safety standards to encourage autonomous - vehicle testing on public roads .

to qualify for an autonomous - vehicle exemption , a manufacturer would have had to show that the safety level of the vehicle equaled or exceeded the safety level of each standard for which an exemption was sought .

current law limits exemptions to 2,500 vehicles per manufacturer per year .

the house - passed bill would have phased in increases over four years of up to 100,000 vehicles per manufacturer per year ; the senate bill would have permitted up to 80,000 in a similar phase - in .

h.r .

3388 provided constraints on the issuance of exemptions from crashworthiness and occupant protection standards ; s. 1885 did not address those two issues .

dot would have been directed to establish a publicly available and searchable database of motor vehicles that have been granted an exemption .

crashes of exempted vehicles would have had to be reported to dot .

the senate bill would not have required the establishment of a database of exempted vehicles , and reporting of exempt vehicle crashes would not have been required .

the senate staff draft added a provision to ensure that vehicles exempted from federal standards would have been required to nonetheless maintain the same level of overall safety , occupant protection , and crash avoidance as a traditional vehicle .

a dot review of vehicle exemptions would have been required annually .

the draft capped exemptions at no more than five years .

new nhtsa safety rules .

the house bill would have required nhtsa to issue a new regulation requiring developers and manufacturers to submit a "safety assessment certification" explaining how safety is being addressed in their autonomous vehicles .

the senate bill included a similar provision requiring a "safety evaluation report," and would have delineated nine areas for inclusion in the reports , including system safety , data recording , cybersecurity risks , and methods of informing the operator about whether the vehicle technology is functioning properly .

while manufacturers and developers would be required to submit reports , the legislation did not mandate that nhtsa establish an assessment protocol to ensure that minimum risk conditions are met .

the senate staff draft would have clarified the process by which federal motor vehicle safety standards would be updated to accommodate new vehicle technologies , providing additional time for new rulemaking .

within six months of enactment , dot would have been required to develop and publicize a plan for its rulemaking priorities for the safe deployment of autonomous vehicles .

to address concerns that autonomous vehicles might not recognize certain potential hazards—including the presence of bicyclists , pedestrians , and animals—and hence possibly introduce new vulnerabilities to motor vehicle travel , the senate staff draft would have clarified that manufacturers must describe how they are addressing the ability of their autonomous vehicles to detect , classify , and respond to these and other road users .

manufacturers and developers would include this analysis in their safety evaluation reports .

cybersecurity .

the house - passed bill provided that no highly autonomous vehicle or vehicle with "partial driving automation" could be sold domestically unless a cybersecurity plan had been developed by the automaker .

such plans would have to have been developed within six months of enactment and would include a written policy on mitigation of cyberattacks , unauthorized intrusions , and malicious vehicle control commands ; a point of contact at the automaker with cybersecurity responsibilities ; a process for limiting access to autonomous driving systems ; and the manufacturer's plans for employee training and for maintenance of the policies .

the senate bill would have required written cybersecurity plans to be issued , including a process for identifying and protecting vehicle control systems , detection , and response to cybersecurity incidents , and methods for exchanging cybersecurity information .

a cybersecurity point of contact at the manufacturer or vehicle developer would have had to be named .

unlike the house - passed bill , s. 1885 would have directed dot to create incentives so that vehicle developers would share information about vulnerabilities , and would have specified that all federal research on cybersecurity risks should be coordinated with dot .

in addition , s. 1885 would have established a highly automated vehicle data access advisory committee to provide congress with recommendations on cybersecurity issues .

federal agencies would have been prohibited from issuing regulations pertaining to the access or ownership of data stored in autonomous vehicles until the advisory committee's report was submitted .

the staff draft would have added several cybersecurity provisions , including an additional study by the national institute of standards and technology that would recommend ways vehicles can be protected from cybersecurity incidents .

privacy .

before selling autonomous vehicles , manufacturers would have been required by the house - passed bill to develop written privacy plans concerning the collection and storage of data generated by the vehicles , as well as a method of conveying that information to vehicle owners and occupants .

however , a manufacturer would have been allowed to exclude processes from its privacy policy that encrypt or make anonymous the sources of data .

the federal trade commission would have been tasked with developing a report for congress on a number of vehicle privacy issues .

although s. 1885 would not have explicitly required privacy plans by developers and manufacturers , it would have required nhtsa to establish an online , searchable motor vehicle privacy database that would include a description of the types of information , including personally identifiable information ( pii ) , that are collected about individuals during operation of a motor vehicle .

this database would have covered all types of vehicles—not just autonomous vehicles—and would have included the privacy policies of manufacturers .

the database would also have included an explanation about how pii would be collected , retained , and destroyed when no longer relevant .

the senate staff draft would have added new passenger motor vehicle privacy protections .

research and advisory panels .

both bills would have established several new advisory bodies to conduct further research on autonomous vehicles and advise dot on possible new vehicle standards .

h.r .

3388 would have established a nhtsa advisory group with a broad cross - section of members to advise on mobility access for senior citizens and the disabled ; cybersecurity ; labor , employment , environmental , and privacy issues ; and testing and information sharing among manufacturers .

s. 1885 would have established other panels , including a highly automated vehicles technical committee to advise dot on rulemaking policy and vehicle safety ; a working group comprising industry and consumer groups to identify marketing strategies and educational outreach to consumers ; and a committee of transportation and environmental experts to evaluate the impact of autonomous vehicles on transportation infrastructure , mobility , the environment , and fuel consumption .

separately , dot would have been required to study ways in which autonomous vehicles and parts could be produced domestically , with recommendations on how to incentivize u.s. manufacturing .

the senate staff draft would have consolidated some of the advisory committees in s. 1885 into a highly automated vehicle advisory council with diverse stakeholder representation , and mandated to report on mobility for the disabled , senior citizens and populations underserved by public transportation ; cybersecurity ; employment and environmental issues ; and privacy and data sharing .

no similar comprehensive autonomous vehicle legislation has been introduced in the 116 th congress , although discussions on a bicameral bill have been ongoing .

in addition , the senate committee on environment and public works has reported america's transportation infrastructure act of 2019 , s. 2302 , which includes several provisions in subtitle d addressing the possible impact of autonomous vehicles on highway infrastructure .

it would establish a grant program to modernize the u.s. charging and fueling infrastructure so that it would be responsive to technology advancements , including autonomous vehicles .

the legislation would also require research on ways in which roadway infrastructure should be improved for autonomous vehicles .

state and local rules and regulations may affect how autonomous vehicles are tested and deployed .

the national governors association ( nga ) has noted that state governments have a role with respect to vehicle and pedestrian safety , privacy , cybersecurity , and linkage with advanced communications networks .

while supporting technology innovations in transportation , a recent nga report notes that "the existing regulatory structure and related incentives have not kept pace with the new technology" and that "recent accidents have raised concerns about the safety of drivers , pedestrians and other road users in the period during which autonomous and non - autonomous vehicles share the road. .

nga has joined with other state and local government organizations to call for modifications in forthcoming autonomous vehicle legislation , including clarity that states and local governments not only can enforce existing laws governing operation of motor vehicles on public roads , but also originate new statutes and regulations ; requiring submission of more detailed automaker and developer reports to dot on the safety of their technologies , so that states and cities can be assured that autonomous vehicle testing is being conducted in a safe manner ; differentiation between limited vehicle testing and the commercial deployment of large numbers of autonomous vehicles through an expanded exemptions process ; and expansion of plans for consumer education about "safe use and interaction" with respect to autonomous vehicles .

according to the national conference of state legislatures ( ncsl ) , at least 41 states and the district of columbia considered legislation related to autonomous vehicles between 2013 and october 2019 ; in that time , 29 states and the district of columbia enacted legislation , governors in 11 states issued executive orders , and 5 states issued both an executive order and enacted legislation .

 ( figure 4 ) .

of the states that have enacted laws in 2017 , 2018 , and 2019 pertaining to autonomous vehicles , ncsl reports that the largest number of states have passed laws that clarify certain types of commercial activity , such as how closely autonomous vehicles can follow each other when they are coordinated , as in truck platooning .

according to ncsl , no recent state laws have been enacted dealing with cybersecurity or vehicle inspection reports .

ncsl has organized and categorized the types of state legislation ( table 4 ) .

for a more thorough description of the legislation passed in 2017 , 2018 , and 2019 , the ncsl table of enacted state legislation provides more detail .

deployment of fully autonomous vehicles will require not only a suite of new technologies , but also changes to the highway infrastructure on which those vehicles will operate .

autonomous vehicles being tested today rely on clear pavement markings and legible signage to stay in their lanes and navigate through traffic .

major highways as well as side roads in urban and rural settings will need to accommodate autonomous vehicles in addition to a large fleet of conventional vehicles with human drivers .

in this transition period to more autonomous vehicles—which many anticipate will last several decades —the federal highway administration ( fhwa ) is expected to play a significant role through its administration of the manual on uniform traffic control devices ( mutcd ) , which sets standards for all traffic control devices , including signs , intersection signals , and road markings .

for example , overhead signage on interstate highways contains white lettering on a green background in all 50 states—easily recognizable to any u.s. driver—due to mutcd standards .

fhwa is in the process of updating the 2009 mutcd to address issues specific to autonomous vehicle technologies .

however , state compliance with mutcd is voluntary , and not all states uniformly apply all standards .

audi reportedly announced in 2018 that it would not make its new level 3 autonomous vehicle technology , called traffic jam pilot , available in the united states because of "laws that change from one state to the next , insurance requirements , and things like lane lines and road signs that look different in different regions. .

other automakers have made similar complaints about u.s. roads .

in the near term , improvement and better maintenance of pavement markings , signage and intersection design may be the most helpful steps that federal and state transportation officials can take .

despite national standards based on mutcd , not all states maintain their highway markings at a level that would be useful to guide autonomous vehicles .

inadequate road maintenance may affect the pace of autonomous vehicle deployment .

some 21% of major u.s. roads are in poor condition , and a road with many potholes or temporary pavement repairs may also lack continuous lane markings .

many minor roads , which are generally the responsibility of county or municipal governments , may lack road edge lines as well as center lines , potentially making it difficult for autonomous vehicles to position themselves correctly .

dirt and gravel roads may pose particular challenges for autonomous vehicles , as they generally have no pavement markings and cameras may be unable to detect potholes or edges in low - visibility conditions .

closely tied to the need for clearer road markings and signage will be ways in which federal and state transportation agencies develop a standardized method to communicate information to vehicles and motorists about construction , road accidents , detours , and other changes to road environments .

many of the perceived benefits of autonomous vehicles—reduced vehicle fatalities , congestion mitigation , and pollution reduction—may depend on the ability of vehicles to exchange information with surrounding infrastructure .

the transportation research board ( trb ) has been evaluating how states should begin now to plan and develop the types of connected vehicle infrastructure that will be necessary for full autonomous vehicle deployment .

trb's research is also focused on how cash - strapped transportation agencies can identify the large investments that will in turn be necessary to implement connectivity on top of regular maintenance of highways , bridges , and other traditional infrastructure .

other options to facilitate autonomous vehicle travel may include designation of special highway corridors that would include all v2x systems necessary for safe autonomous vehicle operation ; three european countries have agreed to build such a corridor .

over a longer time line , the importance of highway markings may fade as automakers and developers find new ways for autonomous vehicles to navigate , including greater use of guardrails and roadside barriers , sensors , and three - dimensional maps .

if highly detailed mapping is deemed to be one replacement for visual cues such as lane markings , then transportation agencies and automakers may need to develop an open standard so that all vehicles will understand the mapping technology .

v2x communications through dsrc and cellular may evolve to provide a mechanism for new types of vehicle guidance .

