o ver the past decade , google , amazon , facebook , and apple—collectively known as the "big four" or "big tech"—have revolutionized the internet economy and affected the daily lives of billions of people worldwide .

google operates a search engine that processes over 3.5 billion searches a day ( google search ) , runs the biggest online video platform ( youtube ) , licenses the world's most popular mobile operating system ( android ) , and is the largest seller of online advertising .

amazon is a major online marketplace , retailer , logistics network , cloud - storage host , and television and film producer .

facebook boasts 2.4 billion monthly active users worldwide , meaning more people use the social network than follow any single world religion .

apple popularized the smartphone , making the device so ubiquitous that consumers have grown accustomed to carrying a supercomputer in their pocket .

collectively , the big four generated over $690 billion in revenue in 2018—a sum larger than the annual gdps of most national economies .

while these companies are responsible for momentous technological breakthroughs and massive wealth creation , they have also received scrutiny related to their privacy practices , dissemination of harmful content and misinformation , alleged political bias , and—as relevant here—potentially anticompetitive conduct .

in june 2019 , the wall street journal reported that the department of justice ( doj ) and federal trade commission ( ftc ) —the agencies responsible for enforcing the federal antitrust laws—agreed to divide responsibility over investigations of the big four's business practices .

under these agreements , the doj reportedly has authority over investigations of google and apple , while the ftc will look into facebook and amazon .

the following month , the doj announced a potentially broader inquiry into big tech .

specifically , the justice department's antitrust division revealed that it intends to examine possible abuses of market power by unnamed "market - leading online platforms" —an announcement that has led some to speculate that a number of the big four may face investigations from both agencies despite the previously reported agreements .

big tech's business practices have also attracted congressional interest .

in may 2019 , the senate judiciary committee held a hearing to investigate privacy and competition issues in the digital advertising industry .

and in june and july , the house judiciary committee held two separate hearings examining the market power of online platforms .

this report provides an overview of antitrust issues involving the big four .

the report begins with a general outline of the aspects of antitrust doctrine that are most likely to play a central role in the doj and ftc investigations—specifically , the case law surrounding monopolization and mergers .

next , the report discusses the application of this doctrine to each of the big four .

finally , the report concludes by examining policy options related to the promotion of digital competition .

applying the general legal principles discussed above to specific technology companies is a highly fact - intensive enterprise that will depend on the specific evidence that the doj and ftc uncover during their investigations .

moreover , the agencies have yet to publicly release details on the categories of conduct that they are evaluating in the course of their big tech inquiries , making it difficult to confidently assess the strength of antitrust cases against the relevant companies .

with these caveats in mind , the following subsections discuss certain categories of conduct that the antitrust agencies may be investigating at each of the big four .

while the antitrust action surrounding the big four is currently concentrated in the executive branch and the courts , digital competition issues have also attracted the interest of congress , which may pursue legislation to address anticompetitive conduct by large technology companies .

such legislation could take two general forms .

first , some commentators have proposed that congress enact certain changes to existing antitrust doctrine to promote digital competition .

second , a number of lawmakers and academics have advocated legislation that would impose sector - specific competition regulation on large technology companies .

the subsections below discuss each category of potential legislation in turn .

a number of commentators have proposed that congress adopt certain changes to existing antitrust doctrine to promote competition in technology markets .

these proposals include: changes to predatory - pricing doctrine .

some observers have proposed changes to predatory - pricing doctrine with an eye toward addressing the pricing practices of dominant technology firms like amazon .

specifically , one commentator has criticized brooke group 's "recoupment" requirement on the grounds that it does not adequately deter predatory pricing by dominant online platforms .

according to this line of criticism , brooke group 's requirement that plaintiffs demonstrate a "dangerous probability" of recoupment fails to account for dominant platforms' unique ability to persist in charging below - cost prices for years and employ difficult - to - detect recoupment strategies like price discrimination among different categories of customers .

as a result , this commentator has advocated a presumption that below - cost pricing by dominant platforms qualifies as prohibited exclusionary conduct .

other academics have criticized the first brooke group requirement , which demands that predatory - pricing plaintiffs show that a monopolist charged below - cost prices .

these commentators argue that pricing - cutting can be anticompetitive even when a firm prices its products above cost , especially in cases where a monopolist aggressively cuts prices in order to prevent a new rival from recovering its entry costs or realizing economies of scale .

to address this concern , these observers contend that courts should evaluate whether challenged price - cutting strategies exclude potential entrants without screening predation claims with a price - cost test .

congress could accordingly remedy this alleged defect in current predatory - pricing doctrine with legislation eliminating the first brooke group requirement .

enhanced merger review for dominant technology companies .

some commentators have advocated stricter scrutiny for mergers and acquisitions by dominant technology companies , including a rebuttable presumption that mergers and acquisitions between certain monopolist technology companies and their potential competitors are unlawful .

a number of academics have also suggested that because promising technology startups often fall below the minimum - size thresholds that trigger doj and ftc review under the hsr act , congress should consider lowering or eliminating those thresholds for deals involving dominant technology companies .

enhanced scrutiny of product design decisions .

finally , some observers have argued that courts should be less deferential toward defendants' justifications of allegedly exclusionary product designs , arguing that product - design decisions are often "key elements" of large technology companies' business strategies .

congress could accordingly consider legislation to clarify the appropriate standards for evaluating exclusionary - design claims , perhaps by making clear that such claims are subject to full rule - of - reason scrutiny rather than the more permissive tests adopted by certain lower federal courts .

as discussed , academic commentators have argued that certain digital markets possess structural characteristics that advantage large incumbent firms .

in some cases , dominant firms in these markets can enhance such entry barriers by making it difficult for consumers to "multi - home" or use complementary products offered by competitors , and courts evaluating challenges to these product - design choices hesitate to hold companies liable under existing antitrust doctrine .

moreover , vertically integrated technology monopolists do not face general nondiscrimination rules requiring them to deal evenhandedly with rivals in adjacent markets .

some analysts have accordingly argued that large technology platforms require sector - specific regulations to address these competition concerns .

these proposed regulations include "data mobility" rules giving consumers greater ability to control their data and move it to competing platforms , "interoperability" standards requiring companies to minimize technical impediments to the use of complementary products , and nondiscrimination requirements prohibiting vertically integrated technology monopolists from discriminating against rivals who use their platforms .

congress could legislate such requirements , direct an existing federal agency to develop them through rulemaking , or create a new agency tasked with regulating the technology industry .

a number of lawmakers and academics have also argued that the infrastructure - like features of certain digital services justify separation regimes prohibiting monopolists that provide those services from entering adjacent markets .

such separation regimes are not without precedent .

historically , congress and federal regulators have imposed a variety of structural prohibitions limiting the lines of business in which certain categories of firms—including railroads , banks , television networks , and telecommunications companies—can engage .

commentators have justified these separation regimes on the grounds that they eliminate conflicts of interest that lead companies in key infrastructure - like sectors to discriminate against their vertical rivals .

while the nondiscrimination requirements discussed above represent one means of addressing this concern , categorical separation rules are an alternative to such requirements that may prove easier to administer .

in march 2019 , senator elizabeth warren proposed one type of separation regime for dominant technology companies , arguing that large "platform utilities"—including "online marketplaces," "exchanges," and "platforms for connecting third parties"—should be prohibited from owing companies that participate on their platforms .

the chairman of the house antitrust subcommittee has also expressed support for similar separation requirements .

congress may also be interested in broader separation regimes prohibiting dominant technology platforms from entering other types of markets .

specifically , many lawmakers have expressed concern about facebook's announcement that it intends to develop a new cryptocurrency .

these worries have generated a legislative proposal to prevent any large technology platform from entering the financial industry , with members on the house financial services committee circulating draft legislation titled the keep big tech out of finance act .

this draft bill would prohibit "large platform utilities" from ( 1 ) affiliating with financial institutions , or ( 2 ) establishing , maintaining , or operating digital assets intended to be "widely used as a medium of exchange , store or value , or any other similar function. .

