on june 4 , 2019 , the house passed the american dream and promise act of 2019 ( h.r .

6 ) on a vote of 237 to 187 .

title i of the bill , the dream act of 2019 , would establish a process for certain unauthorized immigrants who entered the united states as children ( known as unauthorized childhood arrivals ) to obtain lawful permanent immigration status .

this vote on h.r .

6 was one of several house and senate floor votes since 2018—and the only successful one—on legislation to grant some type of immigration relief to unauthorized childhood arrivals .

as commonly used , the term "unauthorized childhood arrivals" encompasses both individuals who entered the united states unlawfully and individuals who entered legally but then lost legal status , by , for example , overstaying an authorized temporary period of stay .

there is no single set of requirements that defines an unauthorized childhood arrival .

individual bills include their own criteria .

this report considers house and senate measures on unauthorized childhood arrivals that have seen legislative action since 2001 , focusing in particular on legislation considered in the 115 th and 116 th congresses .

it also discusses the related deferred action for childhood arrivals ( daca ) initiative and daca - related data .

the material is presented chronologically to trace the development of legislative proposals on unauthorized childhood arrivals and highlight the interplay between legislative action on these measures and developments related to the daca initiative .

legislation on unauthorized childhood arrivals dates to 2001 .

that year , the development , relief , and education for alien minors ( dream ) act ( s. 1291 ) was introduced in the 107 th congress to provide a pathway to lawful permanent resident ( lpr ) status for eligible individuals .

lprs can live and work in the united states permanently and can become u.s. citizens through the naturalization provisions in the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) .

in most cases , lprs must reside in the united states for five years before they can naturalize .

s. 1291 sought to provide immigration relief to unauthorized childhood arrivals who , like the larger unauthorized population , were typically unable to work legally and were subject to removal from the united states .

many policymakers viewed this subset of the unauthorized population more sympathetically than unauthorized immigrants on the whole because unauthorized childhood arrivals had arrived in the united states as children and were thus not generally seen as being responsible for their unlawful status .

although not all subsequent bills to grant lpr status to unauthorized childhood arrivals were entitled the "dream act" and no subsequent bill included exactly the same provisions as s. 1291 , such legislation came to be known generally as the "dream act" and its intended beneficiaries as "dreamers. .

in general , the potential beneficiaries of such bills did not have an avenue under the ina to become lprs .

the most common way for a foreign national to adjust status ( become an lpr while in the united states ) is through ina provisions that require the individual to be eligible for an immigrant visa and to have such a visa immediately available to him or her through the permanent immigration system .

individuals are most often eligible for immigrant visas based on a qualifying family relationship ( to a u.s. citizen or lpr ) or an employment tie .

among the other criteria to adjust status under these provisions , the individual must have been "inspected and admitted or paroled into the united states" ; thus , individuals who entered the united states unlawfully are not eligible .

in addition , with limited exceptions , an individual is not eligible for adjustment of status if he or she falls in a disqualified category , such as someone who engaged in unauthorized employment or "who has failed ( other than through no fault of his own or for technical reasons ) to maintain continuously a lawful status since entry into the united states. .

s. 1291 in the 107 th congress and a subsequent dream act bill ( s. 1545 ) introduced in the 108 th congress were reported by the senate judiciary committee .

neither bill saw further action .

beginning in the 109 th congress , proposals on unauthorized childhood arrivals—which had received action in earlier congresses as stand - alone bills—were incorporated into larger measures .

in the 109 th through the 111 th congresses , several measures to grant lpr status to unauthorized childhood arrivals were considered on the senate and the house floors .

on june 15 , 2012 , dhs issued a memorandum announcing the daca initiative .

the memorandum stated that certain individuals who were brought to the united states as children and met other criteria would be considered for deferred action for two years , subject to renewal .

dhs has described deferred action as "a use of prosecutorial discretion to defer removal action against an individual for a certain period of time. .

in remarks delivered that same day , president barack obama called on congress to pass dream act legislation , citing in particular the house - passed bill in the 111 th congress .

he indicated that "in the absence of any immigration action from congress to fix our broken immigration system," his administration had tried "to focus our immigration enforcement resources in the right places. .

he portrayed the daca initiative as an extension of those efforts , stating that "[e]ffective immediately , the department of homeland security is taking steps to lift the shadow of deportation from these young people. .

president obama made clear that daca relief was not a permanent solution .

instead , he characterized it as "a temporary stopgap measure. .

the eligibility criteria for an initial two - year grant of daca were broadly similar to those in earlie r dream act bills .

dhs's u.s .

citizenship a nd immigration services ( uscis ) , which administers daca , published the eligibility criteria for an i ni tial daca grant and a renewal on its website .

the criteria for an initial daca grant were ( 1 ) under age 31 on june 15 , 2012 ; ( 2 ) under age 16 at time of entry into the united states ; ( 3 ) continuous ly resident in the unite d states since june 15 , 20 07 ; ( 4 ) physically present in united s tates on june 15 , 2012 , and at the time of requesting daca ; ( 5 ) no t in lawful status on june 15 , 2012 ; ( 6 ) in school , graduated from high school or obtained general education development certificate , or honorably d ischarged from the armed forces ; and ( 7 ) not convicted of a felony , a significant misdemeanor , or three or more misdemeanors , and not otherwise a threat to national se curity or public safety .

in addition , with specified exceptions , an individual had to be a t least age 15 to request daca .

individuals granted deferred action could receive employment authorization .

according to uscis , " under existing regulations , an individual whose case has been deferred is eligible to receive employment authorization for the period of deferred action , prov ided he or she can demonstrate ' an ec onomic necessity for employment ' . .

to request daca from uscis , an applicant had to submit form i - 821d , " consideration of deferre d action for childhood arrivals " ; an application for employment authorization ( form i - 765 ) and a related worksheet ( form i - 765ws ) ; and required fees .

currently , as discussed later in this report , individuals who have never been granted daca cannot submit initial requests .

individuals who have been granted daca in the past , however , continue to be able to submit requests .

to be considered for a two - year renewal , a daca recipient must satisfy the following criteria: ( 1 ) did not depart from the united states on or after august 15 , 2012 , without first obtaining permission to travel , ( 2 ) has continuously resided in the united states since submitting his or her latest approved daca request , and ( 3 ) has not been convicted of a felony , a significant misdemeanor , or three or more misdemeanors , and is not a threat to national security or public safety .

to request a renewal of daca , an individual must submit the same forms and fees as for an initial request .

as of the date of this report , these fees total $495 .

the next significant legislative developments related to unauthorized childhood arrivals occurred in the 113 th congress when the senate approved a major immigration reform bill with dream act provisions .

the bill , the border security , economic opportunity , and immigration modernization act ( s. 744 ) , was passed on a 68-32 vote .

the house did not consider s. 744 .

s. 744 proposed to establish a general legalization program for individuals in the united states who were not in nonimmigrant status or other specified lawful status and a special dream act pathway to lpr status for certain aliens who had entered the country as children .

under s. 744 , unauthorized childhood arrivals , like other unauthorized immigrants , would first have applied for a newly created status—registered provisional immigrant ( rpi ) status .

the requirements for rpi status included continuous presence in the united states since a specified date , satisfaction of any applicable federal tax liability , and submission of biometric and biographic data for national security and law enforcement clearances .

rpi status would have been granted for an initial period of six years and could have been extended in six - year increments .

applicants for rpi status would have been subject to specified inadmissibility and ineligibility criteria .

under s. 744 , dhs could have adopted streamlined rpi procedures for daca recipients .

it could have granted rpi status to a daca recipient upon completion of renewed national security and law enforcement clearances unless the agency determined that the individual had engaged in conduct making him or her ineligible for rpi status .

s. 744 would have established a special dream act pathway to lpr status for rpis who had been in rpi status for at least five years , had initially entered the united states when they were under age 16 , and , subject to a hardship exception , had completed either two years of higher education or four years of service in the uniformed services .

such individuals also would have had to submit biometric and biographic data for national security and law enforcement background checks and would have had to meet the english language and civics requirements for naturalization , unless exempted .

s. 744 would have authorized dhs to adopt streamlined procedures for daca recipients to obtain lpr status .

with respect to naturalization , an alien granted lpr status under the dream act provisions in s. 744 would have been considered to be an lpr ( and therefore accumulating time toward the residency requirement for naturalization ) during the period in rpi status .

in most cases , however , an alien could not have applied for naturalization while in rpi status .

s. 744 would have placed restrictions on federal student aid under title iv of the higher education act for rpis who had entered the united states before age 16 .

this group would only have been eligible for federal student loans , federal work - study programs , and services .

in addition , the bill would have repealed section 505 of iirira , which , as discussed , restricts the provision of postsecondary educational benefits for aliens who are not lawfully present .

on september 5 , 2017 , attorney general jeff sessions announced that daca was being terminated .

a related memorandum released by dhs the same day rescinded the 2012 memorandum that established the initiative .

as part of the rescission , dhs had planned to "execute a wind - down" of daca , under which no new initial daca requests would have been accepted after september 5 , 2017 , and no new renewal requests would have been accepted after october 5 , 2017 .

this wind - down did not proceed as planned , however , because daca recipients and others filed federal lawsuits challenging the legality of the rescission .

under rulings in these cases , to date , individuals who have been granted daca in the past continue to be able to submit daca requests .

individuals who have never been granted daca cannot submit new initial requests .

the u.s. supreme court is scheduled to hear arguments on the daca rescission on november 12 , 2019 .

individuals who have been granted daca in the past and whose daca grants have expired or been terminated are still able to apply for a renewal .

as of august 1 , 2019 , uscis has reinstated its past daca "late renewal policy," under which an individual whose previous daca grant expired more than one year ago or whose previous daca grant was terminated must submit an initial daca request rather than a renewal request .

according to uscis data on the daca population , there were approximately 689,000 active daca recipients as of september 4 , 2017 , and approximately 669,080 active daca recipients as of april 30 , 2019 .

regarding the latter group , about 80% were born in mexico , 53% were female , and the median age was 25 .

in notes accompanying the september 4 , 2017 , data tables , uscis indicated that the total number of individuals who had ever been granted daca as of that date was approximately 800,000 .

this number excluded individuals whose initial grants of daca were later terminated .

of those 800,000 individuals , uscis reported that about 40,000 had become lprs and about 70,000 had either failed to apply to renew their daca grants or had their renewal applications denied .

as of july 31 , 2019 , according to uscis data , the total number of individuals who had ever been granted daca was 822,063 .

this number excluded individuals whose initial grants of daca were later terminated .

of those 822,063 individuals , 73,043 had become lprs and 4,448 had become citizens .

these data on daca recipients can be compared with estimates of the daca - eligible population .

according to an analysis by the migration policy institute ( mpi ) , an estimated 1,307,000 unauthorized individuals were immediately eligible for daca in 2016 based on the eligibility requirements for an initial daca grant that mpi was able to model .

in addition , an estimated 398,000 met the age , residence , and immigration status criteria but not the educational requirements .

mpi updated its estimates of the daca - eligible population as of 2018 based on the original daca eligibility requirements and subject to the same model limitations as the 2016 estimates .

it estimated that , as of 2018 , 1,302,000 individuals met the daca eligibility requirements and an additional 356,000 met the age , residence , and immigration status criteria but not the educational requirements .

in the fall of 2017 , following the daca rescission announcement , president donald trump and several members of congress discussed a possible deal on unauthorized childhood arrivals .

initially , these talks focused on a package combining provisions to "enshrine the protections of daca into law" with border security provisions .

other immigration issues were subsequently introduced into the discussion , and in january 2018 the white house released its "framework on immigration reform & border security. .

this proposal called for legal status for daca - eligible individuals as well as enhancements to border security and interior immigration enforcement and changes to the permanent immigration system .

in the 115 th and 116 th congresses , the senate and the house have considered measures containing provisions to grant legal status to daca recipients and unauthorized childhood arrivals along with other immigration provisions .

the trump administration's efforts to end the daca program have focused renewed attention on the issue of unauthorized childhood arrivals .

passage of h.r .

6 in the house in the 116 th congress can be seen as a result of this renewed attention .

this bill is the latest of several measures to grant lpr status to unauthorized childhood arrivals , and the first in more than five years , to have passed one chamber .

the question remains , however , if this bill or another measure to grant legal status to daca recipients or unauthorized childhood arrivals will be enacted into law .

