the increasing complexity and automation of flight control systems pose a challenge to federal policy regarding aircraft certification and pilot training .

over the past 30 years , pilot confusion in the face of unintended or unanticipated behaviors of cockpit automation has been implicated in a number of accidents and safety incidents .

high - profile accidents overseas in 2018 and 2019 led to the grounding of the worldwide fleet of boeing 737 max aircraft and prompted investigations and policy inquiries regarding the design and certification of commercial airplanes .

these inquiries have focused on three key policy issues: 1. the adequacy of standards and regulations pertaining to the design of cockpit interfaces between pilots and aircraft systems and to pilot training ; 2. appropriate policies , standards , and regulations regarding the safety design of aircraft systems and sensors to ensure adequate fault and error detection , fault tolerance , and redundancy ; and 3. the certification process for new aircraft technologies , and the roles of the federal aviation administration ( faa ) and other national regulators in certification .

modern jet airliners rely on numerous automated features to assist and alert pilots as well as to prevent aircraft from getting into precarious and potentially dangerous situations .

in many cases , pilots' lack of understanding or familiarity with the design and operation of these automated features has led to inappropriate use of automation or inappropriate responses when cockpit automation has gone awry .

in other cases , latent flaws and unintended consequences of highly complex automated flight control systems designs have been implicated in commercial airplane accidents .

the complexity of these automated systems has also raised questions about the manner in which new aircraft flight control system designs are evaluated and certified .

two crashes involving the recently introduced boeing 737 max airplane prompted the grounding of the worldwide fleet of that model .

the ensuing investigations into the process for certifying the boeing 737 max have triggered broader discussions about aircraft certification practices in general and also about global training , qualification , and flight currency standards for pilots flying commercial airplanes .

the focus on aviation safety surrounding the boeing 737 max grounding has highlighted a number of long - standing challenges associated with systems design , failure and risk analysis , human - interface design of automated cockpits , aircraft - specific pilot training , and oversight of the certification processes under which these challenges are addressed in the design of new aircraft .

these subjects are now the focus of a global policy debate .

many aviation safety experts attribute the safety advancements in commercial aviation over the past three decades , at least in part , to improvements in aircraft systems technology and flight deck automation .

paradoxically , these same factors have been implicated as causal or contributing factors in several aviation accidents and incidents .

modern aircraft flight systems incorporate advanced autopilot systems as well as traditional flight controls that interface with computers instead of directly actuating flight control surfaces , such as the rudders , ailerons , and elevators that control an airplane's movement in flight ( see figure 2 ) .

flight data computers aboard the aircraft continuously analyze pilot inputs , aircraft states , and environmental factors , like winds , to maneuver the aircraft safely and efficiently .

when the autopilot is engaged , flight control computers will command inputs to the flight control surfaces and aircraft engines to achieve the desired inputs in a manner that is optimized for efficiency .

when pilots are flying manually , displays such as a flight director provide visual aids to pilots to achieve desired states of flight ( eg , a particular altitude , airspeed , or heading ) most efficiently .

the flight computers also continuously monitor pilot or autopilot inputs , aircraft states , and environmental states ( eg , winds ) to ensure that the airplane continues to fly safely .

these systems and displays are designed to enhance safety by improving pilot situation awareness , reducing pilot workload , and monitoring aircraft and aircraft system states to prevent unsafe operations such as flying at too high of a pitch angle or at too steep of a bank .

however , the complexity of the modern cockpit can present considerable challenges to pilots , potentially leading to confusion and errors , particularly in high - workload situations .

if these errors go undetected or if they are compounded by other mistakes or other situational factors , they can potentially lead to a serious incident or accident under rare and unusual circumstances .

worldwide , the most common causes of commercial jet accidents are ( 1 ) loss of control in flight and ( 2 ) controlled flight into terrain , two categories that often involve incomplete pilot situation awareness , poor judgment , and human errors in interaction with complex aircraft systems .

the third most common type of accident , runway excursions ( i.e. , aircraft running off the end or side of a runway ) , also typically can be traced back to pilot performance and pilot understanding of aircraft performance , environmental factors , and flight control systems .

pilots require advanced training to understand the various features , modes , capabilities , and limitations of advanced flight control systems under various flight conditions .

congress has generally supported increased utilization of faa's delegation and designation authorities in order to engage design and manufacturing organizations and their employees more directly in the aircraft certification process , often working as proxies for faa and its aircraft certification inspector workforce .

nonetheless , legislative language in the 2012 faa reauthorization ( p.l .

112-95 ) and the 2018 faa reauthorization ( p.l .

115-254 ) has sought reviews of these practices to assess the efficiency and safety implications of these practices .

faa explains that because it does not have the resources to perform all the necessary certification activities and keep up with an expanding aviation industry , it must rely on delegating certain certification functions to qualified individuals and entities .

faa asserts that using designees for routine , well - established certification tasks allows it to focus its limited resources on safety - critical certification issues as well as new and novel technologies .

since the 1920s , federal aviation safety agencies have relied on private individuals to participate in examination , inspection , and testing of aircraft during the product certification process .

in the 1940s , programs were established to appoint designees to perform certain product certification approvals .

these included designated engineering representatives and designated manufacturing inspection representatives employed by aircraft , aircraft engine , and aircraft component manufacturers .

in the 1980s , faa established a designated airworthiness representative ( dar ) program that expanded the role of individuals in performing airworthiness certification functions , and allowed organizations to serve as dars under a program known as organizational designated airworthiness representatives ( odars ) .

these actions were taken under faa's long - standing authority under 49 u.s.c .

â§44702 ( d ) , which allows for the delegation of activities related to aircraft type certification , production certification , and airworthiness certification , including examination , testing , and inspection necessary to issue a certificate , and certificate issuance to a private person .

in this context , "person," as defined in 1 u.s.c .

â§1 , includes corporations , companies , partnerships , and other business entities in addition to individuals .

faa notes that "[w]hen acting as a representative of the administrator , these persons or organizations are required to perform in a manner consistent with the policies , guidelines , and directives of the administrator .

when performing a delegated function , designees are legally distinct from and act independent of the organizations that employ them. .

under 49 u.s.c .

â§44702 ( d ) , faa has the authority to rescind a delegation issued to a private person at any time for any appropriate reason .

moreover , any person affected by the action of an entity delegated certain faa certification functions may petition faa for reconsideration , and faa may , at its own initiative , consider the actions of a delegated entity at any time .

if faa determines that the delegated entity's actions are unreasonable or unwarranted , it may change , modify , or reverse them .

under international air safety agreements and a framework set forth by icao , other countries generally accept the airworthiness determinations of and the safety certifications issued by faa for aircraft , aircraft engines , and other aircraft components designed or manufactured in the united states .

these agreements are usually reciprocal: faa typically accepts similar determinations made by its overseas counterparts for aviation products developed outside the united states .

because boeing , based in chicago , and airbus , based in toulouse , france , jointly control a large majority of worldwide sales of commercial passenger jets , faa and the european union aviation safety agency ( easa ) fulfill important roles in certifying passenger airliners operated worldwide .

faa generally accepts easa certification of commercial aircraft manufactured by airbus , and , reciprocally , european countries under easa accept faa certification of u.s. - manufactured aircraft , such as those built by boeing .

while the two regulatory agencies , like the industry giants that they regulate , generally cooperate on safety matters , they sometimes hold differing views regarding safety design .

following the boeing 737 max grounding , some international groups and observers have questioned faa's certification processes and its extensive use of designees to conduct certification work , although similar programs are in place in europe .

faa , easa , and other civil aviation oversight entities have working arrangements with respect to each other's certification and safety oversight activities .

for example , faa might insist on certain additional testing or engineering evaluations to demonstrate safety of a modification to an aircraft design type certified by easa .

in such an instance , faa would negotiate with easa and the developer to specify the details of the additional testing and engineering analysis and , if agreed to , may send observers to witness tests and review engineering work .

the continuing controversy surrounding the boeing 737 max is testing these international arrangements .

aviation authorities in other countries might insist on design fixes , inspections and validation tests , and documentation and training different from what faa agrees to before allowing airlines to resume boeing 737 max operations .

while the multinational joint authorities technical review ( jatr ) was formed to develop international consensus on these matters , differing views among major international aviation safety organizations could have significant implications for how these agencies cooperate moving forward , both on review of the boeing 737 max and on future aircraft certification activities .

easa has already insisted on an independent review of proposed design changes to the boeing 737 max , and if its conclusions differ significantly from those of faa , evidence of a schism between key international regulators could create further uncertainty for both aircraft manufacturers and operators .

there is less international coordination in regulating pilot qualifications .

in the united states , pilots must hold an airline transport pilot ( atp ) certification to be hired by an airline .

this certification usually requires 1,500 hours of total flight time to attain .

in contrast , some foreign airlines hire individuals with little or no experience through ab initio programs that provide training to become an airline pilot .

under these programs , pilots can begin flying as first officers once they receive a commercial pilot certification that can be attained with around 250 hours of total flight time , and it is not unusual for entry - level first officers to have only a few hundred hours of total flight experience .

although the captain of ethiopian airlines flight 302 had more than 8,000 hours of total flight experience , the flight's first officer had less than 400 .

questions concerning pilot experience have significant implications for how aircraft manufacturers address pilot interface design issues and training requirements for highly automated jet airplanes .

if even experienced pilots might struggle to understand information presented to them and maneuver the airplane to expected professional standards when faced with a non - normal condition or emergency situation , pilots with limited experience may lack the training to handle potential failure scenarios .

a central consideration in designing cockpits and cockpit procedures is how much detailed systems information pilots should be given to handle possible in - flight failures .

on one end of the spectrum , some aircraft designers might argue that pilots can get by mainly with just procedural knowledge of the actions to take when faced with an urgent situation or event .

on the other end of the spectrum , some aviation safety experts advocate providing pilots with more thorough knowledge of aircraft systems , particularly critical flight control systems , to help them make better - informed choices when working through a novel event or condition .

this debate has important implications for how automated cockpit systems are developed and the training pilots receive .

icao sets general training and licensing standards for pilots internationally , but it is up to individual countries to set formal requirements for their pilots .

the strong demand for airline pilots in countries where air travel is growing rapidly has resulted in some airlines hiring pilots without extensive training and experience to operate revenue passenger flights .

in general , international standards for multi - crew and commercial pilot licenses call for a minimum of 240 flight hours of experience , much lower than the 1,500 now required to fly for an airline in the united states .

economic factors make it unlikely that requirements and standards similar to those applicable to u.s. pilots will be implemented worldwide in the near future .

while faa has some limited regulatory authority over airlines that fly into the united states , it does not have minimum pilot experience requirements for foreign flight crews and defers to the country of aircraft registry in these matters .

faa also has limited influence over aircraft - specific training requirements of countries whose airlines purchase airplanes from boeing and other u.s. manufacturers .

nonetheless , faa has asserted its position that foreign pilots have become too dependent on cockpit automation .

faa has urged icao to address perceived pilot training deficiencies and recommended that icao update standards and guidance to include additional training to prepare airline pilots to operate aircraft manually when automated systems fail .

appendix a. u.s. air carrier accidents in the 1990s involving passenger fatalities during the 1990s there was a spate of u.s. air carrier accidents including several fatal crashes involving passenger flights: the february 1 , 1991 , runway collision between usair flight 1493 , a boeing 737 , and skywest airlines flight 5569 , a commuter turboprop , at los angeles international airport ; the march 3 , 1991 , crash of united airlines flight 585 , a boeing 737 , on approach to colorado springs , co ; the april 5 , 1991 , crash of an atlantic southeast airlines turboprop on approach to brunswick , ga ; the january 3 , 1992 , crash of a commutair turboprop on approach to saranac lake , ny ; the march 22 , 1992 , crash of usair flight 405 , a fokker f28 jet , taking off from laguardia airport in new york , ny ; the june 7 , 1992 , crash of american eagle flight 5456 , a turboprop on approach to mayaguez , puerto rico ; the june 8 , 1992 , crash of a gp express turboprop on approach to anniston , al ; the december 1 , 1993 , crash of northwest airlink flight 5719 , a turboprop on approach to chisolm - hibbing , mn ; the january 7 , 1994 , crash of united express flight 6291 , a turboprop on approach to columbus , oh ; the july 2 , 1994 , crash of usair flight 1016 , a mcdonnell douglas dc - 9 on approach to charlotte , nc ; the september 8 , 1994 , crash of usair flight 427 , a boeing 737 on approach to pittsburgh , pa ; the october 31 , 1994 , crash of american eagle flight 4184 , an atr 72 turboprop , near roselawn , in ; the august 21 , 1995 , crash of an atlantic southeast airlines turboprop near carrollton , ga ; the december 20 , 1995 , crash of american airlines flight 965 , a boeing 757 , on descent into cali , colombia ; the may 11 , 1996 , crash of valujet flight 592 , a mcdonnell douglas dc - 9 , in the florida everglades after departing from miami international airport ; the july 6 , 1996 , uncontained engine failure aboard delta airlines flight 1288 , a mcdonnell douglas md - 88 , during takeoff at pensacola , fl ; the july 17 , 1996 , crash of twa flight 800 , a boeing 747 , shortly after departure from john f. kennedy international airport in new york , ny ; the november 19 , 1996 runway collision between united express flight 5925 , a turboprop and a privately owned turboprop at quincy regional airport , il ; the january 9 , 1997 crash of comair flight 3272 near ida , mi , en route from cincinnati , oh , to detroit , mi ; and the june 1 , 1999 , crash of american airlines flight 1420 , a mcdonnell douglas md - 82 landing at little rock , ar .

