beginning with the campaign to eradicate smallpox in the 1960s , the united states has been interested in the eradication of vaccine - preventable diseases ( vpds ) in children worldwide , as well as vaccine research and development .

the success of the smallpox eradication campaign led to the establishment of the world health organization's expanded programme on immunization in 1974 .

since then , global vaccination campaigns have been broadened and garnered near universal international support .

today , the u.s. government is a leading donor to global vaccination campaigns ( figure 3 ) .

in fy2019 , congress appropriated $290 million in foreign aid for the global alliance for vaccines and immunization ( gavi , now called gavi , the vaccine alliance ) and $226 million for department of health and human services ( hhs ) to support child vaccine campaigns abroad .

the authorization , appropriation , and oversight of u.s. funding for global child vaccination is thus an ongoing area of concern for many in congress , as is the extent of donor coordination and burden - sharing for such efforts .

additional potential issues include the extent to which global child vaccination promotes u.s. foreign policy , development , and domestic health security ( i.e. , pandemic preparedness ) goals .

donor - backed child vaccination campaigns have reduced mortality in poor countries , though occasionally they have faced setbacks .

in the early 1990s , u.s. foreign assistance for large - scale vaccination campaigns led by the world health organization ( who ) and the united nations children's fund ( unicef ) , and with significant u.s. funding and technical support , contributed to an approximately 80% immunization rate for three doses of the diphtheria , tetanus , and pertussis vaccine ( dtp3 ) .

progress , as measured by vaccination rates , stalled on certain vaccines—notably the diphtheria , tetanus , pertussis , and measles vaccines—in the late - 1990s for a variety of reasons , including management of vaccine stocks , effective vaccine delivery , and cost of vaccinations .

in 2000 , a public - private partnership , the global alliance for vaccines and immunization ( gavi ) was launched to address both declining global momentum for child immunization campaigns and declining funding for these programs .

since its inception , gavi has supported the immunization of 700 million children .

as a founding member of gavi , the united states holds a rotating seat on gavi's board and provides it with funding ( see " u.s. role and funding " ) .

vaccinations are considered one of the most cost - effective ways to prevent infectious disease and associated morbidity and mortality .

who recommends that all children receive 10 vaccines ( table 1 ) .

receiving the recommended childhood vaccinations can protect the recipient from illness and death associated with vpds , and can reduce infectious disease spread .

according to unicef , these immunizations save around 3 million lives per year .

globally , coverage of recommended childhood vaccines vary , with vpds causing high levels of morbidity ( illness ) and mortality ( death ) , primarily in certain low - and middle - income countries that have had limited success in achieving universal coverage .

recently , some high - income countries , for example france and the united states , have seen exponential increases in cases of vpds , due primarily to vaccine hesitancy .

according to gavi , from 2000 through 2018 , more than 760 million children worldwide were immunized against vpds , including 66 million children in 2018 .

approximately 100 million children are immunized each year .

at the end of 2018 , 20 million infants and children worldwide had not received the full schedule of recommended vaccines .

according to gavi , full vaccination coverage could prevent one in seven deaths in under - 5 children .

over 1.5 million children die every year from vpds .

nearly 60% of these children live in 10 countries: angola , brazil , drc , ethiopia , india , indonesia , nigeria , pakistan , the philippines , and vietnam .

from 1990 to 2017 , overall child deaths fell from 12.7 million to 5.8 million , largely due to gains made by global immunization campaigns and expanded national immunization programs .

for example , from 2000 to 2017 , scaled - up measles vaccination coverage averted an estimated 15.6 million deaths from the disease .

global coverage for several recommended vaccines has continued to climb over the past decade ( see figure 1 ) ; however , progress in expanding the number of children vaccinated with dtp3 ( a three - dose diphtheria , tetanus and pertussis vaccine ) has stagnated in recent years , though its coverage remains higher than coverage for other required vaccinations ( see figure 2 ) .

gavi reports recent stagnation in coverage is due to "acute problems that a small number of previously high performing countries have faced. .

diphtheria , tetanus and pertussis are particularly fatal to neonates , new mothers , and pregnant women .

maternal and neonatal tetanus ( mnte ) has been almost eliminated globally , and since 2000 there has been an 85% reduction in newborn deaths from tetanus .

as of march 2019 , mnte remains present in 14 countries .

in 2018 , 86% of children under the age of one received all three doses of the dtp3 vaccine .

as global uptake of childhood vaccines improves , an increasing proportion of child deaths are concentrated in sub - saharan africa and southern asia: four out of every five under - 5 child deaths occur in these regions .

figure 2 displays geographical immunization coverage for three doses of the dtp3 vaccine .

dtp3 immunization coverage is used as a proxy indicator to estimate the proportion of children vaccinated within their first year of life .

congress has historically supported global child vaccination programs , both as a component of u.s. foreign assistance and as part of efforts to eradicate infectious diseases that might affect americans at home or abroad .

through annual appropriations for the department of health and human services and the department of state and foreign operations ( sfops ) , congress funds global immunization activities through the centers for disease control ( cdc ) , the united states agency for international development ( usaid ) , and the global alliance for vaccines and immunization ( gavi , now called gavi , the vaccine alliance ) .

the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) and the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) are the primary u.s. federal agencies involved in international vaccination provision and immunization campaigns .

these campaigns support the 2016-2020 strategic framework for global immunization and the who's 2011-2020 global vaccine action plan , the agencies work with country governments to strengthen immunization programs by bolstering infectious disease surveillance , increasing laboratory capacity , and strengthening public health workforce capacity .

the efforts of both agencies align with the 2010 hhs national vaccine plan , the global health security agenda , and the u.n.'s 2030 sustainable development goals .

cdc and usaid also support routine immunizations worldwide through enhanced supply chain management and product procurement assistance .

related efforts are implemented bilaterally and through international partnerships with the who , unicef , the world bank , and others .

in addition , cdc , along with the department of defense , finances the research and development of new vaccines .

congress has continued to demonstrate interest in supporting child vaccinations for vpds overseas—for example , by appropriating increasing levels of funding for related programs .

however , numerous global outbreaks of vpds have raised concerns about whether the progress made in preventing and eradicating communicable diseases can be maintained .

in light of recent events , and in the context of the fy2020 appropriations process ( and beyond ) , congress may examine a few additional issues .

one area that could be explored is the effectiveness of global vaccination campaigns as a tool of domestic pandemic preparedness .

u.s. government public health officials have argued that the global resurgence of certain vaccine - preventable diseases , particularly measles and mumps , may threaten u.s. public health .

recent outbreaks of vaccine - preventable diseases in the united states have been traced to travelers from europe and abroad , and the cdc reports that these travelers , coupled with domestic vaccine hesitancy , are the main cause of outbreaks in the united states .

in march 2019 , the full senate committee on health , education , labor and pensions ( help ) held a hearing to discuss the reasons behind preventable disease outbreaks , including imported cases of vaccine - preventable diseases linked to international travelers .

as these outbreaks continue , congress may continue to consider its oversight of , and federal government involvement in , issues surrounding vaccines , such as misinformation campaigns and their role in vaccine hesitancy .

another core area of interest relates to u.s. funding , foreign policy objectives , and foreign aid programs supporting immunization .

the u.s. government has long - included vaccination as a core component of foreign policy , and as a foreign aid priority .

recently , the trump administration requested cuts to global health funding , including for u.s. agencies involved in global vaccination campaigns .

the administration contends that the funding requests will not affect programs and that "the reduction reflects the administration's intent to further focus funds on countries , populations , and programs where resources will have the greatest public health impact ... [and] cdc will focus its global immunization activities to continue progress towards polio eradication , as well as measles and rubella elimination in the countries with the highest disease burden. .

some experts argue that stagnation in vaccination coverage and the resurgence of some vaccine - preventable diseases are "alarm bells," and have expressed concern about flat support for global vaccine campaigns leading to a continued resurgence of vaccine - preventable diseases .

these issues raise questions about burden sharing and the role of other high - income country donors in global immunization funding , as well as factors affecting the efficacy of global campaigns to increase vaccination rates .

