the retransmission of television signals to subscribers of cable , telephone company ( telco ) , and satellite services has been governed in part by the satellite television extension and localism act reauthorization act of 2014 ( stela reauthorization act ; p.l .

113-200 ) .

some provisions of this law , which amended the copyright act of 1976 and the communications act of 1934 , were set to expire at the end of 2019 .

as described in " legislation ," with the enactment of the satellite television community protection and promotion act of 2019 , and the television viewer protection act of 2019 ( titles xi and x of division p , respectively , of the further consolidated appropriations act , 2020 p.l .

116-94 ) , congress permanently extended certain copyright act and communications act provisions that affect direct broadcast satellite service to viewers in rural areas ; limited the ability of separately owned broadcast stations to jointly negotiate with cable and satellite operators over the retransmission of television signals ; and affirmed the role of the federal communications commission ( fcc ) in resolving disputes that could potentially interrupt television service to subscribers of cable , telephone , and satellite services .

in addition , congress amended the copyright act to restrict the number of households eligible to receive non - local broadcast television signals via satellite distributors , and encouraged directv , a satellite operator , to retransmit local broadcast television signals , where available , in all local television markets .

congress amended the communications act to permit small video programming service distributors to negotiate collectively with large broadcast station groups , and increase transparency in bills for new customers of video distribution services .

to provide context for the current debate , this report provides background information about how households receive television programming , how the television industry operates , and how the copyright and communications acts determine what programs viewers receive .

after describing the now - repealed provisions of the copyright act , the report summarizes the provisions of the copyright and communications act enacted by congress in 2019 .

finally , it addresses the relationship between the new provisions and fcc media ownership rules , which the fcc amended in december 2019 .

a household may receive broadcast television programming through one or more of three methods: 1. by using an individual antenna that receives broadcast signals directly over the air from television stations ; 2. by subscribing to a multichannel video programming distributor ( mvpd ) , such as a cable or satellite provider or a telco , which brings the retransmitted signals of broadcast stations to a home through a copper wire , a fiber - optic cable , or a satellite dish installed on the premises ; or 3. by using a high - speed internet ( broadband ) connection .

a household may subscribe to a streaming service either that includes broadcast television programming on an on - demand basis , or as a package of prescheduled programming , that is , a "virtual mvpd" ( vmvpd ) .

as figure 1 indicates , the total number of u.s. households subscribing to an mvpd has declined over the past 10 years .

in 2010 , about 104.2 million households subscribed to an mvpd , compared with about 87.4 million households in 2019 .

in place of mvpds , an increasing number of households rely on video provided over broadband connections ( including vmvpds ) or via over - the - air broadcast transmission .

currently , two direct broadcast satellite providers—directv and dish—offer video service to most of the land area and population of the united states .

as of june 2019 , directv had approximately 17.4 million u.s. subscribers , while dish had approximately 9.5 million u.s. subscribers .

both have lost subscribers since september 2014 , when directv had approximately 20.2 million u.s. subscribers and dish had approximately 14.0 million u.s. subscribers .

 figure 2 illustrates the relationships among viewers ; broadcast television stations ; cable , telco , and satellite operators ; cable and broadcast networks ; and owners of television programming content .

on december 20 , 2019 , president donald j. trump signed the satellite television community protection and promotion act of 2019 , and the television viewer protection act of 2019 ( titles xi and x of division p , respectively , of the further consolidated appropriations act , 2020 , p.l .

116-94 ) .

these laws amended both the copyright and communications acts .

title xi of p.l .

116-94 permanently extends section 119 of the copyright act , but limits the scope of "unserved households" eligible to receive the distant signals to two categories of households .

the first category includes operators of recreational vehicles and commercial trucks who have complied with certain documentation requirements .

the second category , added by the act , includes households in "short markets" in the definition of "unserved household. .

the act defines a short market as a local market in which programming of one or more of the four most widely viewed television networks nationwide is not offered on either the primary stream or multicast stream transmitted by any network station in that market , or is temporarily or permanently unavailable as a result of an act of god or other force majeure event beyond the control of the carrier .

the act also amends the copyright act to condition the eligibility of satellite operators to retransmit distant signals via a compulsory copyright license to unserved households on whether or not they retransmit local television signals in all 210 dmas .

after may 31 , 2020 , satellite subscribers who fall within the two categories of unserved households described above are no longer eligible to receive distant signals pursuant to the compulsory copyright license unless their satellite operator provides local - into - local service .

likewise , the other four categories of households described in " expiring provision of copyright act " are no longer able to receive distant signals pursuant to the compulsory license after may 31 , 2020 , or until their satellite operator provides local service in all 210 markets , whichever is earlier .

the act also specifies that satellite operators will not lose access to the distant compulsory license if their failure to deliver local signals in all 210 markets is due to a retransmission consent impasse .

as described in " must carry ; carry one , carry all ," dish currently does so , but directv does not .

title x of the act permanently extends portions of the communications act set to expire at the end of 2019 , while amending others .

the following provisions that had been set to expire at the end of 2019 are now permanent: a satellite operator may retransmit broadcast station signals outside of the station's local markets without retransmission consent from those stations , if the operator is retransmitting the signals pursuant to section 119 of the copyright act .

broadcast stations may not enter into exclusive contracts with mvpds .

broadcast stations and mvpds must negotiate retransmission consent in "good faith. .

in the event any party accuses another of failing to negotiate in good faith , the accusing party may petition the fcc to mediate .

joint retransmission consent negotiations by separately owned broadcast stations within the same market constitutes failure to negotiate in good faith .

in addition , title x amended the communications act to state that a qualified "mvpd buying group" representing smaller cable , telco , and / or satellite operators may negotiate retransmission consent with large broadcast station group owners without violating the good faith requirement .

the buying group may represent only cable , telco , or satellite operators with 500,000 or fewer subscribers nationally .

the broadcast station owner with whom the qualified mvpd group negotiates retransmission consent must reach more than 20% of the "national audience. .

this amendment takes effect no later than march 19 , 2020 , that is , 90 days after the enactment of p.l .

116-94 .

as described in " good faith provisions and fcc media ownership rules ," on december 20 , 2019 , the fcc reinstated the media and ownership rules it had adopted in 2016 .

under the reinstated rules , a single company may not own more than one station in a dma unless eight independently owned stations remain ( eight voices test ) .

in addition , stations that jointly sell 15% or more of one another's advertising time count as "owned" for the purposes of the fcc's ownership rules .

this means that non - top - four stations may not jointly negotiate with a separately owned top - four affiliate that sells its advertising time , if common ownership would violate the fcc's eight voices test .

likewise , two non - top four stations may not jointly negotiate retransmission consent in the same market if common ownership would violate the fcc's eight voices test .

the fcc , in measuring the national reach of a broadcast station owner , discounts the number of television households reached within a dma by a station operating in the ultra high frequency ( uhf ) band by half .

in some instances , a station group may reach 20% or fewer households nationally with the "uhf discount," but more than 20% of u.s. households absent the discount .

according to estimates from the research firm bia advisory services , as of may 2019 , the two companies falling in this category were nbc universal and gray television .

thus , a qualified mvpd buying group could not negotiate with nbc universal or gray television unless the fcc repeals the uhf discount .

in some markets , a television company may effectively operate stations under joint sales agreements or shared services agreements without having them count toward the national ownership limit .

thus , depending on how the fcc interprets the good faith provisions , an mvpd with fewer than 500,000 subscribers nationwide might not be able to use a qualified buying group to negotiate for retransmission of stations operated by a company that reaches 20% or more of u.s. households nationwide .

it is far less common for a company to operate third - party stations in a market in which it does not own a station than in a market in which it does own a station .

there are 93 dmas in which a third party operates at least one station and owns at least one station .

in contrast , there are five dmas in which a third party operates at least one station but does not own any stations .

nonetheless , as congress advises the fcc on the implementation of this good faith provision , the role of third - party owners in retransmission consent negotiations remains an issue that may be considered .

