local governments have traditionally played an important role in regulating cable television systems .

operators required municipal permission to place their cables above or beneath streets and other publicly owned land and to mount the cables on telephone / and or utility poles .

cities negotiated with cable operators over the services their systems would provide , including channels dedicated to public , educational , or government programming ( peg ) , and the payment of franchise fees .

in exchange , the cable operators often received de facto exclusive local franchises to offer video distribution services .

that changed in 1984 , when congress required local governments to allow competition .

in the mid - 2000s , as telephone companies ( known as " telcos " ) sought to obtain their own video services franchises , state governments got involved to streamline the franchising process , in several instances preempting municipalities' authority .

the states applied these laws to incumbent cable operators as well as to new entrants , to ensure legal parity .

as technological developments and changes in business strategies and consumer behavior have reshaped the telecommunications industry , the federal communications commission ( fcc ) has taken several steps to limit local regulatory authority over cable and telco video service providers .

many of these regulatory changes have caused controversy .

some local governments assert that , among other things , the fcc's actions will limit their ability to protect the public interest and deprive them of revenue .

this report examines the evolving relationship between federal , state , and local regulators and identifies related policy issues that may be of interest to congress .

cable television began operating in the 1940s as a means to receive broadcast signals in areas with trees or mountains that interfered with over - the - air signal transmission .

initially , municipalities , rather than states , made most decisions related to awarding cable franchises .

as cable television developed , some states began to regulate the terms included in a cable franchise , or required state review or approval of a franchise agreement .

the term local franchising authorities ( lfas ) refers to municipal and / or state government entities that offer and negotiate video franchises .

today , agreements between lfas and video service providers typically include provisions concerning the availability of channels for peg programming ; the amount of money due to the lfa in franchise fees , including in - kind contributions ; and the rates charged to subscribers .

in 2003 , several telephone companies , most notably southwestern bell company ( now at&t ) and verizon , began constructing fiber networks designed to bring consumers advanced digital services , including video .

at&t and verizon branded these services as "u - verse" and "fios," respectively .

neither company launched video services under the ovs rules , claiming that federal requirements and potential local franchise requirements were too costly .

in 2006 , a federal district court in california dismissed at&t's claims that municipalities were violating federal law by attempting to exercise franchise authority over the company's video services .

the court declined , however , to rule on whether video delivered over internet protocol , the technology used by lecs , met the federal definition of a cable service .

two bills introduced that year in the 109 th congress , h.r .

5252 and s. 2686 , would have declared that video service enabled via internet protocol is subject only to federal regulation .

congress did not vote on either bill .

since 2007 , the fcc has repeatedly revisited the authority of states and lfas to franchise and regulate video service providers .

this process culminated in two orders issued in 2019 .

one ( the "2019 lfa 3 rd r&o" ) sharply limits state and local authority over products offered by video service providers other than video programming .

the other order ( the "2019 effective competition order" ) determined that at&t's streaming service , at&t tv now , meets the lec test component of congress's effective local competition definition and therefore provides effective competition to a local cable operator .

 table 1 , as well as the following two tables , illustrate how the fcc's rules could potentially affect the franchising process in several states .

the fcc's decision to extend its franchising rule to state governments for the first time will subject each of the states listed in the first three columns of table 1 ( i.e. , those that issue franchises at the state - level in all or some circumstances ) to the fcc's rules .

moreover , the fcc's rules will cover states that oversee municipal franchises via either statute or state - level agencies .

thus , the fcc's franchising rules will affect more video service providers , viewers , and municipal governments than ever before .

these regulatory developments and industry trends raise several potential issues for congress to consider .

first , congress could consider whether the fcc's interpretation of the communications act is consistent with the policy goals set forth in section 601 of the communications act ( 47 u.s.c .

â§521 ) and section 706 of the telecommunications act .

specifically , congress could explore the extent , if any , to which state and local regulations designed to promote the availability of peg programming and i - nets .

second , congress could evaluate whether to create regulatory parity with respect to local regulation of nonvideo services of cable and telcos .

while states and municipalities may regulate both video and voice services of telcos , they may only regulate video services of cable operators .

congress could address regulatory parity by either deregulating traditional telcos' nonvideo services or regulating cable operators' nonvideo services .

third , as the fcc and local governments include online video providers in their definitions of video providers for the purposes of evaluating competition and / or imposing franchise fees , congress could clarify whether these actions achieve its stated policy goals .

for example , if , in contrast to the fcc's interpretation of the lec test for effective competition , congress intends to include only facilities - based video services in its definition of video service competition , it could delineate the definition in communications laws .

likewise , as online video services become more prevalent and states and municipalities target them for franchise fees , congress could specify the authority , if any , to regulate them .

finally , while the fcc has determined that competition among video programming distribution services has eliminated the need for rate regulation of the basic tier of cable services , maine enacted a law to enable consumers to pay only for video programming they choose , in lieu of bundles of channels .

in the past , some members of congress have proposed statutory changes to require video programming distributors to offer individual channels to consumers in addition to bundles of channels , and congress could consider revisiting this issue , or alternatively clarifying that states and local governments lack authority to enact such laws .

