in recent presidential administrations , there have been several high - profile disputes between congress and the white house regarding access to executive branch officials .

this has included attempts by congress to enforce subpoenas issued to harriet miers , white house counsel to president george w. bush ; eric holder , attorney general to president barack obama ; and wilbur ross and william barr , secretary of commerce and attorney general to president donald trump , respectively .

such disagreements can draw significant attention , but they are relatively uncommon .

most interactions between congress and the executive branch are voluntary .

there is a regular flow of communication between the branches .

principals and staff frequently interact with their counterparts .

they share data ; discuss operations , policy , and projects ; and share subject matter expertise .

understanding why voluntary cooperation is a common practice is crucial to understanding congress's relationship with the executive branch and may help clarify the cases in which the executive branch chooses not to cooperate with congress .

this report focuses on one facet of inter - branch interaction: testimony before congressional committees .

the report outlines the origins of voluntary testimony by the executive branch , identifies some notable incentives for voluntary participation , and covers some key dimensions of the practice of voluntary participation .

two important caveats limit the scope of this report .

first , by design , this report does not engage directly with those occasions when the executive branch refuses to comply with congressional requests and subpoenas .

second , it should also be noted that all responses are not created equal .

the mere fact of voluntary compliance does not ensure that the testimony offered will be candid , complete , or correct .

this report does not speak to that potential issue .

agency leaders , program managers , and subject matter experts routinely testify before congressional committees and subcommittees .

in addition to participating in oversight and budget hearings by providing testimony and responding to questions on agency operations , agency officials frequently appear at informational hearings and when committees are considering possible legislative actions .

the practice of voluntary compliance with congressional requests was established from the first investigation of the executive branch by congress .

that investigation focused on a failed 1791 military campaign against native american tribes in the northwest territory by general arthur st. clair .

president george washington and his cabinet faced the novel question of how to respond to a request for information from congress .

aware that their decision was likely to establish precedent , they decided , in the words of secretary of state thomas jefferson , that the executive branch should "communicate such papers as the public good would permit & ought to refuse those the disclosure of which would injure the public. .

washington's cabinet reviewed the matter and decided that the executive branch should comply fully with congress's request .

the administration then provided congress with documents and officials offered testimony for the investigation .

while president washington determined that it was appropriate for executive branch activities to remain secret when disclosure would "injure the public" ( thus providing the earliest articulation of the concept of executive privilege in american government ) , he also concluded that compliance with congressional requests should be the default .

despite changes in the operations of the presidency and congress , and broader public access to the hearings themselves over television and the internet , this default compliance rule of thumb has generally held over time and across subsequent administrations .

there are a number of reasons that administrations acquiesce to requests from congress .

some of the most broadly applicable incentives are outlined below .

committees can request that executive branch officials appear before them to discuss any matter within the jurisdiction of the committee .

any executive branch official , including the president , may testify before congress under most circumstances .

in practice , invitations are usually formal and may lead to negotiations on the logistics , format , and scope of the testimony .

committees have some discretion to define how they will receive testimony and accept or reject accommodations sought by the executive branch .

the remainder of this report highlights a few important facets of current practice for each branch .

as part of the annual appropriations process , agency leaders are expected to appear before appropriations subcommittees to justify their agencies' budget requests .

this means that the heads of cabinet departments and other agencies are likely to testify before congress at least once per year .

the statutory process for submission of the executive branch's budget request , as established by congress , makes the president the primary actor in the executive branch budget process and gives the president significant control over the final executive branch budget request submitted to congress each year .

using this statutory authority , the office of management and budget ( omb ) has established procedures for agency communications with congress on the budget that are included in omb circular a - 11 .

these guidelines provide for the confidentiality of budget deliberations within the executive branch and require that agencies submit testimony to omb for review in advance of budget hearings .

outside those limitations , when communicating with congress , the guidance states that agencies are to "give frank and complete answers to all questions. .

as discussed earlier , agencies may face repercussions if a committee decides they have not been sufficiently forthright .

omb also has a formal procedure for monitoring and clearing other communications to congress from executive branch agencies .

this guidance is outlined in omb circular a - 19 .

all legislative proposals originating within agencies subject to circular a - 19 , as well as other communications to congress on pending legislation and formal statements of administration policy , are first submitted to omb for clearance .

in a february 2017 memorandum , omb director mick mulvaney described the goals for the clearance process as follows: "agencies' legislative communications with congress are consistent with the president's policies and objectives ; " and "the administration 'speaks with one voice' regarding legislation. .

the senate may also use the confirmation process to attempt to ensure future access to agency leaders .

as a general matter , the senate may choose to reject a nominee if the body believes that he or she would not cooperate with congress after being confirmed .

it has become common practice to address this issue directly during confirmation hearings .

frequently , a senator has asked the nominee appearing before the committee to agree to respond to future congressional requests if they are confirmed .

while these commitments may not be binding on these officials , this process allows the senate to explicitly establish expectations and put the nominee on the record consenting to this condition .

this january 2017 confirmation hearing exchange between department of energy secretary - designee rick perry and senate committee on energy and national resources chairman lisa murkowski is an example of this practice: the chairman .

you may go ahead and be seated .

before you begin your statement , i am going to ask you three questions addressed to each nominee before this committee .

the first is will you be available to appear before this committee and other congressional committees to represent departmental positions and respond to issues of concern to the congress ? .

mr. perry .

i will , senator .

while this report is focused on the avenues of formal communication between the branches in hearings , there are circumstances in which the executive branch is less likely to provide public testimony to congress .

while each situation is unique , there are at least three types of information that are more likely to cause such tension: national security and intelligence matters , law enforcement investigations , and executive branch deliberations .

in all of these areas , administrations have sometimes refused to appear before committees or sought to limit public testimony .

the legal and prudential reasons for limiting disclosure of information in each of these areas may , depending on the circumstances , have particular merit .

from the perspective of an executive branch official , the costs of voluntary compliance may outweigh the benefits in some cases , and they may decline to testify .

congress is under no obligation to accept such conclusions and may seek to compel those officials to testify .

however , committees may choose to take these concerns into account .

for instance , a committee may agree to limit the scope of a request , allow a witness to decline to testify on specific matters , or conduct a closed door session .

this occurred , for example , during former special counsel robert mueller's testimony before the house committee on the judiciary and the house permanent select committee on intelligence .

over the course of his testimony on july 24 , 2019 , both committees allowed mueller to decline to answer specific questions for all three of the above reasons .

in this case , the committees accepted the limits put forward by mueller , and they were able to hold the hearings .

