congress is currently considering legislation for a long - term reauthorization of the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) .

the last long - term reauthorization of the nfip was by the biggert - waters flood insurance reform act of 2012 ( hereinafter bw - 12 ) , from july 6 , 2012 , to september 30 , 2017 .

congress amended elements of bw - 12 , but did not extend the nfip's authorization further , in the homeowner flood insurance affordability act of 2014 ( hfiaa ) .

since the end of fy2017 , 15 short - term nfip reauthorizations have been enacted .

the nfip is currently authorized until september 30 , 2020 .

the nfip is managed by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) .

the general purpose of the nfip is both to offer primary flood insurance to properties with significant flood risk and to reduce flood risk through the adoption of floodplain management standards .

a longer - term objective of the nfip is to reduce federal expenditure on disaster assistance after floods .

the nfip is discussed in more detail in crs report r44593 , introduction to the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) , by diane p. horn and baird webel .

the nfip is the primary source of flood insurance coverage for residential properties in the united states .

as of december 2019 , the nfip had more than 5 million flood insurance policies providing over $1.3 trillion in coverage .

the program collects about $4.6 billion in annual revenue from policyholders' premiums , fees , and surcharges .

over 22,000 communities in 56 states and jurisdictions participate in the nfip .

according to fema , the program saves the nation an estimated $1.87 billion annually in flood losses avoided because of the nfip's building and floodplain management regulations .

floods are the most common natural disaster in the united states .

all 50 states , plus the district of columbia ( dc ) , puerto rico , guam , american samoa , the u.s. virgin islands , and the northern mariana islands have experienced flood events since may 2018 .

total u.s. flood losses in 2016 were about $28 billion .

2017 was the most costly year for u.s. flood losses on record , with total losses estimated at $276.3 billion .

the total for the 2017 hurricanes significantly exceeded the previous record of $214.8 billion ( cpi - adjusted ) , from the 2005 hurricane season .

total u.s. flood losses for 2018 are estimated at $49.4 billion .

all of these losses are greater than the $20.3 billion annual average flood losses estimated by the congressional budget office in april 2019 .

the statute for the nfip does not contain a comprehensive expiration , termination , or sunset provision for the whole of the program .

rather , the nfip has multiple different legal provisions that generally tie to the expiration of key components of the program .

unless reauthorized or amended by congress , the following will occur after september 30 , 2020: the authority to provide new flood insurance contracts will expire .

flood insurance contracts entered into before the expiration would continue until the end of their policy term of one year .

the authority for nfip to borrow funds from the treasury will be reduced from $30.425 billion to $1 billion .

other activities of the program would technically remain authorized following september 30 , 2020 , such as the issuance of flood mitigation assistance ( fma ) grants .

however , the expiration of the key authorities described above would have varied , generally serious effects on these remaining nfip activities .

the house financial services committee amended and ordered reported a bill for the long - term reauthorization of the nfip , the national flood insurance program reauthorization act of 2019 ( h.r .

3167 ) , on june 11 , 2019 .

h.r .

3167 was reported , as amended , on october 28 , 2019 ( h.rept .

116-262 , part 1 ) .

h.r .

3167 would reauthorize the nfip until september 30 , 2024 .

one bill has been introduced in the senate , on july 18 , 2019 , to reauthorize the expiring provisions of the nfip , the national flood insurance program reauthorization and reform act of 2019 ( s. 2187 ) , with a companion bill in the house , h.r .

3872 .

these bills have not yet been considered by the committees of jurisdiction .

s. 2187 and h.r .

3872 would also reauthorize the nfip until september 30 , 2024 .

the remainder of this report will summarize relevant background information and proposed changes to selected areas of the nfip in h.r .

3167 and s. 2187 .

the report does not examine every provision in detail , but focuses on selected provisions that would introduce significant changes to the nfip , particularly those related to the issues identified by the government accountability office ( gao ) described below .

the provisions in h.r .

3167 and s. 2187 are listed in table 1 at the end of the report .

in a 2017 report , gao examined actions which congress and fema could take to reduce federal fiscal exposure and improve national resilience to floods , and recommended that congress should consider comprehensive reform covering six areas: ( 1 ) outstanding debt ; ( 2 ) premium rates ; ( 3 ) affordability ; ( 4 ) consumer participation ; ( 5 ) barriers to private sector involvement ; and ( 6 ) nfip flood resilience efforts .

as a public insurance program , the goals of the nfip were originally designed differently from the goals of private - sector companies .

as currently authorized , the nfip also encompasses social goals to provide flood insurance in flood - prone areas to property owners who otherwise would not be able to obtain it , and reduce government's cost after floods .

the nfip also engages in many "non - insurance" activities in the public interest: it disseminates flood risk information through flood maps , requires communities to adopt land use and building code standards in order to participate in the program , potentially reduces the need for other post - flood disaster aid , contributes to community resilience by providing a mechanism to fund rebuilding after a flood , and may protect lending institutions against mortgage defaults due to uninsured losses .

the benefits of such tasks are not directly measured in the nfip's financial results from underwriting flood insurance .

from the inception of the nfip , the program has been expected to achieve multiple objectives , some of which may conflict with one another: to ensure reasonable insurance premiums for all ; to have risk - based premiums that would make people aware of and bear the cost of their floodplain location choices ; to secure widespread community participation in the nfip and substantial numbers of insurance policy purchases by property owners ; and to earn premium and fee income that , over time , covers claims paid and program expenses .

gao concluded that the sequence of actions taken by congress in nfip reform is important ; for example , requiring full - risk rates for all policyholders and expanding the mandatory purchase requirement would create affordability concerns which would warrant having an affordability assistance program already in place .

according to gao , when addressing barriers to private sector involvement , it would be important to protect nfip's flood resilience activities at the same time ; and addressing the outstanding debt would be best accompanied by premium rate reform to help reduce the likelihood of a recurrence of another unpayable debt buildup .

as congress considers a long - term reauthorization of the nfip , a central question may be who should bear the costs of floodplain occupancy in the future .

the nrc study on affordability concluded that the costs of floods can be borne in three possible ways , or in some combination of them .

the first scenario is that individual policyholders ( whether nfip or private ) bear location cost in the form of insurance premiums paid and damages falling within policy deductible amounts .

the second possibility is that the federal taxpayers bear floodplain location costs in several possible ways: if the federal government develops a premium assistance program , or makes up for nfip premium revenue shortfalls , or pays for pre - flood mitigation , or makes post - flood disaster assistance payments to individual households .

in the third scenario , property owners and other floodplain or coastal zone inhabitants bear the costs for losses that are uninsured or otherwise uncompensated .

while there are many ways to finance flood risk , the majority of the cost will likely ultimately be allocated across these three stakeholder groups: policyholders ( the insured ) , taxpayers , and the uninsured , requiring potentially difficult policy choices by congress .

