for roughly the first 100 years of the electric power industry , electricity generation occurred mostly in large , c entralized power plants .

partly in response to the energy crisis of the 1970s , congress established policies to promote , among other things , alternatives to centralized power plants , including generation capacity located on customer property .

customer - sited generation is a type of distributed generation ( dg ) and can be located on commercial , industrial , or residential properties .

one policy intended to promote dg is net metering .

in the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact05 ; p.l .

109-58 ) congress encouraged states to adopt net metering , defined in the law as service to an electric consumer under which electric energy generated by that electric consumer from an eligible on - site generating facility and delivered to the local distribution facilities may be used to offset electric energy provided by the electric utility to the electric consumer during the applicable billing period .

state net metering policies may be relevant to congressional discussions about the role of renewable energy sources , like solar , in the nation's electricity system .

solar photovoltaic ( pv ) is the most commonly deployed energy type participating in net metering , comprising 97% of net metering capacity in 2018 .

other federal and state policies ( eg , tax incentives , renewable portfolio standards , carbon pricing ) may interact with net metering policies to determine the deployment pace of distributed solar energy sources and other types of dg .

also , some members of congress may be interested in how some states have modified their net metering policies in recent years , including the effect of those modifications on stakeholders .

some recent state policy changes are expected to expand solar energy development , while others are expected to slow it .

among other options , congress could choose to restrict , encourage , or require certain kinds of state policy modifications , or take no action on state net metering policies , depending on congressional priorities .

this report provides background information and discusses current issues related to net metering policy .

net metering policies determine how electricity customers with distributed generation are compensated for electricity they deliver to the grid .

net metering is frequently used to mean a policy of net energy metering ( nem ) , which specifies that electricity delivered to the grid from a net metering customer is compensated on a one - to - one basis for electricity purchased from the grid .

every unit of electricity generated by the customer ( typically expressed in kilowatt - hours , kwh ) is subtracted from the amount of electricity they consume , for billing purposes .

this is frequently described as "the meter running backward. .

other analyses and discussions sometimes distinguish different policy options , including: buy - all , sell - all , under which a utility buys all electricity generated by the net metering customer at one ( usually , lower ) rate and sells all the electricity consumed by the customer at a different rate ( usually the same retail rate charged to any other customer ) ; and net billing , under which electricity delivered to the grid is compensated at a pre - determined value , which might be measured as a rate or a fixed amount .

this report will generally use the term net metering to refer to any of these policies since they are closely related to each other , in that they provide financial support for dg .

as of april 2019 , 45 states had net metering policies in place that require utilities to offer net metering to customers .

some of these policies include alternatives to net energy metering .

further , some of these policies predate epact05 .

in the states that do not require utilities to offer net metering , some utilities voluntarily offer net metering service to customers .

according to the u.s. energy information administration ( eia ) , almost 2 million customers participated in net metering programs in the united states in 2018 , compared to over 153 million electricity customers overall .

in other words , about 1% of u.s. electricity customers in 2018 participated in net metering .

the number of net metering customers increased from 2013 to 2018 as shown in figure 1 .

data before 2013 also show growth in net metering participation , but eia changed the way it reported net metering data beginning in 2013 , so these data are not shown below , in the interest of consistency .

net metering participation can be measured in other ways , such as total net metering capacity or the amount of electricity delivered to the grid from net metering generators .

according to the eia data , these measures have seen average annual increases similar to customer count .

levels of net metering participation vary by state , as shown in figure 2 .

in many states , less than 0.1% of electricity customers participate in net metering .

hawaii has the highest participation rate , with over 15% of customers participating in the state's net metering programs .

some potentially relevant factors for the differences among states include design of state net metering policies , presence of other state policies such as renewable portfolio standards ( which may incentivize renewable dg ) , average electricity prices , and solar resource quality .

a full analysis of the factors behind different state participation rates is beyond the scope of this report .

this section provides an overview of how electricity rates are set in general , in order to clarify major areas of debate for state net metering policies .

electricity ratemaking is the process of allocating to customers the total costs that utilities incur when producing and delivering electricity .

many complexities and local factors influence ratemaking .

a full discussion is beyond the scope of this report .

as an illustrative example , this section discusses typical ratemaking considerations for vertically - integrated investor - owned utilities .

in its service territory , this type of utility owns and operates all parts of the electricity system , from electricity generation to transmission and distribution to customers .

state regulators conduct the ratemaking process and approve rates that the utility can charge its customers .

regulators design rates so that utilities can recover their costs through customers' bill payments .

these costs generally include: the costs of building and operating power plants , including fuel costs and compliance with any applicable regulations ( eg , environmental , safety , reliability ) ; the costs of building and maintaining transmission and distribution systems ( i.e. , the grid ) ; regular utility operating costs , such as ensuring reliable grid operation ( i.e. , grid services ) or collecting meter data for billing ; any programmatic costs , such as bill relief for low - income consumers or implementation of other public policies ; and a return on the utility investments ( i.e. , return on equity or roe ) .

a common method for setting rates is to establish volumetric rates ( sometimes called flat rates ) .

all customers within a given type , or customer class , will pay the same rate expressed in cents per kilowatt - hour ( cents / kwh ) .

the more electricity a customer uses , the higher a bill they will have .

customers' bills will vary each month based on the amount of electricity they consume .

regulators estimate a value for the volumetric rate that will allow the utility to recover its total costs , based on projections of total sales for all customer classes .

in this way , the costs for electricity generation , transmission , distribution , and other utility expenses are shared among all customers .

costs associated with customer service ( eg , billing , connections ) sometimes are separated from the electricity rate and recovered in a separate customer charge .

this charge would appear as a fixed value on the customer's bill and would not change from month to month .

customer charges are additional to rates .

in other words , a customer's bill would have volumetric charges ( rate times kwh consumed ) plus a fixed customer charge .

some customer classes , such as large industrial facilities or institutions , consume so much electricity that utilities might make special system modifications for them .

in some cases , utilities recover these costs in a demand charge that is only paid by those high - consuming customers .

like customer charges , demand charges are generally additional to volumetric charges and do not typically change from month to month .

epact05 encouraged states to adopt net metering , but the law did not specify how customers should be compensated .

states with net metering have taken different approaches in implementing their policies , and many states have revised their compensation approaches in recent years .

these decisions may affect dg markets .

as one study from the national renewable energy laboratory observed , "compensation mechanisms impact dg deployment because they strongly influence the value proposition of a dg investment for individual customers. .

this section describes some elements of states' approaches to implementing net metering .

in addition to differing in net metering compensation , state net metering policies differ in a variety of other aspects .

some differences pertain to provisions on program caps , source eligibility , credit retention , and system ownership .

provisions in these areas can affect deployment of dg .

some members of congress have introduced legislation addressing aspects of states' net metering policies .

some proposals would influence state policies directly .

for example , s.amdt .

3120 in the 114 th congress would have limited the ability of state regulators to move net metering customers to lower compensation rates or to add fixed charges to their bills .

s.amdt .

3053 , also in the 114 th congress , would have required state regulators to consider the extent to which their net metering policies created cross - subsidies .

h.r .

4175 in the 116 th congress would require states to consider adopting net billing policies for community solar .

other legislation would require studies to better understand the costs and benefits of net metering .

for example , in a committee report on an fy2017 appropriations bill , congress requested a doe study on "the costs and benefits of net - metering and distributed solar generation to the electrical grid , utilities and ratepayers. .

doe transmitted the report to congress in 2019 .

in the 116 th congress , s. 346 and h.r .

1009 would require the national academies of sciences , engineering , and medicine to study various aspects of net metering such as alternative incentives for dg , net metering planning and operating techniques , and consumer and industry incentives for net metering .

