space weather refers to the dynamic conditions in earth's outer space environment .

this includes conditions on the sun , in the solar wind , and in earth's upper atmosphere .

space weather phenomena include solar flares or periodic intense bursts of radiation from the sun caused by the sudden release of magnetic energy , coronal mass ejections composed of clouds of solar plasma and electromagnetic radiation , ejected into space from the sun , high - speed solar wind streams emitted from low density regions of the sun , and solar energetic particles or highly - charged particles formed at the front of solar flares and coronal mass ejections .

hazardous space weather events are rare , but may cause geomagnetic disturbances ( gmds ) that affect broad areas of the globe .

such events may pose hazards to space - borne and ground - based ci systems and assets that are vulnerable to geomagnetically induced current , electromagnetic interference , or radiation exposure ( see figure 1 ) .

several notable events illustrate space weather hazards , and how their potential impact has broadened over time with technological advances .

the 1859 "carrington event," named for the british solar astronomer who first observed it , caused auroras as far south as central america and disrupted telegraph communications .

in 1972 , a gmd knocked out long - distance telephone service in illinois .

in 1989 , another gmd caused a nine - hour blackout in quebec , and melted some power transformers in new jersey .

in 2005 , x - rays from a solar storm disrupted gps signals for a short time .

this report provides an overview of federal government policy developed under the existing legislative framework , and describes the specific roles and responsibilities of select federal departments and agencies responsible for the study and mitigation of space weather hazards .

over the past several decades , the federal government's interest in space weather and its effects has grown .

congress has required individual federal agencies to conduct certain space weather - related activities related to agency missions .

however , federal interagency work began in earnest with the establishment of the interagency national space weather program ( nswp ) in 1995 by the department of commerce's office of the federal coordinator for meteorology .

the program was directed by the nswp council that included representatives from interested federal agencies .

the nwsp council coordinated federal space weather strategy development between 1995 and 2015 in partnership with federal agencies , industry , and the academic community .

in 2010 , congress directed the white house office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) to improve national preparedness for space weather events and to coordinate federal space weather activities of the nswp council .

this marked the beginning of a period during which the white house assumed leadership of federal space weather policy .

ostp's national science and technology council established the space weather operations , research and mitigation ( sworm ) working group in 2014 to lead federal strategy and policy development .

the nswp council was deactivated the following year , when sworm published a national space weather preparedness strategy , titled the "national space weather strategy" ( the 2015 plan ) .

in 2016 , president obama signed executive order ( e.o. ) .

13744 , "coordinating efforts to prepare the nation for space weather events" directing federal space weather preparedness activities to be carried out "in conjunction" with those activities already identified in the 2015 plan .

the sworm working group released an updated national space weather strategy in 2019 , titled "the national space weather strategy and action plan" ( the 2019 plan ) .

the same year , president trump signed e.o .

13865 , "coordinating national resilience to electromagnetic pulses," directing the federal government to "foster sustainable , efficient , and cost - effective approaches" to improve national resilience to the effects of electromagnetic pulses .

taken together , the 2019 plan and e.o .

13865 prioritize investment in ci resilience initiatives over scientific research and forecasting , and represent a shift in policy from that of the previous administration set forth in the 2015 plan and e.o 13744 .

the 2019 plan focuses on three objectives related to protection of assets , space weather forecasting , and planning for space weather events , and identifies the agencies and departments with responsibilities under each objective ( figure 2 ) .

e.o .

13865 directs relevant federal agencies to identify regulatory and cost - recovery mechanisms that the government may use to compel private - sector investments in resilience .

this approach differs from most other federal infrastructure resilience initiatives , which generally rely upon voluntary industry adoption of resilience measures .

e.o .

13865 applies both to space weather and manmade electromagnetic hazards ( such as a nuclear attack ) and refers to both types of hazard as electromagnetic pulse ( emp ) .

this may create ambiguity in cases where a given provision could apply either to manmade or natural electromagnetic hazards .

for example , e.o .

13865 directs the secretary of homeland security to "incorporate events that include emps as a factor in preparedness scenarios and exercises," without specifying whether a space weather event or nuclear attack scenario should be exercised , or which should be prioritized .

the fact that e.o .

13865 does not formally supersede e.o .

13744 ( which refers solely to space weather ) may create further ambiguity in cases where policies of the previous and current administrations are not in direct alignment , or else reflect differing priorities .

federal agencies typically regard—and refer to—manmade emp and naturally - occurring gmds as related , but distinct phenomena .

this section provides an overview of federal roles and responsibilities for space weather - related research and emergency preparedness .

federal agency roles and responsibilities fall into four major categories: early warning and forecasting ; research and development ( r&d ) ; basic scientific research ; risk assessment and mitigation , including modeling and information sharing ; and response and recovery .

some agencies have roles and responsibilities in more than one category .

this section only includes entities that relevant executive orders or strategies have designated as the federal lead for a specific objective or requirement .

this does not include agencies whose role is confined to participation in working groups , harmonizing internal policies with national strategy or directives , contributing refinements to analytical products or models produced by other agencies , or ensuring their own continuity - of - operations in case of a space weather event .

each sub - section includes a summary of the department or agency mission and the relevant authorities under which it operates .

if applicable , the agency - specific provisions of the two executive orders currently in force—e.o .

13744 and e.o .

13865—are listed in a table , followed by information about implementing programs and activities .

provisions applicable only to manmade emp threats , such as high - altitude nuclear detonations , are excluded .

the 2019 plan is referenced in cases where the executive orders do not provide specific or complete guidance to given federal entities .

departments and agencies are ordered alphabetically for ease of reference .

a comprehensive account of total federal agency spending on space weather - related activities is not available .

in a cost estimate for the space weather research and forecasting act ( s. 881 in the 116 th congress ) , cbo estimated that the federal agencies in the national space weather program and the space weather operations , research , and mitigation working group "allocated a combined total of nearly $350 million to activities related to space weather" in fy2019 .

cbo estimated that the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) allocated the majority ( $264 million ) of the $350 million total .

total federal agency allocations towards space weather activities may differ from year to year .

for example , cbo estimated federal agencies that were a part of the national space weather program "spent a total of $160 million" in fy2016 on activities related to space weather .

the 116 th congress continues to consider and pass legislation related to space weather research , forecasting , preparedness , response , and recovery .

congress enacted s. 1790 in december 2019 as the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2020 ( 2020 ndaa ) .

the 2020 ndaa amended sections 320 and 707 of the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) to enact a series of homeland security - related provisions that parallel the e.o .

13865 framework for critical infrastructure resilience and emergency response .

see table 7 for a summary of the new requirements .

the 2020 ndaa also repealed section 1691 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2018 ( p.l .

115-91 ) , which authorized a "commission to assess the threat to the united states from electromagnetic pulse attacks and similar events. .

the congressional emp commission was to conduct an emp threat assessment and make policy recommendations to congress .

senior commission members have publicly claimed a prominent role in developing e.o .

13865 , which "seeks to implement core recommendations of the congressional emp commission on an accelerated basis. .

house - passed versions of the 2020 ndaa cited the publication of e.o .

13865 when repealing section 1691 .

other provisions in the 2020 ndaa require the national guard to clarify relevant "roles and missions , structure , capabilities , and training," and report to congress no later than september 30 , 2020 , on its readiness to respond to electromagnetic pulse events affecting multiple states .

these similar but not identical bills , introduced by senator gary peters and representative ed perlmutter respectively , set forth provisions designed to improve the ability of the united states to forecast space weather events and mitigate the effects of space weather .

the bills provide statutory authority for an interagency working group ( such as sworm , which was established administratively by the nstc in 2014 ) .

other major provisions of the bills concern federal agency roles and responsibilities , the establishment of an advisory group , r&d , data sharing , and certain congressional reporting requirements .

s. 881 also includes provisions related to the protection of critical infrastructure .

the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation ordered s. 881 to be reported without amendment in april 2019 .

s. 881 was reported out of the committee and placed on the senate legislative calendar in december 2019 .

h.r .

5260 was referred to several house committees for consideration in november 2019 .

previous versions of these bills were introduced in the 114 th and 115 th congresses .

