the chief financial officers act of 1990 ( cfo act ) requires annual financial audits of federal agencies' financial statements to "assure the issuance of reliable financial information ... deter fraud , waste and abuse of government resources ... [and assist] the executive branch ... and congress in the financing , management , and evaluation of federal programs. .

agency inspectors general ( igs ) are responsible for the audits and may contract with one or more external auditors .

the department of defense ( dod ) completed its first agency - wide financial audit in fy2018 and recently completed its fy2019 audit .

comprehensive data for the fy2019 audit are not currently available .

therefore , this report focuses on dod's fy2018 audit .

congressional interest in dod's audits is particularly acute because dod accounts for about half of federal discretionary expenditures and 15% of total federal expenditures .

the department of defense inspector general ( dod ig ) contracted with nine independent public accounting firms ( ipas ) to conduct the fy2018 and fy2019 audit .

the ipas conducted 24 separate audits within dod ( see table 1 for each of the component - level audit opinions ) .

in both fy2018 and fy2019 audits , the dod ig issued the overall agency - wide opinion of disclaimer of o pinion —meaning auditors could not express an opinion on the financial statements because the financial information was not sufficiently reliable .

dod components that received a disclaimer of opinion represent approximately 56% of the reported dod assets and 90% of the reported dod budgetary resources .

dod expected to receive a disclaimer of opinion for fy2018 and fy2019 .

the department has stated it could take a decade to receive an u nmodified ( clean ) audit opinion .

the federal government as a whole is unable to receive a clean opinion on its financial report because agencies with significant assets and budgetary costs , such as dod , the department of housing and urban development , and the railroad retirement board , have each received a disclaimer of opinion in recent years .

the federal government as a whole potentially could receive a clean audit opinion without all government agencies receiving a clean audit opinion ; however , the size of the dod budget—$708 billion in fy2019—prevents an overall clean opinion without dod receiving a clean audit opinion .

dod employs 2.9 million military and civilian employees at approximately 4,800 dod sites in 160 countries .

dod ig personnel and auditors from ipas visited over 600 sites , sent over 40,000 requests for documentation , and tested over 90,000 sample items .

dod spent $413 million to conduct the fy2018 audit: $192 million on audit fees for the ipas and $221 million on government costs to support the audit .

dod spent an additional $406 million on audit remediation and $153 million on financial system fixes .

financial statements are the primary way for an entity to communicate its financial performance to its stakeholders .

how each line item on a financial statement ( eg , property ) should be valued and reported is based on generally accepted accounting principles ( gaap ) , an agreement among practitioners ( i.e. , accountants , auditors , and regulators ) .

in a financial audit , a private or public entity hires an independent auditor to provide reasonable assurance to all stakeholders that its financial statements are free of material misstatement , whether caused by error or fraud .

auditors form opinions by examining the types of risks an organization might face and the controls in place to mitigate those risks .

auditors give unbiased professional opinions on whether financial statements and related disclosures are fairly stated in all material respects for a given period of time in accordance with gaap .

as mentioned previously , the cfo act requires federal agencies' financial statements to be audited annually .

the cfo act assigns responsibility for audits to agency inspectors general ( igs ) , but an ig may contract with one or more external auditors to perform an audit .

the annual audit can inform congress and the agency about its business processes and areas for improvement .

an audit of dod can provide benefits , such as ( 1 ) effective and efficient internal operations that can lead to reducing costs and improving operational readiness ; ( 2 ) improved allocation of assets and financial resources that can enhance dod's decisionmaking and ability to support the armed forces ; and ( 3 ) improved compliance with statutes and financial regulations .

for each line item on a financial statement and notes to the financial statement , an auditor will examine a sample of the underlying economic events to determine the reported information's accuracy .

the federal accounting standards advisory board ( fasab ) promulgates financial reporting and accounting standards for federal government entities , and gao establishes federal auditing standards , including for federal grant recipients in state and local governments .

gao issues the generally accepted government auditing standards ( gagas ) , also commonly known as the yellow book , to provide a framework for conducting federal government audits .

the yellow book requires auditors to consider the visibility and sensitivity of government programs in determining the materiality threshold .

similar to requirements in the private sector , gagas requires federal financial reporting to disclose compliance with laws , regulations , contracts , and grant agreements that have a material effect on financial statements .

before auditors examine an entity's financial statement , they first evaluate its enterprise resource planning ( erp ) systems' ( information technology systems' ) access control and reliability , as well as internal controls .

erp refers to an enterprise - wide information system used to manage and coordinate all of an entity's resources , information , and functions from shared data stores , including financial information .

auditing erp systems is a critical aspect of evaluating an entity's internal controls .

the dod auditors issued 2,377 notices of findings and recommendations ( nfrs ) that resulted in 20 agency - wide material weaknesses and 129 dod component - level material weaknesses .

appendix a provides an overview of the 20 agency - wide material weaknesses .

an auditor creates an nfr to capture issues that require corrective action .

dod then creates a corrective action plan ( cap ) to address one or more nfrs .

the nfr is later retested , and if the cap sufficiently addresses the nfr , the auditor is to validate that the issue has been resolved .

as of june 2019 , the majority of nfrs were related to three critical areas: approximately 48% were related to financial management systems and information technology ; 30% were related to financial reporting and dod's fund balance with treasury ; and 16% were related to property .

although the overall number of nfrs increased slightly between december 2018 and june 2019 , the number has decreased significantly in certain categories ( see table 2 , other column ) .

the increase in nfrs in certain categories is an expected result of the audit process .

as auditors learn more about dod and how it functions , they may continue to identify new nfrs , while dod continues to address some of the previously identified nfrs .

the office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) has established an audit nfr database .

dod uses the database to consolidate and track the status of all auditor - issued nfrs and prioritize and link them to caps .

the nfr and cap component - based metrics are reported and reviewed monthly in the national defense strategy meeting with the deputy secretary of defense and military service financial management leadership teams .

the military service branches—army , navy , marine corps , and air force—account for over 60% of nfrs identified in the fy2018 audit ( see table 3 ) .

for dod to receive a clean audit opinion , civilian leadership and uniformed armed forces personnel may need to improve collaboration .

according to dod , it is prioritizing caps that align with the national defense strategy and provide the greatest potential value to dod operations and the warfighter .

dod has established actionable financial statement audit priorities at many levels within the department , including at the command level .

those fy2019 priorities include the following: real property ; government property in the possession of contractors ; inventory , and operating materials and supplies ; and access controls for it systems .

given the complexity of dod operations , auditors began their work for the fy2019 financial audit in late 2018 .

comprehensive data for the fy2019 audit are not currently available .

however , the auditors issued an overall agency - wide disclaimer of opinion for fy2019 .

most financial statement audits stop as soon as the auditor determines the reporting entity is not auditable .

dod , however , has asked the auditors to continue such audits to identify as many problems as possible , with the goals of identifying systemic issues and making faster progress toward business reform .

although the cfo act required annual audits of federal agencies' financial statements , dod did not complete an agency - wide audit until 2018—28 years later .

one of dod's strategic goals is to reform its business practices for greater performance and affordability .

according to dod , the annual audit process helps it reform its business practices consistent with the national defense strategy ( nds ) : the financial statement annual audit regimen is foundational to reforming the department's business practices and consistent with the national defense strategy .

data from the audits is driving the department's strategy , goals , and priorities and enabling leaders to focus on areas that yield the most value to the warfighter .

the audits are already proving invaluable and have the potential to support long - term , sustainable reform that could lead to efficiencies , better buying power , and increased public confidence in dod's stewardship of funds .

continued congressional oversight of dod's plan to achieve a clean audit opinion could help dod achieve a clean audit opinion .

as more components receive a clean audit opinion , audit costs might eventually decrease .

for fy2018 , dod incurred nearly $1 billion in total audit costs , which was less than 0.25% of dod's fy2018 budget .

although the cost of an audit is a consideration , the more impactful benefits from an annual financial audit , arguably , are the changes in dod business practices that directly impact the nds while increasing transparency .

the audits identified three critical areas of improvement that are consistent with the nds: ( 1 ) financial management systems and information technology ( it ) , ( 2 ) financial reporting and fund balance with treasury , and ( 3 ) property ( real property , inventory , and supplies , and government property in the possession of contractors ) .

addressing the issues in these critical areas not only could help dod improve its business practices , but it might also help resolve many of the nfrs , which could enable some audit components to receive clean audit opinions in the next few years instead of in another decade or more .

since passing the cfo act of 1990 , which required 24 agencies to conduct an agency - wide annual financial audit , congress has continued to express interest in dod completing an annual audit .

dod completed its first agency - wide audit in fy2018 and a subsequent audit in fy2019 .

both audits resulted in a disclaimer of o pinion .

the ongoing independent assessment of dod's financial systems , arguably , provides congress and dod leadership with an independent third - party assessment of dod's financial and business operations .

reliable systems that produce auditable financial information , including an accurate count and valuation of real estate and inventory , could help congress provide better oversight and ultimately determine how funds appropriated for dod should be spent in support of the nds .

further , the annual financial audit of dod by independent auditors might provide dod with a competitive advantage when compared to other countries' defense agencies .

in many other countries , financial information—including a financial audit of defense agencies—is nonexistent or opaque at best and not readily available to legislators or citizens .

many of dod's financial management systems are also used for operational purposes .

testing of the financial management systems and other systems that interface with each other as part of the annual audit process can help identify and improve cybersecurity vulnerabilities and the conduct of military operations .

dod's efforts to fix its vulnerabilities and reduce wasteful practices , arguably , could enable it to respond to future threats more effectively .

the implementation of new erp systems and the complexity of auditing dod might result in dod not achieving a clean audit opinion within the next decade .

without each of the armed forces receiving a clean audit opinion , dod will not be able to receive an agency - wide clean audit opinion even if all other dod components receive a clean audit opinion .

appendix a. dod agency - wide material weaknesses weaknesses and inefficiencies in internal controls are classified based on severity .

auditors identified 20 material weaknesses at dod ( see table a - 1 ) related to internal controls that range from issues with financial management systems to inventory management .

a material weakness is a deficiency , or a combination of deficiencies , in internal control over financial reporting that results in a reasonable possibility that management will not prevent , or detect and correct , a material misstatement in the financial statements in a timely manner .

in addition to material weaknesses , the auditors issue two types of deficiencies—a significant deficiency or a control deficiency — that are less severe than a material weakness , but a combination or multiple instances of either deficiency can result in material weaknesses .

a significant deficiency is a deficiency or a combination of deficiencies that are less severe than a material weakness , but important enough to merit management's attention .

a control deficiency is a noted weakness or deficiency that auditors typically bring to management's attention , but that does not have an impact on the financial statement unless a combination of them results in a material weakness .

improvements in either type of deficiency could improve the business process and help prevent waste , abuse , and fraud .

appendix b .

common service providers some organizations within dod provide common information technology services to other organizations at dod .

these organizations report to higher - level organizations .

for fy2018 , auditors completed 20 dod service provider examinations—14 resulted in unmodified opinions and 6 resulted in qualified opinions .

see table b - 1 for more information , including auditors' opinions and the number of fy2018 nfrs issued .

service provider examinations provide a positive assurance as to whether information technology control activities were designed , implemented , and operate effectively to provide management reasonable assurance that control objectives function as designed or intended in all material respects .

examination procedures are limited in scope as compared to a financial audit .

component - level auditors can use these examinations' results to reduce redundant testing , saving time and money ; see table 1 for the list of audited dod components .

for fy2019 , dod expects to complete 23 common service provider examinations .

