a majority of the population of the united states has private health insurance coverage ( i.e. , coverage not available through a public program , such as medicare or medicaid ) .

in 2017 , about 55% of the u.s. population had private group coverage ( eg , a health plan offered by an employer ) and 13.5% had private individual coverage ( eg , a health plan offered through a health insurance exchange ) .

in general , health plans sold in the private health insurance market must comply with state and federal health insurance requirements .

the federal requirements relate to how coverage is offered and issued , the benefits it must cover , and how it is priced , among other issues .

an example of a federal health insurance requirement is the prohibition of preexisting condition exclusions .

although federal health insurance requirements generally apply to health plans sold in the private health insurance market , not all private health coverage arrangements comply with such requirements .

this includes exempted health coverage arrangements and nonco mpliant health coverage arrangements , as termed for purposes of this report .

this report identifies and describes arrangements within these two categories .

the report is intended to help congressional policymakers better understand the scope of these health coverage arrangements that are available to individuals in the united states private health insurance markets and to provide information about the limitations of the application of federal health insurance requirements .

the arrangements discussed in this section have the following in common: they meet a federal definition of health insurance ( i.e. , they meet the federal definition of health insurance coverage or group health plan ) , but they are exempt from compliance with some or all applicable federal health insurance requirements .

for most of the arrangements discussed in this section , the exemption is explicit in federal statute , regulations , or guidance ( see table 1 ) .

the two health coverage arrangements discussed in this section have the following in common: the federal government has not explicitly exempted them from compliance with federal health insurance requirements , and they do not necessarily comply with those requirements .

the arrangements summarized in this section are just two examples that share the aforementioned characteristics .

there may be other health coverage arrangements that share the same characteristics , but it is difficult to make a comprehensive list of such arrangements , given that one of their defining characteristics is that the federal government does not appear to have discussed their status with respect to the application of the federal health insurance requirements .

a health care sharing ministry ( hcsm ) is a faith - based organization that shares resources for medical needs among its members .

the idea of pooling financial resources for medical needs among a religious community has a long history in the united states .

the idea originated with the amish and mennonites over a century ago , and other religious groups began offering hcsms in the 1990s .

in general , members of an hcsm are expected to follow a set of religious or ethical beliefs and regularly contribute a payment ( eg , monthly ) to cover the medical expenses of other members .

the contributions are distributed , either through the hcsm or via a member - to - member match , to members who need funds for health care costs .

members are often responsible for a portion of their health care costs prior to receiving funds from the hcsm , and most hcsms exclude coverage of specified illnesses , care , or treatments .

hcsms maintain that they are not providing insurance and do not guarantee payment for members' health care costs .

however , the federal government does not appear to have defined hcsms for regulatory or exemption purposes .

hcsms do not necessarily currently comply , and have not historically complied , with federal health insurance requirements .

states may choose whether and how to regulate hcsms operating in their state .

as of august 2018 , 30 states had opted to explicitly exempt hcsms from state insurance law ( i.e. , the hcsm does not have to comply with the state's body of insurance laws ) , provided the hcsm meets specified requirements .

state hcsm requirements vary ; examples of requirements include providing to consumers written disclaimers stating the hcsm is not an insurance company and having an annual audit .

in the remaining 21 states ( including dc ) , hcsms have not been explicitly exempted from state insurance law ; however , the lack of an explicit exemption does not necessarily mean that such states regulate hcsms .

regardless of whether a state has exempted an hcsm from its body of insurance laws , a state's role in regulating hcsms is complex and varied .

in states that exempt hcsms from their insurance laws , state regulators are responsible for ensuring that hcsms meet the requirements necessary to maintain their exemption and for taking action if they do not .

in states that do not exempt hcsms from their insurance laws , state regulators "can investigate and , if sufficient evidence exists , regulate these plans as unauthorized insurers. .

in all states , regulators may have roles to play in "investigating fraud , referring cases to the attorney general's office , and assisting consumers who may have been harmed [by an hcsm]. .

the alliance of health care sharing ministries reports that there are 104 hcsms in 29 states , and 7 of the 104 are open to new members .

as of the date of this report , the alliance estimates enrollment in hcsms at just under 970,000 .

the american farm bureau federation is a national organization established in 1919 to advocate for the financial and political interests of farmers , ranchers , and others associated with agriculture .

there are local farm bureau offices in all 50 states and in puerto rico ( but not in dc ) .

membership in a local farm bureau is open to anyone who pays the membership fee , but typically membership is tiered , with members associated with agriculture having a status different from other members ( eg , agriculture - associated members may have voting rights in the organization , whereas other members may not ) .

each state farm bureau provides member benefits .

the benefits include discounts on a variety of products and services , such as hotel stays , farm equipment , and membership in air ambulance networks .

additionally , many state farm bureaus assist their members with obtaining insurance , including health insurance .

the assistance with health insurance takes different forms .

many state farm bureaus have agents available to assist their members with finding and enrolling in a health plan ; some state farm bureaus sponsor coverage that is available to their members ; and at least one state farm bureau is divided in two parts , with one part being an insurance company that serves the farm bureau's members .

as of the date of this report , three states—iowa , kansas , and tennessee—have enacted laws that allow the farm bureaus in each state to offer a different type of health coverage arrangement .

each state allows the state's farm bureau to sponsor health benefits coverage that is not defined by the state as insurance and is not subject to the state's insurance laws , provided the coverage and the farm bureau comply with specified requirements .

 ( see table 6 for details. ) .

iowa and kansas passed their laws recently—in 2018 and 2019 , respectively—and tennessee passed its law in 1993 .

the farm bureaus in iowa and tennessee currently offer such coverage ; the kansas farm bureau's coverage became available for purchase beginning october 1 , 2019 , with coverage starting as early as january 1 , 2020 .

as explained above , the arrangements sponsored by farm bureaus in iowa , kansas , and tennessee are not considered insurance in their respective states and do not have to comply with state requirements that apply to insurance .

additionally , farm bureau coverage in these three states does not necessarily comply with any federal health insurance requirements .

however , the federal government does not appear to have defined such coverage for regulatory or exemption purposes .

in 2017 , about 23,000 individuals had tennessee farm bureau coverage .

estimates for the iowa farm bureau were not found .

kansas farm bureau estimates that 11,000-42,000 residents of kansas will be covered by its health benefits coverage .

 table a - 1 shows the applicability of selected federal health insurance requirements to grandfathered and transitional plans .

both types of plans are described in detail in this report ; as a reminder , any type of plan could be grandfathered , but only fully insured small - group plans and individual - market plans could become transitional plans .

the check marks in the table indicate that the grandfathered or transitional plan must comply with the requirement .

the term n.a .

indicates that the requirement does not apply to the specified market segment , regardless of whether the plan is a grandfathered or transitional plan .

the use of exempt in the table indicates that the grandfathered or transitional plan is exempt from complying with the requirement .

for example , the aca's rate review requirement applies only to fully insured small - group plans and individual market plans .

grandfathered plans do not have to comply with the requirement , which is why the table indicates that grandfathered fully insured small - group plans and grandfathered individual plans are "exempt" from the requirement .

transitional plans do have to comply with the requirement , which is why the table has check marks for these plans .

the rate review requirement does not apply to fully insured large - group plans or self - insured plans ; as such , the table indicates that the requirement is not applicable ( n.a. ) .

to grandfathered versions of these plans .

