u.s. energy information administration ( eia ) has forecast u.s. coal production to decline through 2050 , with the sharpest reduction to occur by the mid - 2020s .

consequently , the coal industry's decline has contributed to economic distress in coal - dependent communities , including increased unemployment and poverty rates .

in response , the obama administration launched the partnerships for opportunity and workforce and economic revitalization ( power ) plus plan , which addressed the coal sector's decline through funding for ( 1 ) economic stabilization , ( 2 ) social welfare efforts , and ( 3 ) environmental efforts .

the economic elements were organized within the power initiative , a multi - agency federal initiative to provide economic development funding and technical assistance to address economic distress caused by the effects of energy transition principally in coal communities .

although the initiative began as a multi - agency effort as part of the power plus plan , the power initiative currently operates as a funded program administered by the appalachian regional commission ( arc ) in its 420-county service area .

this report considers the background of the power initiative and the broader effort of which it was originally a part , the power plus plan .

it broadly surveys the state of power elements in the current administration , including elements of the initiative in the economic development administration ( eda ) , the appalachian regional commission ( arc ) , and funded efforts for abandoned mine land reclamation .

the appalachian regional commission's power initiative program is the largest of these , and the only program to retain the power initiative branding .

this report considers its scope and activities as well as its funding history .

the power initiative is supported by congress as reflected by consistent annual appropriations .

the power initiative may also be of interest to congress as an economic development program that actively facilitates and eases the repercussions of energy transition in affected communities in appalachia .

more broadly , in light of the projected continued decline of the coal industry , as well as proposals to address greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions from hydrocarbon combustion , congressional interest in programs to address economic dislocations as a result of energy transition is likely to accelerate .

the power initiative was launched in 2015 as a multi - agency federal effort to provide grant funding and technical assistance to address economic and labor dislocations caused by the effects of energy transition—principally in coal communities around the united states .

the power initiative was a precursor to a broader effort known as the power plus plan ( dubbed power+ by the obama administration ) .

this latter plan was launched using preexisting funds , and was intended to develop an array of grant programs across multiple agencies to facilitate energy transition and ameliorate the negative effects of that transition .

most legislative elements of the power+ plan were carried out under existing authorities rather than new legislation .

certain features continue to be active—particularly elements of the power initiative within the arc and the eda .

as of november 2019 , the power initiative exists solely as a funded program of the arc , and is no longer a multi - agency initiative .

however , certain other elements originally included in the power+ plan and the power initiative continue to receive appropriations and continue to be active , but they are not designated as such by the trump administration .

these elements are discussed below .

the appalachian regional commission ( arc ) is the only federal agency that continues to receive regular appropriated funding for energy transition activities under the power initiative designation .

while the power initiative was launched as a multi - agency effort , only the arc chose to designate its contributions as the power initiative .

the energy information administration projects that coal production overall will continue to decline as a consequence of falling market demand .

in particular , the eia forecasts coal to account for 24% of u.s. electric energy generation in 2019 and 2020 , down from 28% in 2018 .

by 2050 , coal is projected to decline to 17% of u.s. electricity generation , nuclear is projected to account for 12% , renewables 31% , and natural gas 39% , according to eia projections .

coal's decline is a function of market forces , particularly its higher cost relative to natural gas and renewable energy options .

in the future , under current policies , coal's cost disadvantage is expected to continue , and could be accelerated if policies are adopted to reduce ghg emissions that contribute to climate change .

even with federal incentives to invest in carbon capture , utilization , and storage as a means to mitigate fossil fuel - related emissions , coal may still not be competitive in many situations .

as a result of falling demand , noncompetitive coal producers and their communities are expected to face continued economic dislocation .

should it wish to broaden or intensify federal efforts to address energy transition in local communities , congress may have several options .

in the past , congress has demonstrated bipartisan interest in the federal government providing assistance to populations adversely affected by the ongoing energy transitions .

it has done so through its appropriations for the arc's power initiative , the eda's acc program , and the aml investments .

in combination with evidence of unmet demand for federal assistance , as measured by unfunded requests to the arc ( table 5 ) , congress may consider reviewing the balance among needs , appropriations , and effectiveness of past efforts .

congress could conduct a review of the power initiative and the efficacy of its performance and resources .

this potential review suggests some particular considerations: geography : while the acc is available for the nation as a whole , the arc's power initiative is restricted to the arc's service area in the appalachian region .

congress may consider expanding the power initiative to be available more broadly across the nation , or in a more targeted fashion as demonstrated by the arc's program .

alternatively , funding could be made available nationwide to any eligible coal community , such as through other federal regional commissions and authorities and / or eda regions .

funding : projections of u.s. coal production ( cited earlier ) suggest that the ongoing transition in u.s. energy systems may lead to further localized economic distress without the development of new regional opportunities .

congress may consider the level of funding for power initiative programs in the context of those economic needs .

funding levels could be tied to the overall scale of the challenge , allocated to areas with the greatest need , and made in consideration of data - driven evaluations of the program effectiveness .

in assessing scale , congress may consider macroeconomic factors as well as social and environmental policy objectives .

energy type : congress may also consider expanding the power initiative program beyond the coal industry to other energy industries or regions perceived to be in decline .

for example , economic strain and job losses following the closure of other electrical generating units , such as aging nuclear power plants , may signal additional types of displacement .

eia forecasts anticipate a modest decline in nuclear power generation by 2050 as older , less efficient reactors are retired .

nuclear - industry communities may face similar issues of economic distress and labor dislocation .

congress may also consider other public policy goals , such as reducing ghgs , to assist in promoting renewable energy types and carbon capture technologies .

should congress consider such efforts , the arc's power initiative program could serve as a potential model to be scaled or replicated as needed .

in addition , other models have also been proposed in bills introduced in the 116 th congress that would assist coal communities in transition .

although the power+ plan was not enacted in its entirety , some of its legacy programs continue to receive annual appropriations and remain active .

the persistence of such programs suggests support among many policymakers for federal efforts to rectify , or at least attenuate , economic distress as a consequence of energy transition .

in addition , were congress to pursue policy efforts reflective of broadening concern for climate issues , a power initiative - type program could be developed to also facilitate energy transition from fossil fuel - based energy sources to a mix of renewables and other alternatives .

although the power+ plan did not continue beyond the obama administration , several constituent programs have continued to receive congressional backing , and applicant volume—at least in the case of the arc's power initiative—may suggest further demand for additional federal resources in addressing energy transition issues .

more broadly , these mechanisms could also be purposed to facilitate federal resources for other related issues , such as related to ecological / environmental resilience and adaptation .

the power initiative , as originally conceived or in its current form as a program of the arc , has not been subjected to a formal evaluation by the u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) or other research organization of its effectiveness as either a mechanism for alleviating community economic distress caused by the declining coal industry , or economic development more broadly .

one recent gao report mentioned the assistance to coal communities program , but did not seek to analyze its activities or efficacy .

similarly , older gao reports exist that feature the abandoned mine land reclamation program ( prior to its current configuration ) , and the appalachian regional commission , but may be of limited relevance when evaluating current programming , including more recent activities such as the power initiative .

meanwhile , a number of anecdotal and media reports appear to tout the power initiative's success and viability .

the arc , for its part , reports that the power initiative has "invested over $190 million in 239 projects touching 326 counties across appalachia. .

according to the arc , those investments are "projected to create or retain more than 23,000 jobs , and leverage more than $811 million in additional private investment. .

in the arc's 2018 performance and accountability report , the arc reported that the annual outcome target for "students , workers , and leaders with improvements" in fy2018 was exceeded by 55% "likely due to" investments from the power initiative ; similarly , the arc reported the outcome target for "communities with enhanced capacity" in fy2018 was exceeded by 125% , "due in part to priorities established for the power initiative. .

the same report also noted that the arc launched a new monitoring and evaluation effort on the power initiative in september 2018 encompassing "approximately 135 power grants" in fy2015-fy2017 .

the results of that assessment have not yet been released .

