t he agriculture appropriations bill—formally called the agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies appropriations act—funds all of the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , excluding the u.s. forest service .

for fy2020 , the house appropriations committee reported h.r .

3164 on june 6 , 2019 ( including h.rept .

116-107 ) .

funding for usda was included in a five - bill minibus appropriations bill ( h.r .

3055 ) that passed the house on june 25 , 2019 .

the senate appropriations committee reported s. 2522 on september 19 , 2019 ( including s.rept .

116-110 ) .

the full senate did not act on this bill by october 1 , 2019 , so fy2020 began without a full - year appropriation .

to avoid a lapse in funding , congress and the president approved two consecutive continuing resolutions to fund federal agencies at the fy2019 level ( p.l .

116-59 and p.l .

116-69 , respectively ) .

the senate passed a four - bill minibus appropriations bill ( h.r .

3055 ) on october 31 , 2019 , setting up negotiations with the house for a final bill .

on december 20 , 2019 , congress passed and the president signed the fy2020 further consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

116-94 ) , which includes agriculture and related agencies under division b .

this report provides a brief overview of the conservation - related provisions in the fy2020 agriculture appropriations acts .

for a general analysis of the fy2020 appropriations for agriculture , see crs report r45974 , agriculture and related agencies: fy2020 appropriations .

usda administers a number of agricultural conservation programs that assist private landowners with natural resource concerns .

these include working lands programs , land retirement and easement programs , watershed programs , technical assistance , and other programs .

the two lead agricultural conservation agencies within usda are the natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) , which provides technical assistance and administers most conservation programs , and the farm service agency ( fsa ) , which administers the conservation reserve program ( crp ) .

most conservation program funding is mandatory , obtained through the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) and authorized in omnibus farm bills ( about $6.4 billion of ccc budget authority for conservation in fy2020 ) .

the agriculture improvement act of 2018 ( 2018 farm bill ; p.l .

115-334 ) reauthorized most mandatory conservation programs through fy2023 .

other conservation programs—mostly providing technical assistance—operate with discretionary funding provided in annual appropriations ( about $1 billion annually ) .

the fy2020 appropriation included an increase from fy2019 levels for discretionary conservation programs .

the administration's fy2020 request proposed a decrease for discretionary conservation funding from the fy2019 enacted levels and reductions in funding for mandatory conservation programs .

the fy2020 appropriation does not generally include these proposed reductions and would continue to redirect some conservation funding to the farm production and conservation ( fpac ) business center .

mandatory conservation programs are generally authorized in omnibus farm bills and receive funding from the ccc and thus do not require an annual appropriation .

the 2018 farm bill reauthorized mandatory funding for many of the agricultural conservation programs through fy2023 .

because most of these programs are classified as mandatory , nonexempt spending , they are reduced annually by sequestration .

the president's fy2020 budget requested a reduction of $40 million annually to the agricultural conservation easement program and the elimination of the conservation stewardship program .

both programs were reauthorized to receive mandatory funding in the 2018 farm bill through fy20203 .

the fy2020 appropriation does not reduce these or other mandatory farm bill conservation programs .

the farm production and conservation ( fpac ) mission area was created in 2017 as part of a larger departmental reorganization .

fpac includes nrcs , fsa , the risk management agency ( rma ) , and a new fpac business center .

the fpac business center is responsible for financial management , budgeting , human resources , information technology , acquisitions / procurement , strategic planning , and other customer - oriented operations of three agencies—nrcs , fsa , and rma .

congress reduced funding for nrcs , fsa , and rma in fy2019 to realign funding and staff to the fpac business center .

the fy2020 appropriation includes the administration's requested level of $206.5 million for the business center .

this is $9.8 million less than the enacted fy2019 appropriation ( see table 2 ) .

according to the administration's fy2020 request , the proposed reduction is the result of "realizing efficiency improvements. .

the proposed reduction for fy2020 to the fpac business center's appropriation could affect the implementation of conservation programs if efficiencies are not realized .

the explanatory statement of the fy2020 appropriation directs usda to produce a report to the appropriations committees within 60 days of enactment on the center's efficiency gains , the metrics by which such gains are measured , and its hiring acceleration and reorganization plans .

similar language was included in the senate committee report ( s.rept .

116-110 ) , which also cited concerns related to the business center's delays in filling critical vacancies , potentially resulting in delayed deployment of conservation and commodity programs .

the senate committee report expressed concern that additional functions and staff positions affiliated with nrcs state offices are being moved to the fpac business center .

the fy2020 appropriation directs a transfer of funds to the fpac business center from other accounts , including mandatory conservation programs and farm loan accounts .

this transfer could result in nrcs effectively receiving less in total funding if the amount shifted would have been used for nrcs administrative or technical assistance had the business center not been created .

in total , the direct appropriation and transfer of funds would provide the fpac business center with $282.8 million in fy2020 ( see table 2 ) .

in addition to setting budgetary amounts , the agriculture appropriations bill may also include policy - related provisions that direct how the executive branch should carry out an appropriation .

these provisions may have the force of law if they are included in the text of an appropriations act , but their effect is generally limited to the current fiscal year ( see table 3 ) .

policy - related provisions generally do not amend the u.s. code or have long - standing effects .

for example , the wfpo program has historically been called the "small watershed program," because no project may exceed 250,000 acres , and no structure may exceed 12,500 acre - feet of floodwater detention capacity or 25,000 acre - feet of total capacity .

the fy2020 enacted appropriation includes a policy provision that waives the 250,000-acre project limit when the project's primary purpose is something other than flood prevention .

this provision does not amend the wfpo authorization and therefore is effective only for the funds provided during the current appropriation year .

table 3 compares some of the policy provisions in the farm production and conservation programs ( title ii ) and general provisions ( title vii ) titles of the fy2019 and fy2020 agriculture appropriations bills related to conservation .

many of these provisions were also included in past years' appropriations acts .

the table is divided by agency and account according to their location within the fy2019 and fy2020 acts .

the explanatory statement that accompanies the final appropriations—and the house and senate report language that accompanies the committee - reported bills—may also provide policy instructions .

these documents do not have the force of law but often explain congressional intent , which congress expects the agencies to follow ( see table 4 ) .

the committee reports and explanatory statement may need to be read together to capture all of the congressional intent for a given fiscal year .

many of these provisions have been included in past years' appropriations acts .

some provisions in report language and bill text address conservation programs that are not authorized or funded within the annual appropriations ( i.e. , mandatory spending for farm - bill - authorized programs ) .

table 4 is divided by the administering agency and by account according to the location of each provision within the two reports .

