the constitution grants congress authority to impeach and remove the president , vice president , and other federal "civil officers" for treason , bribery , or "other high crimes and misdemeanors. .

impeachment is one of the various checks and balances created by the constitution , serving as a crucial tool for holding government officers accountable for abuse of power , corruption , and conduct considered incompatible with the nature of an individual's office .

although the term impeachment is commonly used to refer to the removal of a government official from office , the impeachment process , as described in the constitution , entails two distinct proceedings carried out by the separate houses of congress .

first , a simple majority of the house impeaches —or formally approves allegations of wrongdoing amounting to an impeachable offense .

the second proceeding is an impeachment trial in the senate .

if the senate votes to convict with a two - thirds majority , the official is removed from office .

following a conviction , the senate also may vote to disqualify that official from holding a federal office in the future .

the house has impeached nineteen individuals: fifteen federal judges , one senator , one cabinet member , and two presidents .

of these , eight individuals—all federal judges—were convicted by the senate .

the constitution imposes several requirements on the impeachment process .

when conducting an impeachment trial , senators must be "on oath or affirmation," and the right to a jury trial does not extend to impeachment proceedings .

if the president is impeached and tried in the senate , the chief justice of the united states presides at the trial .

finally , the constitution bars the president from using the pardon power to shield individuals from impeachment or removal from office .

understanding the historical practices of congress on impeachment is central to fleshing out the meaning of the constitution's impeachment clauses .

while much of constitutional law is developed through jurisprudence analyzing the text of the constitution and applying prior judicial precedents , the constitution's meaning is also shaped by institutional practices and political norms .

james madison , for instance , argued that the meaning of certain provisions in the constitution would be "liquidated" over time , or determined through a "regular course of practice. .

justice joseph story thought this principle applied to impeachment , noting that the framers understood that the meaning of "high crimes and misdemeanors" constituting impeachable offenses would develop over time , much like the common law .

indeed , justice story believed it would be impossible to define precisely the full scope of political offenses that may constitute impeachable behavior in the future .

moreover , the power of impeachment is largely immune from judicial review , meaning that congress's choices in this arena are unlikely to be overturned by the courts .

for that reason , examining the history of actual impeachments is crucial to determining the meaning of the constitution's impeachment provisions .

consistent with this backdrop , this report begins with an examination of the historical background on impeachment , including the perspective of the framers as informed by english and colonial practice .

it then turns to the unique constitutional roles of the house and senate in the process , followed by a discussion of impeachment practices throughout the country's history .

the report concludes by noting and exploring several recurring questions about impeachment , including legal considerations relevant to a senate impeachment trial .

the constitution grants the sole power of impeachment to the house of representatives .

generally speaking , the impeachment process has often been initiated in the house by a member by resolution or declaration of a charge , although anyone—including house members , a grand jury , or a state legislature—may request that the house investigate an individual for impeachment purposes .

indeed , in modern practice , many impeachments have been sparked by referrals from an external investigatory body .

beginning in the 1980s , the judicial conference has referred its findings to the house recommending an impeachment investigation into a number of federal judges who were eventually impeached .

similarly , in the impeachment of president bill clinton , an independent counsel—a temporary prosecutor given statutory independence and charged with investigating certain misconduct when approved by a judicial body —first conducted an investigation into a variety of alleged activities on the part of the president and his associates , and then delivered a report to the house detailing conduct that the independent counsel considered potentially impeachable .

regardless of the source requesting an impeachment investigation , the house has sole discretion under the constitution to begin any impeachment proceedings against an individual .

in practice , impeachment investigations are often handled by an already existing or specially created subcommittee of the house judiciary committee .

the scope of the investigation can vary .

in some instances , an entirely independent investigation may be initiated by the house .

in other cases , an impeachment investigation might rely on records delivered by outside entities , such as those delivered by the judicial conference or an independent counsel .

following this investigation , the full house may vote on the relevant impeachment articles .

if articles of impeachment are approved , the house chooses managers to present the matter to the senate .

the chairman of the house managers then presents the articles of impeachment to the senate and requests that the body order the appearance of the accused .

the house managers typically act as prosecutors in the senate trial .

the house has impeached nineteen individuals: fifteen federal judges , one senator , one cabinet member , and two presidents .

the consensus reflected in these proceedings is that impeachment may serve as a means to address misconduct that does not necessarily give rise to criminal sanction .

according to congressional sources , the types of conduct that constitute grounds for impeachment in the house appear to fall into three general categories: ( 1 ) improperly exceeding or abusing the powers of the office ; ( 2 ) behavior incompatible with the function and purpose of the office ; and ( 3 ) misusing the office for an improper purpose or for personal gain .

consistent with scholarship on the scope of impeachable offenses , congressional materials have cautioned that the grounds for impeachment "do not all fit neatly and logically into categories" because the remedy of impeachment is intended to "reach a broad variety of conduct by officers that is both serious and incompatible with the duties of the office. .

while successful impeachments and convictions of federal officials represent some clear guideposts for what constitutes impeachable conduct , impeachment processes that do not result in a final vote for impeachment and removal also may influence the understanding of congress , executive and judicial branch officials , and the public over what constitutes an impeachable offense .

a prominent example involves the first noteworthy attempt at a presidential impeachment , aimed at john tyler in 1842 .

at the time , the presidential practice had generally been to reserve vetoes for constitutional , rather than policy , disagreements with congress .

following president tyler's veto of a tariff bill on policy grounds , the house endorsed a select committee report condemning president tyler and suggesting that he might be an appropriate subject for impeachment proceedings .

the possibility apparently ended when the whigs , who had led the movement to impeach , lost their house majority in the midterm elections .

in the years following the aborted effort to impeach president tyler , presidents have routinely used their veto power for policy reasons .

this practice is generally seen as an important separation of powers limitation on congress's ability to pass laws rather than a potential ground for impeachment .

likewise , although president richard nixon resigned before impeachment proceedings were completed in the house , the approval of three articles of impeachment by the house judiciary committee against him may inform lawmakers' understanding of conduct that constitutes an impeachable offense .

the approved impeachment articles included allegations that president nixon obstructed justice by using the office of the presidency to impede the investigation into the break - in of the democratic national committee headquarters at the watergate hotel and office building and authorized a cover - up of the activities that were being investigated .

president nixon was alleged to have abused the power of his office by using federal agencies to punish political enemies and refusing to cooperate with the judiciary committee's investigation .

while no impeachment vote was taken by the house , the nixon experience nevertheless established what some would call the quintessential case for impeachment—a serious abuse of the office of the presidency that undermined the office's integrity .

that said , one must be cautious in extrapolating wide - ranging lessons from the lack of impeachment proceedings in the house .

specific behavior not believed to constitute an impeachable offense in prior contexts might be considered impeachable in a different set of circumstances .

moreover , given the varied contextual permutations , the full scope of impeachable behavior resists specification , and historical precedent may not always serve as a useful guide to whether conduct is grounds for impeachment .

for instance , no president has been impeached for abandoning the office and refusing to govern .

that this event has not occurred , however , hardly proves that this behavior would not constitute an impeachable offense meriting removal from office .

the constitution provides that the president , vice president , and all civil officers are subject to impeachment for "treason , bribery , or other high crimes and misdemeanors. .

the meaning of high crimes and misdemeanors , like the other provisions in the constitution relevant to impeachment , is not primarily determined through the development of jurisprudence in the courts .

instead , the meaning of the constitution's impeachment clauses is "liquidated" over time , or determined through historical practice .

the framers did not delineate with specificity the complete range of behavior that would merit impeachment , as the scope of possible "offenses committed by federal officers are myriad and unpredictable. .

according to one scholar , impeachments are sometimes "aimed at articulating , establishing , preserving , and protecting constitutional norms," or "'constructing' constitutional meaning and practices. .

at times , impeachment might be used to reinforce an existing norm , indicating that certain behavior continues to constitute grounds for removal ; in others , it may be used to establish a new norm , setting a marker that signifies what practices are impeachable for the future .

examining the history of impeachment in congress can thus illuminate the constitutional meaning of impeachment , including when congress has established or reaffirmed a particular norm .

influenced by both english and colonial practice , the framers of the constitution crafted an americanized impeachment remedy that ultimately holds government officers accountable for political offenses , or misdeeds committed by public officials against the state .

the meaning of the constitution's impeachment provisions has been worked out over time , informed by the historical practices of the house and senate in pursuing impeachment for the misconduct of government officers .

impeachment is also generally immune from judicial review , meaning that congress has substantial discretion in how it structures impeachment proceedings .

the constitution does not delineate the range of misconduct that qualifies as "high crimes and misdemeanors," perhaps because the scope of possible offenses by government officers is impossible to delineate in advance .

the history of impeachment in the united states shows that the remedy has generally applied against government officers for abuses of power , corruption , and conduct determined incompatible with an individual's office , but does not extend to strictly political or policy disagreements .

