domestic violence is a term often used to describe abuse of a spouse or child in the home .

i ntimate partner violence ( ipv ) is a subset of domestic violence that is committed against a spouse , or current or former dating partner .

ipv is treated as a public health issue and is monitored by the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) at the national level .

according to the cdc , approximately one in five women and one in seven men report having experienced severe physical violence from an intimate partner in their lifetime .

in addition , crime statistics suggest that 16% of all u.s. homicide victims are killed by an intimate partner .

nearly half of female homicide victims are killed by a current or former male intimate partner .

ipv criminal offenses are typically defined and prosecuted at the state level ; however , federal law imposes penalties on some domestic violence offenders .

military ipv offenders may be prosecuted in civilian courts , but are also subject to punitive measures within the military justice system under uniform code of military justice ( ucmj ) provisions .

from a military effectiveness perspective , ipv may lead to productivity losses , degraded servicemember or unit readiness , and subsequent costs to the department of defense ( dod ) .

when servicemembers are victims , associated mental and physical trauma may affect their ability to deploy or serve in worldwide assignments and can lead to capability gaps in units .

in addition , qualified veterans who were victims of ipv may require additional care for co - morbid conditions through the veterans' health administration ( vha ) .

congress has constitutional authority to fund , regulate , and oversee the armed forces , including the military justice system .

congress has used this authority in recent years to mandate domestic violence prevention and victim response policies , programs , and services .

as such , there is enduring congressional interest on domestic violence prevention and response , victim well - being , and perpetrator accountability .

this report starts with an overview of ipv in the armed forces , including risk factors , prevalence , and concerns specific to military families and certain subgroups .

the next section focuses on dod prevention activities , including efforts to screen out high - risk individuals , increase awareness , and address relationship stresses before they escalate .

this section is followed by a discussion of intervention activities implemented by clinical service providers , military commanders , and other stakeholders .

the next section describes actions taken by dod and the congress to provide victim support , resources , and advocacy .

following that , the report touches on how military law enforcement organizations respond to and investigate allegations of domestic abuse and how offenders are held accountable under the military justice system .

finally , the report touches on some continuing issues for congressional oversight and action .

intimate partner violence ( ipv ) is a crime characterized by recidivism and escalation , meaning offenders are likely to be repeat abusers , and the intensity of the abuse or violence is likely to grow over time .

ipv can harm victims in various ways , resulting in physical injury , mental health problems , and adverse pregnancy outcomes ( eg , low birth weight , preterm birth , and neonatal death ) .

many victims of ipv continue to struggle with stress and anxiety long after incidents occur .

for example , national surveys have found that among victims of ipv , 41% of women and 10% of men have experienced symptoms of post - traumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) .

in addition , alleged perpetrators can face decreased productivity at work , loss of income , and incarceration .

domestic violence can also affect the behavior and well - being of subsequent generations .

research has shown that children who grow up in a home where ipv occurs are at higher risk for behavioral , cognitive , and emotional disorders .

relatedly , studies have indicated that perpetrators often have a history of experiencing abuse or witnessing abusive relationships within their families as a children or young adults .

factors unique to military service may exacerbate risks for both perpetrators and victims of ipv .

first , servicemembers and their families frequently move for various assignments .

this separates individuals from natural support networks , which can heighten stress on intimate partnerships , including those involving caretakers , and lead to social isolation .

whereas a victim of domestic abuse might normally escape a situation by temporarily moving in with a local family member or trusted friend , this option may not be readily available , particularly for those located at overseas or remote installations .

similarly , difficulties in coping with frequent moves and other pressures associated with military service ( eg , a spouse's long hours , shift work , or unpredictable deployments ) may contribute to marital conflict and instability ( eg , reunification cycles , separation , or divorce ) .

in addition , frequent household moves may complicate the capacity of nonmilitary spouses to achieve full employment .

lack of financial independence and the threat of lost or reduced military benefits may serve as a disincentive for military spouse victims to seek help in cases of abuse .

finally , prior interpersonal trauma is also indicated as a risk factor for both perpetrators and victims .

some data suggest that women who have experienced abuse in childhood may be more likely to join the military to escape a violent or unstable home environment .

at the same time , some factors unique to military service may mitigate ipv incidence .

for example , access to health care ( tricare ) , stable pay and benefits , and the availability of installation - based family support services may help with financial stability and early intervention for at - risk couples .

in addition , military servicemembers who are perpetrators of abuse may face more immediate or severe sanctions for ipv than their civilian counterparts ( eg , reductions in pay , loss of employment , and / or benefits ) .

military commanders have broad discretion to impose administrative remedies , penalties , or referrals for judicial action for abusers under their command ( see section on " commander's authority " ) .

in this way , military commanders can play an important role in ipv intervention , and in establishing a climate where victims feel safe to report and perpetrators are held accountable .

prior to 1980 , the military services ( army , navy , air force , and marine corps ) conducted their own family advocacy programs , primarily under their respective military medical service programs .

in response to a 1979 u.s. general accounting office ( now called the u.s. government accountability office ) report that characterized military service family violence prevention programs as inconsistent and understaffed , dod established the military family resource center ( mfrc ) as a three - year demonstration project through a dod - subsidized grant from the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

in 1981 , congress first appropriated funds for dod family violence prevention and between 1981 and 1983 , responsibility for total funding of the program transitioned to dod's sole responsibility .

during that time , dod also published directive 6400.1 , establishing the family advocacy program and an advocacy committee with representatives from the services and dod .

given the success of the mfrc demonstration and dod's interest in consolidating programs under a single secretariat , dod transferred mfrc activities to the office of the deputy assistant secretary of defense for force management and personnel in august of 1985 .

the military family act of 1985 formally established an office of family policy under the office of the secretary of defense to "coordinate programs and activities of the military departments to the extent that they relate to military families. .

congress later amended and codified the act under chapter 88 of title 10 , u.s. code , in 1995 as part of the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 1996 and renamed the office of family policy as the office of military family readiness policy .

currently , this office falls under the purview of the office of the under secretary of defense ( usd ) for personnel and readiness ( p&r ) .

within usd ( p&r ) , the deputy assistant secretary of defense for military community and family policy has oversight responsibility for military family programs , including domestic violence prevention and response .

the military services implement domestic violence prevention and response through the family advocacy program ( fap ) .

military law enforcement activities fall under the purview of usd ( p&r ) and the defense human resource activity ( dhra ) , while central incident databases are housed in the defense manpower data center ( dmdc ) , also under dhra .

dod collects data on domestic abuse incidents through the fap central registry , created by in 1994 .

in 1999 , as part of the fy2000 ndaa , congress explicitly mandated that dod maintain a centralized database and collect annual reports from the services on ( 1 ) each domestic violence incident reported to a commander , a law enforcement authority of the armed forces , or a family advocacy program of the department of defense .

 ( 2 ) the number of those incidents that involve evidence determined sufficient for supporting disciplinary action and for each such incident , a description of the substantiated allegation and the action taken by command authorities in the incident .

 ( 3 ) the number of those incidents that involve evidence determined insufficient for supporting disciplinary action and for each such case , a description of the allegation .

the military services collect data at the installation level .

each installation's fap enters data into its respective service registry and then submits reports to the dmdc , which maintains the registry for all of dod .

data elements include demographic information , individual identifiers ( i.e. , name and social security number ) , relationship indicators , incident details ( eg , location and date ) , and the type and severity of abuse .

when an fap office receives a report of domestic abuse , an incident determination committee ( idc ) determines whether the incident "met criteria" to be submitted and tracked within the database .

incidents that do not meet the criteria for domestic abuse are also included in the database , but identifiable individual information is not tracked .

dod uses the aggregate data in this registry to produce annual reports to congress , analyze the scope of abuse and trends , and support budget requests for domestic violence prevention resources .

the fap central registry is not the only database that includes domestic violence information involving military servicemembers .

dod also maintains the defense incident - based reporting system ( dibrs ) as a central repository at dmdc for criminal incident - based statistical data .

dibrs includes criminal activity related to domestic abuse , but would typically not capture cases without law enforcement involvement .

 ( see section on " crime reporting to national databases " for more detail. ) .

while gao has highlighted concerns about gaps and overlaps in these two databases ( see text box below on "gao reviews of dod domestic violence data collection efforts" ) , dod has resisted consolidating them , stating that dibrs and the services' fap central registries , from which the dod central registry contains limited data elements , serve fundamentally different purposes: law enforcement and clinical treatment , respectively .

[…] using the fap database for law enforcement data collection purposes will significantly degrade the perception of the fap as a program that provides clinical assistance to troubled families .

in some cases , the dod's database for military sexual assault , the defense sexual assault incident database ( dsaid ) may also capture data on incidents of sexual abuse involving spouses or intimate partners .

the prevalence of intimate partner sexual assault or stalking of servicemember victims may also be captured in dod's annual workforce and gender relations ( wgr ) surveys .

these surveys would not generally capture all types of domestic abuse , and surveys do not include military spouses .

therefore , while incidents of domestic abuse that are reported to fap or other military officials are generally captured in the data , it is possible that the actual prevalence ( including unreported incidents ) within the military is higher than reported .

dod has focused on a number of activities to prevent ipv and mitigate the escalation and repetition of violence or abuse following an initial offense .

the cdc has identified several individual , relationship , community , and societal risk factors for domestic violence ( see appendix b ) .

some of these risk factors are inherent in the military environment .

for example , youth is considered a risk factor , and the bulk of servicemembers are recruited and enlisted or appointed between the ages of 17-26 .

on the other hand , military protocols for entry screening , education and training , and support structures may provide protective factors and deterrence .

while prevention activities generally target the entire population , interventions are targeted at high - risk couples or individuals , or provided after a first alleged offense .

interventions include removing individuals and family members from any immediate risk of harm , initiating an investigation , ensuring ongoing safety , and preventing future escalation or offender recidivism .

response to domestic abuse often involves coordination among military commanders , law enforcement officials , health care personnel , social workers , and legal representatives .

dod policies outline specific roles and responsibilities for each of these responders .

the fy2019 ndaa required the establishment of multidisciplinary teams on military installations to enhance collaboration in response and management of domestic abuse cases .

the law requires each team to include ( 1 ) one or more judge advocates , ( 2 ) personnel from military criminal investigation organizations ( mcios ) , ( 3 ) mental health professionals , ( 4 ) family advocacy caseworkers , and ( 5 ) other personnel as appropriate .

in the past decade , dod has developed methods for incident reporting , data collection , and analysis of ipv trends .

there is some evidence to suggest , however , that the actual prevalence of domestic abuse in the military could be underreported .

while dod conducts annual surveys of servicemembers to determine the prevalence of sexual assault and harassment in the military , it does not conduct or report on similar surveys with the military spouse population or on the prevalence of non - sex - related abuse by intimate partners .

indeed , ipv prevalence can be difficult to measure , and within the academic literature there is a broad range of prevalence estimates for victimization and perpetration involving military servicemembers .

one meta - analysis undertaken by the va suggests that among active duty servicemembers , the 12-month prevalence of ipv perpetration was 22% , and victimization was 30%—rates higher than those of actual incident reports within dod .

another ( nonscientific ) survey conducted by a military family advocacy group in 2017 found that 15% of the military and veteran family respondents did not feel physically safe in their relationship .

among those experiencing abuse , the survey found that "87% of military spouse respondents did not report their physical abuse , citing their top two reasons for not reporting the abuse was that they felt it was not a big deal and they did not want to hurt their spouse or partner's career. .

intimate partner abuse for the perpetrator is often connected with coercive control and monitoring of the victim's activities ( eg , controlling phone or email passwords , and restricting bank account access ) , and thus some victims may be fearful of seeking help .

confidentiality concerns , financial dependency , and lack of support structures can all create barriers to reporting ipv .

congress and dod have taken some actions to try to reduce these barriers , to encourage victims to report , and to increase access to victim support services .

dod and the services have a general framework under the ucmj , and other laws , for responding to violent offenses .

dod domestic abuse policies superimpose specific requirements onto this framework .

among other things , dod policy states commanders are required to respond to reports of domestic abuse in the same manner as they would to credible reports of any other crime and must ensure that military service offenders are held accountable for acts of domestic violence through appropriate disposition under the ucmj .

similarly , law enforcement and military criminal investigation personnel are required to investigate reports of domestic violence and respond to them as they would to credible reports of any other crime .

in 1993 , as part of the fy1994 ndaa , congress specified certain responsibilities for military law enforcement officials in response to domestic violence .

in particular , the law requires that in cases where there is evidence of physical injury , or where a deadly weapon or dangerous instrument has been used , officials must report the incident within 24 hours to the appropriate commander and to a local fap representative .

military law enforcement includes both installation law enforcement ( ile ) , mcios , and the defense criminal investigative service ( dcis ) , which is an arm of the dod inspector general .

the term defense criminal investigative organization ( dcio ) is used to describe the military criminal investigative organizations and dcis .

current dod policy requires that either a mcio or another appropriate law enforcement organization investigate domestic violence and specifies that mcios are to investigate all unrestricted reports of domestic violence involving sexual assault or aggravated assault with grievous bodily harm .

while some domestic violence offenders in the military may be subject to local or host nation jurisdiction , active duty servicemembers worldwide may be held accountable for domestic violence offenses under the military justice system .

the military justice system is established in title 10 of the united states code and is separate from and independent of the federal criminal justice system established in title 28 .

congress enacts this authority through the articles ( statutes ) that make up the ucmj , under chapter 47 , of title 10 , u.s. code .

the president implements the ucmj by executive order through the manual for courts - martial ( mcm ) .

the mcm establishes detailed rules for administering justice .

among other things , the mcm contains the major components of military justice: ju risdiction —court - martial convening authority for the three levels of courts - martial and the jurisdiction of each one ( chapter ii , part ii , mcm ) .

criminal procedure code —rules for courts - martial provide for the administration of military justice ( chapters iii – xiii , part ii , mcm ) .

rules of evidence —military rules or evidence established the evidential procedure for judicial proceedings at a court - martial ( part iii , mcm ) .

criminal code —punitive articles in the ucmj criminalize specific conduct ( part iv , mcm ) .

the mcm also includes the procedure for nonjudicial punishment ( njp ) and maximum punishment information for each punitive article .

the consequences of intimate partner and domestic violence to servicemembers and families can be severe and even fatal .

congress has taken a number of actions over the past three decades to expand the provision of prevention and support responses , improve data collection and monitoring of ipv prevalence , deepen civilian and military collaboration on addressing and monitoring ipv , among other things .

in the 116 th congress , there have been several proposals to augment services for military - connected ipv victims .

nevertheless , recent reports and testimony have identified several ongoing issues for oversight .

these include community coordination , coverage and access to victim services , law enforcement response , data collection federal reporting requirements , and mitigating risk factors .

in many ipv cases involving the military , the abused or the abuser is a civilian , and incidents happen both on and off military installations .

the ucmj applies worldwide to active duty servicemembers ; however , local , state , and foreign governments ( for members serving in foreign countries ) may have overlapping jurisdiction for domestic violence response , investigation , and prosecution .

local law enforcement authorities may have different protocols for domestic violence response depending on the location .

domestic violence victim advocates have often asserted that insufficient coordination between military and state / local authorities threatens the safety of victims when they move between installations and the civilian community .

dod regulations require certain information to be shared between installation commanders and local authorities , but it is unclear if processes for information sharing are consistent across bases and if gaps are sufficiently addressed .

for example , at a september 2019 house hearing , a representative of a victims' advocacy group noted that while cpos are given full force and effect on military installations , victims may not know whom to notify on the installation that they have a cpo and that everyone involved needs clear registration procedures .

while there have been a number of efforts to improve and expand victim services , there may still be some barriers to coverage and access .

a 2019 study based on interviews of fap personnel found that there was variation in the services offered across services and installations with smaller installations sometimes lacking a full range of programs .

the study also found that , on average , fap offices are open five days a week for approximately 41 hours per week , with a small portion ( 3% ) offering weekend hours .

some fap personnel noted that these hours may make it difficult for working civilian spouses , or those in need of childcare , to be able to attend counseling appointments .

in addition , some servicemembers and spouses may not be aware of their eligibility for services .

in 2019 testimony to the house armed services military personnel subcommittee , an ipv survivor noted that during the period of her abuse , she was not aware of the fap or other services available to her .

the 2019 fap study also found that public awareness and outreach activities , "are not a strong emphasis of [fap] programming. .

in terms of coverage , some military - connected ipv victims may not be eligible for services under existing law and policy .

for example , unmarried civilian intimate partners of a servicemember would not typically have access to military relationship counseling services , military health care , transitional monetary benefits , or other resources on the installation .

in addition , due to the part - time nature of their work , members of the reserve component and intimate partners of members , may not have consistent access to installation resources and mental / behavioral health coverage .

for example , the national guard has reported that it does not offer a curriculum on domestic abuse response and intervention training ; rather , it relies on fap services of its parent services ( army and air force ) for members called to duty on federal orders .

finally , another aspect to consider is the period of transition during discharge or separation from the military .

military veterans , including retirees and their civilian spouses are generally not eligible for fap services but may be eligible for some services through the va. for example , he va does offer some social work programs including the veteran health administration's intimate partner violence assistance program .

dodig's 2019 findings of deficiencies in military law enforcement response to domestic violence incidents ( as discussed in " dodig review of law enforcement actions " ) suggest that further congressional oversight of dod actions in this area could be warrented .

dod domestic violence policy requires the dodig to develop relevant policy for mcios and to oversee their investigations of domestic violence , similar to dodig responsibility for sexual assault investigations .

current dodig policy assigns mcios responsibility for initiating a criminal investigation in response to all allegations of adult sexual assault , a serious offense under the ucmj .

that is , these investigations are not within the jurisdiction of installation law enforcement .

there was no similar mandate for all allegations of domestic violence under article 128 ( assault ) , with the exception of unrestricted reports of domestic violence involving sexual assault or aggravated assault with grievous bodily harm .

if the maximum punishment of article 128b were to be established at one year or more—a serious offense —such a move may preclude investigations by installation law enforcement investigators whose investigative jurisdiction is limited to minor offenses with punishment for a year or less .

several dodig and gao reports have raised concerns with dod data collection , management , and reporting to internal dod and federal databases .

the reliability of data can have implications for congressional oversight and funding , in terms of accurate estimates of the size and scope of ipv issues and identifying high - risk military populations for targeted programs .

while dod and the services have undertaken efforts to improve the quality and reliability of data , this is a potential area for continued oversight and audit .

questions also remain as to whether those responsible for entering data into the various systems ( i.e. , law enforcement , fap personnel ) are adequately trained on their statutory and regulatory obligations .

consideration may be given as to whether incident data accurately captures ipv that goes unreported to the fap , or if further surveys or studies of the military spouse population are needed .

in addition , proper entry of criminal data is necessary for adequate enforcement of other laws , for example , those prohibiting convicted ipv offenders from purchasing firearms .

another way to address ipv prevention is to address risk factors .

one method is through dod programs and policies that help to improve family stability and resiliency and promote a positive and supportive command climate .

from a broad perspective , any actions to reduce personnel tempo ( perstempo ) , whether through fewer deployments , more time at home station between deployments , or through fewer unaccompanied assignments can help to reduce family stresses associated with departure and reintegration .

another option for reducing stress on military families is to manage permanent change of station ( pcs ) moves to extend time on station .

frequent moves can impair social support networks and have been found to have a negative impact on spousal employment and earnings .

while personnel management efforts could be made to reduce deployments and pcs moves , national security concerns may sometimes necessitate high perstempo .

dod and the services have several other programs to support families , for example , child and youth programs ( eg , subsidized child - care services ) , spouse employment assistance , and other family readiness services .

in congress's oversight and appropriations roles , one area of consideration is whether these programs are funded at appropriate levels given current or anticipated demands on military servicemembers .

finally , given the military commander's unique authority , the command climate he or she establishes within a unit is an important aspect of ipv prevention .

dod policies specify that military commanders have a duty for care not only of their troops , but also of the troop's families .

commanders may address issues among the troops through positive reinforcement of healthy relationships and attitudes or through punitive administrative actions .

the cdc has identified problematic gender norms as a potential risk factor for ipv .

some reporting has identified prevailing negative stereotypes , attitudes , and memes directed at the military spouse community .

commanders can have significant influence on acceptable and unacceptable behavior in the workplace .

in addition , several abused spouses have testified that they felt their partner's commander did not provide adequate support , follow established procedures , or take complaints of abuse seriously .

in cases where victims of ipv are servicemembers , there may also be concerns about retaliation from a commander or military peers for reporting or seeking help—particularly if the offending spouse is also a military servicemember .

one response to this might be a survey of ipv victims to better understand their perceptions of command response and their experiences with other responders such as victim advocates and law enforcement or military justice personnel .

similar surveys have been done with victims of sexual assault .

options to remedy concerns about commander response may be to require higher - level review of ipv complaints , or to enhance protections from retaliation against those who report ipv .

appendix a .

selected legislation appendix b. cdc risk factors for intimate partner violence individual risk factors low self - esteem low income low academic achievement young age aggressive or delinquent behavior as a youth heavy alcohol and drug use depression anger and hostility antisocial personality traits borderline personality traits prior history of being physically abusive having few friends and being isolated from other people unemployment emotional dependence and insecurity belief in strict gender roles ( eg , male dominance and aggression in relationships ) desire for power and control in relationships perpetrating psychological aggression being a victim of physical or psychological abuse ( consistently one of the strongest predictors of perpetration ) history of experiencing poor parenting as a child history of experiencing physical discipline as a child relationship factors marital conflict: fights , tension , and other struggles marital instability: divorces or separations dominance and control of the relationship by one partner over the other economic stress unhealthy family relationships and interactions community factors poverty and associated factors ( eg , overcrowding ) low social capital: lack of institutions , relationships , and norms that shape a community's social interactions weak community sanctions against ipv ( eg , unwillingness of neighbors to intervene in situations where they witness violence ) societal factors traditional gender norms ( eg , women should stay at home , not enter workforce , and be submissive ; men support the family and make the decisions ) appendix c. acronym .

