on december 9 , 2019 , the washington post published a series of documents termed "the afghanistan papers" ( herineafter "the papers" ) .

the papers comprise two sets of documents: notes and transcripts of interviews with more than 400 u.s. and other policymakers conducted between 2014 and 2018 by the special inspector general for afghanistan reconstruction ( sigar ) , and approximately 190 short memos ( referred to as "snowflakes" ) from former secretary of defense donald rumsfeld , dating from 2001 to 2004 .

the washington post contends that "the lessons learned interviews broadly resemble the pentagon papers , the defense department's top - secret history of the vietnam war," although the sigar interviews and pentagon papers differ in several key ways .

perhaps most importantly , the pentagon papers were a contemporaneous recounting of the vietnam war based mostly on classified material from the office of the secretary of defense ; the sigar lessons learned documents are unclassified records of interviews with a wide array of policymakers carried out as many as 15 years after the events described .

the documents , and the washington post stories that accompany them , suggest that u.s. policies in afghanistan often were poorly planned , resourced , and / or executed .

these apparent shortcomings contributed to several outcomes that either were difficult to assess or did not fulfill stated u.s. objectives .

the documents , released at a time when the united states is engaged in talks with the taliban aimed at ending the 18-year u.s. military presence in the country , have attracted attention , and some members of congress have called for further investigation into u.s. policy in afghanistan .

however , there is debate over how revelatory the sigar interviews are , with some analysts contending that the information they contain was available at the time and remains so today ( see " reactions to "the afghanistan papers" below ) .

"the afghanistan papers" raise a number of potential questions for congress to consider as members evaluate the trump administration's afghanistan policies .

u.s. strategy .

what role , if any , has congress played in compelling successive executive branch administrations to articulate u.s. strategy and / or policy goals in afghanistan ? .

what are the means by which congress has attempted to shape or influence those goals ? .

what have been the most and least effective of those means ? .

congressional oversight .

members of congress have conducted oversight of executive branch policy through various means , including appointing a special inspector general , public and closed hearings , member and staff delegations to afghanistan , letters to executive branch officials , and public statements .

what have been the most and least effective methods of congressional oversight ? .

u.s aid: budgeting .

to what extent has congress scrutinized executive branch funding requests ? .

have appropriated u.s. funding levels differed from those requests and if so , what changes have been made and why ? .

to what extent have congressional budgeting decisions in afghanistan been made due to political expediency ? .

how , if at all , can members of congress insulate budgeting or other policymaking processes from political pressures ? .

u.s. aid: conditionality .

what conditions has congress imposed on u.s. aid to afghanistan and why ? .

how , if at all , have those conditions impacted the delivery of u.s. aid , afghan government actions , u.s. - afghan relations , and congressional interactions with the executive branch ? .

what kinds of changes , if any , to the foreign assistance act or other relevant pieces of legislation might make u.s. development assistance more effective ? .

reporting .

what has been the impact of congressionally mandated reporting on policy or outcomes ? .

how , if at all , does congress use these reports ? .

what are the most and least useful reports that congress receives on u.s. military and development efforts in afghanistan ? .

how , if at all , does congress require agencies to evaluate their programs , and how does this inform reports to congress ? .

has there been any evolution in specific monitoring and evaluation requirements ? .

bureaucracy .

how has congress shaped executive branch structure ? .

have these efforts been helpful ? .

how direct a role should congress play in mandating the establishment or nature of offices or other bureaucratic structures within the executive branch that work on afghanistan ? .

personnel issues .

to what extent have u.s. efforts in afghanistan been hampered by the frequent personnel turnover cited by many sigar interviewees ? .

how , if at all , have congressional actions improved , undermined , or otherwise affected the ability of federal agencies to train and deploy capable workforces in afghanistan ? .

what congressional action , if any , is needed to help the executive branch , or individual departments , address this issue ? .

recommendations .

what are the most important things that congress could have been doing over the past 18 years to ensure u.s. success in afghanistan ? .

what can ( and should ) congress do going forward ? .

