as congress continues to consider reforms to secure the social security program's solvency , a related discussion has e merged around targeted reforms for vulnerable groups—widows , low earners , caregivers , older beneficiaries , spouses , and never - married individuals—who may deserve targeted benefit enhancements as part of a broader social security reform package .

this report focuses on widows and social security policy levers to aid them .

researchers and policymakers have commented on both benefit adequacy and benefit equity in the context of social security benefits for widows .

concerns about the adequacy of social security benefits for widows stem from the fact that the widow has outlived the spouse and likely contends with a reduced monthly income after the spouse's death .

the widow also may confront significant medical or long - term care expenses associated with the deceased spouse's end - of - life care .

in addition , on average , women outlive men and today's widows face increased life expectancy relative to earlier birth cohorts , thus increasing the possibility of outliving their retirement resources and incurring significant expenses for their own long - term care .

benefit equity concerns stem from social security program rules that provide higher benefits to one - earner couples than to two - earner couples with identical lifetime earnings and payroll tax contributions .

social security was designed in the era of a traditional family with a working husband and a wife devoted to home production .

marital patterns , gender roles , and work patterns have changed substantially since the 1930s .

benefit equity would be improved by providing equal benefits for equal contributions .

this report seeks to discuss current - law social security provisions pertaining to widows ; describe the characteristics of social security widow beneficiaries ; illustrate the benefit adequacy and benefit equity concerns leading to a perceived need for targeted benefit enhancements for widows ; explain policy levers that may be modified to aid widows ; outline legislative proposals and proposals in the literature concerning widows , highlighting their projected effects on program solvency and estimated distributional effects ; and identify other social security reform options that would indirectly benefit widows .

researchers and policymakers have raised concerns about both benefit adequacy and benefit equity in the context of social security benefits for widows .

concerns about benefit adequacy stem from the facts that the widow has outlived the spouse , may contend with a reduced monthly income after the spouse's death , may confront significant medical and long - term care expenses associated with the deceased spouse's end - of - life care , and is at risk of outliving retirement resources and incurring significant expenses for long - term care .

concerns about benefit equity stem from social security program rules that provide higher benefits to one - earner couples than to two - earner couples with identical lifetime earnings and social security payroll tax contributions .

more equitable program rules , reflecting changes in family structure and the work patterns of husbands and wives , would provide equal benefits for equal contributions .

driven by concerns about social security benefit adequacy and benefit equity for widows , researchers , advocates , and policymakers have considered several approaches to modifying social security benefits to aid widows .

one approach is to adjust the social security program policy levers that most directly affect widows .

these levers include the fraction of the deceased worker's pia that the surviving spouse would receive under the widow ( er ) 's limit , the provision of credits for delayed claiming , the parameters around benefits for disabled widows , and the lump - sum death benefit .

another approach is to develop an alternative widow benefit , envisioned as a percentage of the couple's combined social security benefits while both were alive , with the widow receiving the higher of this alternative benefit amount and the current - law widow benefit .

this section looks to the research and policy literature , and previously introduced legislation in some cases , to describe policy options .

the discussion identifies potential effects on benefit adequacy and benefit equity , and highlights projected effects on program solvency and estimated distributional effects .

several other policy changes proposed for other vulnerable groups would aid widows who are members of those targeted groups .

brief descriptions follow , along with references for more detailed information .

under current law , the social security program has a special minimum benefit ( smb ) for workers with many years of low earnings .

however , the smb grows with prices rather than wages , and thus affects fewer beneficiaries every year .

in december 2018 , 35,505 beneficiaries received the smb , with an average monthly benefit of just over $900 .

in addition , the smb is computed based on years of coverage , rather than lifetime earnings .

the earnings threshold for a year of coverage in 2019 is $14,805 ( by comparison , in 2019 a worker earns four quarters of coverage for traditional social security benefits with annual earnings of $5,440 ) .

a worker must have at least 11 years of coverage to qualify for the smb , and the maximum smb is obtained with 30 years of coverage .

proposals to improve benefit adequacy by providing an enhanced minimum benefit under social security take many forms and may serve to increase retirement income and reduce poverty among some older women and widows .

some proposals would reform the smb to apply to a larger group of workers with substantial work histories and low earnings .

the initial smb could be tied to wage growth rather than price growth , the amount of earnings required for a year of coverage could be reduced , partial years of coverage could be allowed , and the amount of the smb could be tied to a fraction of the federal poverty threshold , increasing with the number of years of coverage .

others point out that workers with shorter working careers are a larger group at greater risk of poverty in older age and would not be aided by a reformed smb .

some options to address this group include ( 1 ) creating a new basic minimum benefit as a supplement to traditional social security benefits for low - income beneficiaries above the fra and ( 2 ) revising the bend points and pia factors in the traditional social security benefit formula to increase benefits for low earners and improve progressivity .

older women and widows from birth cohorts currently of retirement age may be well represented among workers with shorter working careers , given traditional propensities to leave the workforce for raising children and potentially for providing elder care .

however , recent research suggests that women's labor force participation patterns are changing , with higher levels of employment early in life , motherhood coming later in life , motherhood's impact on employment lessening , and women working longer at older ages .

among women who worked at some point during their pregnancy , the fraction who reported quitting their jobs around the time of the birth decreased substantially for those having their first child in the early 2000s compared with those having their first child in the 1980s , whereas the fraction taking paid leave increased substantially and the fraction taking unpaid leave remained constant .

cohorts of women born in the 1950s and later are expected to enter their retirement ages with more work experience and more steeply sloped earnings patterns .

under current law , a divorced spouse may claim social security spouse and / or survivor benefits if the marriage lasted at least 10 years and the person claiming benefits is unmarried .

divorced spouse benefits may be claimed beginning at age 62 , whereas divorced survivor benefits may be claimed beginning at age 60 ( or age 50 if disabled ) .

divorced spouses are entitled to the same spouse and survivor benefits as a married spouse , including applicable reductions when benefits are claimed before the divorced spouse's fra .

as shown in table 3 , divorced individuals made up 16.6% of the population aged 60 or older in 2017 , but 30.7% of the population aged 60 or older in poverty .

the poverty rate among all divorced individuals aged 60 or older was 17.6% in 2017 ( table 4 ) , and 19.0% among divorced women aged 60 or older ( not shown ) .

two studies found that the fraction of women aged 50-59 and 60-69 who are divorced from a marriage of less than 10 years—and thus not eligible for social security divorced spouse and divorced survivor benefits under current law—increased substantially between 1990 and 2004 / 2009 .

since the 1950s , the age of first marriage ( among women and men ) has increased markedly , whereas the prevalence of divorce doubled between the 1960s and 1970s , with the probability of divorce substantially higher for those with some college or a high school degree compared with college graduates .

reducing the duration - of - marriage requirement for divorced spouses and survivors , for example to five , seven , or nine years , has been discussed as a way to reduce the poverty rate among this vulnerable population .

one study found that , although such a policy change would affect a relatively small fraction of female retirees , the greatest potential income gain ( and thus poverty reduction ) would accrue to low - income divorced widows with marriages that lasted between five years and nine years .

as noted earlier , women tend to outlive men and remaining cohort life expectancy for a woman attaining age 65 has increased by nearly 2 years over the past 40 years , reaching 21.5 years in 2019 ( compared with a greater gain of 4.4 years over the past 40 years for men , reaching 19.0 years for men attaining age 65 in 2019 ) .

with increased life expectancy comes greater risk of outliving one's non - social security retirement resources and , consequently , greater reliance on social security benefits .

poverty rates also increase with age , particularly among women ( although table 5 shows an even higher poverty rate among young widows aged 60-64 ) .

some have outlined a modest longevity increase in social security benefits ( specified as a percentage of the individual's benefit or a fixed dollar amount within a given retiree cohort ) starting around age 80 to 85 , or after 18 years to 20 years of benefit receipt .

one proposal would target the benefit increase to low - income beneficiaries .

another would provide a delayed annuity for older beneficiaries whose benefit is below some minimum level relative to the federal poverty threshold and increase it with years of covered earnings .

estimates of an option to increase benefits by 5% for beneficiaries aged 85 or older ( about 64% of whom are widows ) in 2030 point to modest reductions in poverty .

proposals to increase the social security cost - of - living adjustment , for example by using the experimental consumer price index for americans 62 years of age and older ( cpi - e ) instead of the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers ( cpi - w ) , also tend to favor older beneficiaries .

providing earnings credits for periods out of the labor force or with reduced earnings due to caregiving responsibilities has been proposed in many forms .

although not targeted toward widows , such policies would result in enhanced benefits for widows to the extent that the enhanced benefits were available for periods out of the labor force while caring for young children or elderly parents , or perhaps caring for a now - deceased spouse .

women are more likely than men to experience time out of the workforce while raising children .

in march 2017 , the labor force participation rate was 63.1% for mothers with children under the age of 3 , 65.1% for mothers with children under the age of 6 , and 76.0% for mothers with children aged 6 to 17 .

comparable rates for men were 95.1% , 94.4% , and 91.5% , respectively .

women also are more likely than men to be caregivers , provide more hours of care , and provide more hands - on care .

women caregivers are less likely to be in the labor force than women who are not caregivers , whereas among men , the labor force participation rate for caregivers is essentially the same as the labor force participation rate for noncaregivers .

options include providing caregivers with a number of dropout years ( eg , up to five years ) to be excluded from the social security benefit formula , providing earnings credits ( eg , tied to a fraction of the average wage index for a given year or a fraction of the worker's prior earnings ) to caregivers for years of caregiving ( eg , up to five years ) , and supplementing the retired worker benefit for caregivers in households with limited income ( eg , up to 125% of the federal poverty threshold ) .

related are ongoing policy discussions about establishing a system for paid family leave , which refers to partially or fully compensated time away from work for specific and generally significant family caregiving needs , such as the arrival of a new child or serious illness of a close family member .

the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2020 ( p.l .

116-92 ) conferred a paid parental - leave benefit on certain federal employees covered by the family and medical leave act of 1993 ( p.l .

103-3 , as amended ) .

employer provision of paid family leave in the private sector is currently voluntary , and in march 2019 such leave was available to 18% of private - industry employees , according to data from the bureau of labor statistics .

as of january 2020 , five states—california , new jersey , new york , rhode island , and washington state—have active programs .

four additional programs—those in connecticut , the district of columbia , massachusetts , and oregon—await implementation .

several bills have been introduced in the 116 th congress to establish a national paid family leave program .

some would implement paid family leave through the social security program , either by creating a new program component in which covered workers and employers pay into the program and covered workers with periods of qualified caregiving draw benefits from the program , or by allowing eligible caregivers ( parents ) to receive some months of social security benefits in exchange for deferred claiming of retirement benefits to cover the caregiver benefit's costs .

