t he gulf of mexico energy security act of 2006 ( gomesa ) altered federal offshore oil and gas leasing policy in the u.s. gulf of mexico .

the law imposed an oil and gas leasing moratorium through june 30 , 2022 , throughout most of the eastern gulf of mexico ( off the florida coast ) and a small part of the central gulf .

in other parts of the gulf of mexico , the law established a framework for sharing revenues from certain qualified oil and gas leases with the "gulf producing states" of alabama , louisiana , mississippi , and texas , as well as with a nationwide outdoor recreation program—the land and water conservation fund's ( lwcf's ) state assistance program .

several aspects of gomesa have generated interest in the 116 th congress .

as the 2022 expiration date for the leasing moratorium in the eastern gulf approaches , the department of the interior's ( doi's ) bureau of ocean energy management ( boem ) has begun to plan for offshore leasing in this area following the moratorium's expiration .

boem's draft proposed five - year oil and gas leasing program for 2019-2024 would schedule new lease sales in the expired moratorium area starting in 2023 .

some members of congress seek to forestall new lease sales by extending the moratorium beyond 2022 ; others support allowing it to expire on the currently scheduled date .

on september 11 , 2019 , the house passed h.r .

205 , which would make the gomesa moratorium permanent .

congress is weighing the potential for development of hydrocarbon resources in the eastern gulf against competing uses of the area for military testing and training , commercial fishing , and recreation .

the debate encompasses questions of regional economic livelihoods and national energy and military security , as well as environmental concerns centered on the threat of oil spills and the potential contributions to climate change of oil and gas development .

gomesa's revenue - sharing provisions also have generated debate and interest in the 116 th congress .

the law entered a second revenue - sharing phase in fy2017—often referred to as gomesa's "phase ii"—in which qualified leasing revenues from an expanded geographic area are shared with the states and with the lwcf .

phase ii has resulted in higher revenue shares than in the law's first decade ( fy2007-fy2016 ) .

revenue sharing from the added phase ii areas is capped for most years at $500 million annually for the gulf producing states and the lwcf combined , and some members of congress seek to raise or eliminate this cap .

in the 115 th congress , p.l .

115-97 increased the cap to $650 million for fy2020 and fy2021 .

in addition to changing the cap , some members have advocated to increase the percentage of revenues shared with the gulf coast states and to increase the set of qualified leases from which revenues can be shared , as well as to add an additional state ( florida ) to the revenue - sharing arrangement .

other bills have proposed new uses of gulf oil and gas revenues for various federal programs and purposes outside of revenue sharing , and some stakeholders have proposed to end gomesa state revenue sharing altogether .

debate has centered on the extent to which these revenues should be shared with coastal states versus used for broader federal purposes , such as deficit reduction or nationwide federal conservation programs .

some members of congress and other stakeholders have made the case that the coastal states should receive a higher revenue share , given costs incurred by these states and localities to support extraction activities .

these stakeholders have compared gomesa revenue sharing with the onshore federal revenue - sharing program , where states receive a higher share of the federal leasing revenues than is provided under the gomesa framework .

other members of congress , as well as the obama and trump administrations at times , have contended that revenues generated in federal waters belong to all americans , and revenue distribution should reflect broader national needs .

this report provides brief background on gulf of mexico oil and gas development , discusses key provisions of gomesa , and explores issues related to the eastern gulf moratorium and gulf state revenue sharing .

the report discusses various legislative options and proposals for amending gomesa , as well as scenarios for future leasing if the law continues unchanged .

the gulf of mexico has the most mature oil and gas development infrastructure on the u.s. outer continental shelf ( ocs ) , and almost all u.s. offshore oil and gas production ( approximately 98% ) takes place in this region .

additionally , the gulf contains the highest levels of undiscovered , technically recoverable oil and gas resources of any u.s. ocs region , according to boem .

the office of natural resources revenue ( onrr ) estimated federal revenues from offshore oil and gas leases in the gulf at $5.51 billion for fy2019 , out of a total of $5.57 billion for all ocs areas ( table 1 ) .

from fy2009 to fy2018 , annual revenues from federal leases in the gulf ranged from a high of $8.74 billion in fy2013 ( out of $9.07 billion total ocs oil and gas revenues for that year ) to a low of $2.76 billion in fy2016 ( out of $2.79 billion total ocs oil and gas revenues for that year ) .

changing prices for oil and gas are the most significant factors in these revenue swings .

boem divides the gulf into three planning areas: eastern , central , and western .

most of the oil and gas development has taken place in the central and western gulf planning areas .

this is due to stronger oil and gas resources in those areas ( as compared with the eastern gulf ) and to leasing restrictions in the eastern gulf imposed by statutes and executive orders before gomesa's enactment .

gomesa was signed into law on december 20 , 2006 .

sections 101 and 102 of the law contain a short title and definitions .

section 103 directs that two areas in the central and eastern gulf be offered for oil and gas leasing shortly after enactment .

these mandated lease sales took place in 2007-2009 , and this provision of gomesa has not been a focus of current congressional interest .

current interest has focused on section 104 of the law , which imposes a moratorium on oil and gas leasing in certain parts of the gulf , and section 105 , which contains provisions for revenue sharing from qualified leases with four states and their coastal political subdivisions , as well as with the lwcf's state assistance program .

the current period is one of transition for the oil and gas leasing framework established by gomesa for the gulf of mexico .

first , the eastern gulf leasing moratorium is set to expire in 2022 , and boem is proposing offshore lease sales for the moratorium area starting in 2023 .

second , the gulf leases subject to revenue sharing expanded substantially starting in fy2017 , and doi projects revenues from these areas will approach or reach gomesa's revenue - sharing cap in fy2024 .

congress is considering whether gomesa's current provisions will best meet federal priorities going forward , or whether changes are needed to achieve various ( and sometimes conflicting ) national goals .

regarding the moratorium provisions , a key question is whether decisions about leasing in the eastern gulf should be legislatively mandated or left to the executive branch to control .

absent any legislative intervention , after june 2022 , the president and the secretary of the interior are to decide whether , where , and under what terms to lease tracts in the former moratorium area , following the statutory provisions of the ocsla .

some members of congress seek to amend gomesa—either to extend the moratorium or to mandate lease sales in the area—rather than deferring to the ocsla's authorities for executive branch decisionmaking .

at stake are questions of regional and national economic priorities , environmental priorities , energy security , and military security .

with respect to gulf oil and gas revenues , gomesa's current revenue - sharing provisions take into account multiple priorities: mitigating the impacts of human activities and natural processes on the gulf coast ( through state revenue shares directed to this purpose ) ; supporting conservation and outdoor recreation nationwide ( through the lwcf state assistance program ) ; and contributing to the treasury .

for the most part , legislative proposals to change the terms of gomesa revenue distribution have supported some or all of these priorities but have sought to change the balance of revenues devoted to each purpose .

also at issue are proposals to use the revenues for new ( typically conservation - related ) purposes outside the gomesa framework , as well as proposals to substantially reduce or eliminate gulf oil and gas production—with corresponding revenue implications—in the context of addressing climate change .

the 116 th congress is debating such questions as it considers multiple measures to amend gomesa .

