this report discusses twenty criminal law cases the united states supreme court decided during its 2018 term ( term ) .

twelve of the cases addressed sentencing issues: capital punishment , violent crime enhancements , supervised release , and excessive fines .

five featured the court's analysis of pretrial questions associated with drunk driving , double jeopardy , and suits against law enforcement officers .

two decisions sought to discern congressional intent in cases involving firearms and sex offenders .

an ineffective of assistance of counsel decision rounded out the term .

the supreme court examined the scope of federal statutes that establish various criminal offenses in two cases .

in the first , the court held that , in order to convict a foreign national unlawfully present in the united states with knowingly possessing a firearm , the government must prove that the defendant knew both that he was in possession of a firearm and that he was unlawfully present in the country ( rehaif v. united states ) .

in the second , the justices held that congress had validly authorized the attorney general to apply the sex offender registration and notification act ( sorna ) to offenders convicted before sorna's enactment ( gundy v. united states ) .

five decisions in the supreme court's most recent term dealt with pre - trial matters .

one confirmed the continued validity of the double jeopardy dual sovereign doctrine ( gamble v. united states ) .

a second addressed circumstances under which the fourth amendment permits the warrantless performance of a blood alcohol test on an individual suspected of drunk driving ( mitchell v. wisconsin ) .

three others discussed the obstacles individuals face when they seek to sue officers for the manner in which the officers performed their law enforcement duties ( nieves v. bartlett ; mcdonough v. smith ; and city of escondido v. emmons ) .

holding : a defense attorney's failure to appeal in spite of a client request is presumptively prejudicial ineffective assistance of counsel "even when the defendant has signed an appeal waiver. .

background : garza entered into plea agreements covering state aggravated assault and possession of controlled substance charges .

garza waived his right to appeal in the agreements and his counsel did not file a notice of appeal .

thereafter , garza sought post - conviction review ( state habeas corpus ) asserting his trial attorney had ignored his request to appeal and claiming ineffective assistance of counsel .

the sixth amendment provides the criminally accused the right to "reasonably effective" assistance of counsel for his defense .

appellate courts overturn convictions or sentences when the defense counsel made "errors so serious that counsel was not functioning as the 'counsel' guaranteed the defendant by the sixth amendment" if "the deficient performance prejudiced the defense. .

prejudice occurs when "counsel's errors were so serious as to deprive the defendant of a fair trial , a trial whose result is reliable. .

the court has held that prejudice may be assumed , stating: "[w]hen counsel's deficient performance deprives a defendant of an appeal that he otherwise would have taken , the defendant has made out a successful ineffective assistance of counsel claim entitling him to an appeal. .

denying garza's petition for relief , the trial court stated that garza's waiver precluded him being a victim of ineffective assistance .

the idaho court of appeals and the idaho supreme court affirmed .

the u.s. supreme court reversed and remanded .

supreme court : in the opinion , justice sotomayor focused on two concepts—notice of appeal and waiver of appeal—to rebut that garza's filing a notice of appeal would breach his plea agreements and deny him their benefits .

she explained that a notice of appeal is ministerial being "a simple , nonsubstantive act that is within the defendant's prerogative. .

she noted: ( 1 ) any "waiver of appeal" is limited to the language of the particular agreement ; ( 2 ) some appellate issues cannot be waived ; and ( 3 ) matters that are within the scope of the waiver are only binding if the prosecution elects to stand on its rights .

thus , she concluded , "simply filing a notice of appeal does not necessarily breach a plea agreement , given the possibility that the defendant will end up raising claims beyond the waiver's scope .

and in any event , the bare decision whether to appeal is ultimately the defendant's , not counsel's , to make. .

justice sotomayor further found that idaho's approach was inconsistent with precedent .

justice sotomayor recalled the flores - ortega holding that "'a lawyer who disregards specific instructions from the defendant to file a notice of appeal acts in a manner that is professionally unreasonable.' .

she stated: " flores - ortega 's reasoning shows why an appeal waiver does not complicate [a] straightforward application" and further commented: "as the court explained , given that past precedents call for a presumption of prejudice whenever 'the accused is denied counsel at a critical state' it makes even greater sense to presume prejudice when counsel's deficiency forfeits an 'appellate proceeding altogether.' .

she noted , "[a]fter all , there is no disciplined way to 'accord any presumption of reliability … to judicial proceedings that never took place,'" concluding "[t]hat rationale applies just as well here because … garza retained a right to appeal at least some issues despite the waivers he signed .

in other words , garza had a right to a proceeding and he was denied that proceeding altogether as a result of counsel's deficient performance. .

