since 2009 , the federal government has been shifting its data storage needs to cloud - based services and away from agency - owned , in - house data centers .

this shift is intended to achieve two goals: reduce the total investment by the federal government in information technology ( it ) , which currently stands at about $90 billion each year , and realize other stated advantages of cloud adoption , including efficiency , accessibility , collaboration , reliability , and security .

however , challenges remain as agencies shift to cloud services .

according to a survey conducted in september 2018 , federal it managers continue to express long - held concerns about security in certain cloud environments , the complexity of migrating existing ( "legacy" ) applications to the cloud , a lack of skilled staff to manage certain cloud environments , and uncertain funding .

this report explains what cloud computing is , including different models for cloud deployment and services , and describes the federal government's planning for it reform .

it also provides information on assessments that have been conducted on agency cloud adoption .

finally , the report provides a summary of recent congressional action and presents some possible mechanisms for congress to monitor agencies as they implement cloud computing .

cloud computing is a new name for an old concept: the delivery of computing services from a remote location .

cloud computing services are delivered through a network , usually the internet .

some analysts see this approach as analogous to the networked delivery of electricity , water , and other utilities through the electric grid , water delivery systems , and other distribution infrastructure .

in some ways , cloud computing is reminiscent of computing before the advent of the personal computer , when users shared the power of a central mainframe computer through video terminals or other devices .

cloud computing , however , is much more powerful and flexible , and information technology advances may permit the approach to become nearly ubiquitous .

cloud computing differs from local computing , in which local machines perform most tasks and store the relevant data .

some cloud services are adaptations of familiar applications , such as email and word processing .

others are new services that never existed as a local application , such as social networks .

as cloud computing has developed , varied and sometimes nebulous descriptions of what it is and what it is not have been commonplace .

such ambiguity can create uncertainties that may impede innovation and adoption .

the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) has developed standardized language describing cloud computing to help clear up that ambiguity: cloud computing is a model for enabling ubiquitous , convenient , on - demand network access to a shared pool of configurable computing resources ( eg , networks , servers , storage , applications , and services ) that can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management effort or service provider interaction .

this cloud model promotes availability and is composed of five essential characteristics , three service models , and four deployment models .

the first sentence of the definition basically states that cloud computing is a way of providing convenient , flexible access to a broad range of computing resources over a network .

the characteristics and models referred to in the second sentence provide the specificity necessary to clarify what cloud computing is and is not , described below .

planning for cloud adoption by federal agencies began with the 2010 publication by the federal chief information officer ( cio ) of "a 25-point implementation plan to reform federal it management. .

the reforms put forth in the plan were focused on eliminating barriers that were impeding effective management of it programs throughout the federal government .

in the plan , the federal cio recognized that too many past federal it projects had run over budget , fallen behind schedule , or failed to deliver promised functionality .

the plan stated that the federal government would shift to a "cloud first" strategy , which it stated would be more economical , faster , and more flexible .

increased cloud adoption is also a stated goal of the federal information technology acquisition reform act ( fitara ) , enacted on december 19 , 2014 .

among other provisions , fitara required the federal cio , in conjunction with federal agencies , to refocus the federal data center consolidation initiative ( fdcci ) to include adoption of cloud services .

the fdcci was superseded by the data center optimization initiative ( dcoi ) in august 2016 .

in the 2017 "report to the president on federal it modernization," the office of management and budget ( omb ) pledged to update the federal government's legacy federal cloud computing strategy ( "cloud first" ) .

fulfilling this requirement , the administration developed a new strategy , cloud smart , published as a draft on september 24 , 2018 .

the dcoi was updated in june 2019 .

among other requirements , the updated dcoi placed a freeze on funds or resources to build new agency - owned data centers or significantly expand existing agency - owned data centers without approval from omb .

it also requires agencies to evaluate options for the consolidation and closure of existing data centers , in alignment with the cloud smart strategy .

in april 2019 , the government accountability office ( gao ) published a report examining the status of cloud adoption at 16 agencies .

gao found that 10 of the agencies reported increasing their use of cloud services from fy2016 through fy2019 .

all 16 agencies had made progress in implementing cloud services , meaning they had established assessment guidance , performed assessments , and implemented services , but the extent of their progress varied .

for example , not all had followed omb guidance that directs agencies to review all it investments for compatibility with cloud services .

gao also found that 16 agencies reported an increase in their cloud service spending since 2015 .

13 of the 16 agencies saved a total of $291 million to date from using cloud services .

15 of the 16 agencies identified significant benefits from acquiring cloud services , including improved customer service and the acquisition of more cost - effective options for managing it services .

15 of the 16 agencies identified nine cloud investments that enhanced the availability of weather - related information ; facilitated collaboration and information sharing among federal , state , and local agencies related to homeland security ; and provided benefits information to veterans .

in collecting the information requested by gao , agency cios identified the following challenges: spending data were not consistently tracked .

different methods were used to calculate cloud spending costs .

interpreting changes in omb and related guidance created confusion regarding what spending data should be tracked .

as a result of these challenges , gao concluded that agency - reported cloud spending and savings figures were likely underreported .

gao made one recommendation to omb on cloud savings reporting , and 34 recommendations to the 16 agencies on cloud assessments and savings .

to omb , gao recommended that agencies be required to explicitly report , at least on a quarterly basis , the savings and cost avoidance associated with cloud computing investments .

the 34 recommendations to the agencies included directing cios to establish guidance to assess new and existing it investments for suitability for cloud computing services ; complete an assessment of existing it investments for suitability for migration to a cloud computing service ; and establish a consistent and repeatable mechanism to track savings and cost avoidances from the migration and deployment of cloud services .

congress has conducted ongoing oversight of it acquisitions , including cloud computing activity , for many years .

this section summarizes cloud - related legislation and hearings in the 116 th congress .

as congress monitors the progress of federal departments and agencies in implementing cloud computing , its options for ongoing oversight include holding hearings ; requesting review of an agency's status by either the agency itself or the gao ; and assessing the agency's progress and projected goals against the stated goals of the cloud smart strategy .

committees might choose to focus hearings on omb , which oversees the management of the cloud smart strategy at the agency level .

this role makes omb the central point of information regarding the status of agency planning and implementation .

if omb management practices for cloud computing are lacking , the impact could potentially affect the performance of all agencies .

consistent congressional review of omb's management practices with respect to the cloud smart strategy could help to detect and correct problems in a timely manner .

alternatively , or in addition , committees might choose to hold hearings to receive status reports directly from the cios of particular agencies under their jurisdictions .

as plans to migrate to cloud services within the federal government are created and implemented , policymakers may choose to monitor how agencies are following federal directives and responding to gao assessments .

such monitoring could be achieved through assessments conducted internally by a department or agency itself , externally by gao , or directly by a committee of jurisdiction .

a model for internal assessments and reporting could be based on progress made on the uncompleted items of the cloud smart strategy .

gao conducts status reports on cloud adoption across the federal agencies , such as the april 2019 report discussed above , but it has not issued separate reports focused on the status of individual departments or agencies .

when examining shortcomings in individual agencies' implementation of the cloud smart strategy , as identified by gao , congress might consider requesting follow - up reviews focused on particular challenges .

