the office of federal student aid ( fsa ) within the u.s. department of education ( ed ) is the primary entity responsible for the administration and oversight of the federal student aid programs authorized under title iv of the higher education act of 1965 , as amended ( hea ; p.l .

89-329 , as amended ) .

as such , fsa is the largest provider of postsecondary student financial aid in the nation , performing functions that are akin to those of large banks , to which it has sometimes been compared .

in fy2019 , fsa oversaw the provision of $130.4 billion in title iv aid to 11.0 million students attending approximately 6,000 participating institutions of higher education ( ihes ) .

in addition , in fy2019 , fsa managed a student loan portfolio encompassing 45 million borrowers with outstanding federal student loans totaling about $1.5 trillion .

fsa is a performance - based organization ( pbo ) pursuant to section 141 of the hea .

conceptually , pbos are intended to be results - driven organizations that have clear objectives and measurable goals designed to improve an agency's performance and transparency .

pbos are led by chief executives who are personally accountable for meeting measurable goals within the organization .

in exchange , pbos are granted greater discretion than other government agencies to operate more like private - sector companies , with more control over the budget , personnel decisions , and procurement .

fsa was established under the higher education amendments of 1998 ( p.l .

105-244 ) as the federal government's first pbo .

this was done in response to the belief that ed needed restructuring to improve federal student aid delivery .

in recent years , fsa has come under scrutiny for its oversight of ihes participating in the student aid programs and contracted student loan servicers , its perceived lack of transparency to stakeholders , and its accountability to and engagement with stakeholders .

this report provides information about the structure and organization of fsa , the nature of the work it performs , and its characteristics as a pbo .

additionally , the report attempts to synthesize some challenges experienced by fsa that have received considerable attention in recent years .

there has been considerable interest in this set of issues from the 116 th congress .

as congress contemplates the reauthorization of the hea , it might examine some of the issues raised by these critiques and the way fsa's organization as a pbo may affect congressional goals and policies .

this report begins by discussing the hea provisions that distinguish fsa from other types of federal agencies .

this is followed by a discussion of the legislative history of the creation of fsa as a pbo and of hea title iv programmatic changes that may affect its operations .

next , the report describes the current operations and structure of fsa .

finally , it discusses several issues related to fsa's operations and how they may relate to its structure as a pbo .

the issues presented have received recent congressional and stakeholder attention and have been identified in reviews of fsa's operations .

there have been numerous recent reports that have examined aspects of fsa's operations .

appendix a provides a bibliography of recent government accountability office ( gao ) and ed office of inspector general ( ig ) reports relating to fsa's operations .

appendix b provides a list of selected acronyms used in this report .

federal programs are usually carried out by or through agencies that are established in statute , with structural refinements established through directives issued by the agency head .

over time , congress has created governmental and quasi - governmental entities with varying characteristics to address diverse needs in different contexts .

most federal agencies in the executive branch , however , are designed to be directly or indirectly accountable to the president .

furthermore , most federal agencies must comply with general management laws regarding financial management , procurement , information management , personnel , and other administrative practices .

as a pbo , fsa has organizational features that are distinct from most other departmental subunits in the executive branch of the federal government .

as the name suggests , pbos are designed to have a greater focus on results—outcomes rather than outputs .

to this end , they are required to have clear objectives and measurable goals .

pbo leaders are to be held professionally accountable for meeting measurable goals within the organization , with continued tenure and a portion of compensation linked to these measures of success .

in exchange , these organizations and leaders are granted greater discretion to deviate from certain government - wide management processes and to operate more like private - sector companies .

key statutorily established features of fsa include , among others , the appointment and compensation arrangements for its chief operating officer ( coo ) and other senior managers , exemptions from certain government - wide personnel and procurement requirements , and greater independence from political pressure in the exercise of its functions .

fsa was established as the federal government's first pbo in 1998 .

when congress established this structure , it departed from conventional organizational arrangements that were then in use within the federal government .

the pbo model was drawn from government innovations in great britain in the 1980s and 1990s .

it was then developed and promoted for american governmental use by the national partnership for reinventing government ( npr ) , a major clinton administration governmental reform initiative .

the administration's rollout of the pbo touted the model's potential benefits and portrayed it as a commonsense development in the effort to streamline the federal government and make it more responsive to its "customers. .

the npr initiative , led by vice president al gore , aimed to improve federal government performance by reorganizing agencies and processes to be guided by market principles and incentives .

npr's first report put forth hundreds of recommendations .

these recommendations were intended to lead to better government service delivery and greater "customer" satisfaction .

in general , this would be accomplished through the streamlining of personnel practices , procurement , and other government operations ; improvement of management tools and incentives ; and promotion of efficiency and economy in administration .

administration - endorsed pbo - related legislation was introduced in late 1995 , but it was not until early 1996 that the vice president introduced the pbo concept as a major new focus of the ongoing npr .

the aim was to improve government service delivery by implementing certain functions through the use of business - like practices and incentive structures .

agencies reorganized as pbos would be freed from adherence to certain procurement and civil service laws and would , at the same time , develop systems of performance incentives and accountability for results .

in advocating for the creation of federal pbos , vice president gore stated: government agencies need to change their incentives and internal cultures to shift from a focus on process to a focus on customers and achieving results .

they need to become more responsive to citizens , yet account for program costs and safeguard broader public interests .

this can be done by creating performance - based organizations ( pbos ) that set forth clear measures of performance , hold the head of the organization clearly accountable for achieving results , and grant the head of the organization authority to deviate from governmentwide rules if this is needed to achieve agreed - upon results .

pbos involve structural changes as well as changes in incentives affecting federal employees .

the npr identified seven candidates for conversion , but none has been formally converted into a pbo .

however , one of the entities targeted for conversion , the patent and trademark office , was statutorily reorganized and given many pbo - like structural characteristics .

because it has these features , some observers have referred to it as a pbo .

though not contemplated as a potential pbo within the scope of the initial npr list , fsa represented the first organization aligned with the pbo framework outlined in the npr .

in addition to fsa , one other entity—the air traffic organization of the federal aviation administration—has been explicitly established as a pbo in statute .

since fsa's inception , both statutory and regulatory changes have been made to the title iv student aid programs .

these changes may have had an effect on fsa's operations .

at the time of fsa's formation in 1998 , hea title iv authorized and ed administered two primary federal student loan programs: the federal family education loan ( ffel ) program and the direct loan program .

these two programs provided borrowers with loans for postsecondary education with substantially similar terms and conditions as one another , but each program had significantly different administrative structures .

private lenders originated ffel program loans , and either they or secondary market loan purchasers ( who bought loans from originating lenders ) were responsible for completing many loan servicing tasks , including working with postsecondary institutions to track students' enrollment and loan eligibility status , billing borrowers , and conducting initial collection services if a loan became delinquent .

additionally , under the ffel program , state and nonprofit guaranty agencies received federal funds to administer many aspects of the program , such as providing technical assistance to ihes and lenders , providing credit and loan rehabilitation counseling to borrowers , and performing collections work .

under the direct loan program , the federal government essentially serves as the "banker" by providing loans to students and their families using federal capital .

ed assumes the primary role in administering the direct loan program ( described below ) , including providing technical assistance to ihes , contracting with loan servicers to perform day - to - day administrative tasks , providing loan counseling to borrowers , and initiating collections work .

in may 2008 , in response to concerns about the continued availability of ffel program loans due to several ffel program lenders curtailing or ceasing their participation in the program , the ensuring continued access to student loans act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-227 ) granted ed the temporary authority to purchase student loans made under the ffel program .

in october 2008 , p.l .

110-350 extended this authority through july 1 , 2010 .

after purchasing loans made under the ffel program , control of loan servicing was transferred to ed .

in 2009 , the safra act ( p.l .

111-152 , title ii ) terminated the authority to make new loans under the ffel program after june 30 , 2010 .

since july 1 , 2010 , the direct loan program has been the primary federal student loan program , although many ffel program loans remain outstanding , and ffel program lenders and guaranty agencies remain responsible for administering several aspects of those programs .

these changes have vested fsa with a larger scope of responsibility than congress might have originally contemplated when it authorized fsa's pbo structure , as fsa became responsible for administering a larger share of the federal student loan programs ( in terms of loan volume and individual borrowers associated with these changes ) than for which it had previously been responsible under the ffel program .

moreover , the switch to almost 100% direct lending in 2010 had the effect of fundamentally altering the federal student loan marketplace .

during the roughly 15-year period that the two programs operated concurrently , ihes and borrowers were provided the opportunity to "shop around. .

that is , ihes chose whether to apply to participate in the ffel program or direct loan program , and the caliber of administrative and servicing work available within the respective loan programs may have been a factor in those decisions .

additionally , schools opting to participate in the ffel program usually compiled preferred lender lists that they shared with students .

again , assessments of the caliber of administrative and servicing work provided through differing lenders likely factored into the selection of lenders for such lists .

borrowers attending ffel program participating ihes were free to select among an array of lenders , including but not limited to those on the preferred lender lists .

there were opportunities available for ihes and for borrowers who were dissatisfied with customer service to pursue other options .

the competition that existed within the ffel program and across the loan programs provided incentives for those involved in administrative and servicing work to provide enhanced customer service .

by transitioning to a single model of federal student lending ( the direct loan program ) under which a single entity ( the federal government ) both makes and is responsible for administering loans , the federal student loan marketplace transitioned from one with some built - in incentives to provide enhanced customer service to one in which there may be less incentive to do so .

several other changes in the title iv aid programs since fsa's creation as a pbo may have also had the effect of increasing the scope and complexity of fsa's administrative functions .

these include but are not limited to the following: increases in the amount and type of aid benefits available to students , including extension of plus loan availability to graduate and professional students under the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-171 ) and the authorization of the teach grant program under the college costs reduction and access act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-84 ) ; authorization and implementation of myriad income - driven loan repayment plans that allow borrowers to make monthly payments in amounts indexed to their adjusted gross income ; increased complexity of aid benefits , including establishment of a 6% interest rate cap on federal student loans during military service under the servicemembers civil relief act ( p.l .

108-189 ) , the public service loan forgiveness ( pslf ) program under the college costs reduction and access act , cumulative lifetime maximums on certain students' eligibility to receive pell grants established under the heoa and amended under the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 ( p.l .

112-74 ) , and limitations placed on certain borrower's eligibility to borrow direct subsidized loans established under the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century act ( p.l .

112-141 ) ; and changes made to aid administration , including the process to receive a discharge of federal student loans after a determination that a borrower is totally and permanently disabled as established under the heoa and implemented via subsequent regulatory changes , the requirement that ed ( via fsa ) contract with not - for - profit loan servicers under the safra act , and regulatory changes to borrower defense to repayment discharge procedures .

section 141 of the hea tasks fsa with managing administration and oversight of the title iv federal student aid programs .

among other functions , fsa develops and maintains the fafsa ; obtains student aid funds from the treasury and makes them available for disbursement to students ; contracts with third parties that perform myriad administrative tasks associated with the title iv programs ( eg , loan servicing ) ; provides information on the title iv programs to students , title iv participants ( eg , ihes ) , congress , and other stakeholders ; and provides oversight of title iv program participants , including ihes and the third - party loan servicers with which it contracts .

the hea specifically establishes two roles within fsa—the coo and the student loan ombudsman—to carry out fsa's functions , but much of fsa's organizational structure has been established through administrative action by the coo .

in addition , many outside entities may have an interest in or have asserted a role over aspects of the federal student aid programs .

thus , in coordination with ed , fsa maintains relationships with outside stakeholders , executive branch entities , and congress .

fsa also maintains relationships with offices within ed at large .

close observers assessed fsa's progress in addressing the congressionally identified issues that prompted fsa's establishment as a pbo in 1998 .

immediately following the enactment of the hea provisions establishing a pbo , acsfa acknowledged the difficulty of simultaneously undertaking a major reorganization and system modernization .

acsfa noted the commitment and energy of the first permanent coo and praised "his willingness to communicate with the higher education community" as well as his early senior personnel choices .

acsfa also criticized the priorities of the new unit as well as its adherence to the congressional intent behind , and the requirements of , the new statute .

among other concerns , it noted that ed appeared to be transplanting the organizational arrangements of sfap ( fsa's predecessor ) , as an office of ope , into a new pbo that reported directly to the secretary without making more fundamental changes to its management and organizational structure ; ed was failing to "adequately separate policy making and regulatory responsibilities of ope and operations responsibilities of the pbo as intended by congress ; " and rather than "directing its attention and scarce resources toward solving its basic systems , data , and contract problems , the pbo appear[ed] to be … concentrating on the twin objectives of improving day - to - day customer service and providing students web access to their data through 'a single federal point of contact' for all financial aid transactions. .

in 2002 , acsfa reported , among other findings , that some progress had been made on transferring policymaking functions to ope but that "functions related to institutional eligibility and guarantor and lender oversight" remained within the purview of fsa .

asfca called for the transfer of these functions to ope , with ope consulting with fsa to ensure that proposed federal aid policies supported fsa operations .

acsfa also reported that fsa was strengthening the capacity of its management , systems , and operations staff while reducing its reliance on contractors and recommended fsa continue to do so .

in addition , it expressed concern that minimal progress had been made on systems integration .

acsfa called for ed to "incorporate specific integration goals and schedules into its strategic and tactical plans and quicken the overall pace of data and systems integration as a means of reducing cost and increasing efficiency. .

by 2001 , fsa had developed an organizational performance plan identifying three strategic goals: increase customer satisfaction , increase employee satisfaction , and reduce unit costs .

however , ed's ig and gao noted that it did not clearly address some of the new office's statutory purposes that had been identified during the hea reauthorization process .

for example , both entities found that the performance plan did not sufficiently address the means by which systems integration would be accomplished , nor did it include any objective measures of forward movement in that area .

both ed's ig and gao recommended that fsa establish clear goals , strategies , and performance measures related to systems integration .

fsa disagreed with the ig's recommendation , reasoning that the agency could not achieve its three stated goals without systems integration .

in a response to the gao recommendation , which came later , however , ed's deputy secretary agreed with the recommendation , committing to directing that fsa's performance plan "be revised to establish measurable goals and milestones for systems integration efforts to provide both direction to fsa and enhance its accountability. .

the gao report also assessed the progress fsa had made in measuring and achieving its three strategic goals .

it noted that fsa had made measurable progress in the general improvement of customer and employee satisfaction—two of its three strategic goals .

with regard to its third goal ( reduce unit costs ) , gao found that the indicator fsa used to measure unit cost was deficient .

gao also noted that the relationship between fsa and ed was still evolving: education continues to take steps to clarify fsa's level of independence and its relationship with other education offices… .

with the arrival of the current administration … education established special interim operating procedures for all department units , including fsa , that were intended to ensure that personnel and financial resources are managed effectively and efficiently throughout the department.… education now provides greater direction and oversight of fsa than was provided previously .

education is currently reviewing fsa's role and responsibilities as part of the departmentwide management planning effort .

the results … will be used to guide future decisions concerning fsa's level of independence and its relationship to other department offices .

in 2005 , gao removed the title iv federal student aid programs from its high risk list .

the student aid programs had been on gao's high risk list since the list's inception in 1990 .

in removing the title iv student aid programs from the list , gao found that while fsa still needed to take additional steps to fully address some of its recommendations , overall , management of the programs had improved enough to warrant removal from the high risk list .

in removing the student aid programs from its high risk list , gao cited many factors , including fsa's "sustained improvements to address financial mismanagement and internal control weaknesses," receipt of an unqualified or "clean" opinion on its financial statements for fy2002-fy2004 , actions to ensure that aid was not being awarded to ineligible students , actions to "integrat[e] its many disparate information systems," steps to reduce student loan default rates , and steps to address its "human capital challenges. .

in more recent years , fsa has been praised for its handling of the transition to 100% direct lending under the direct loan program and for other improvements to the administration of the title iv aid programs , such as implementation of the irs data retrieval tool to allow students and their parents to import their federal income tax data directly into their fafsa .

some more recent gao and ig reports have noted cases in which fsa met its objectives .

some sizable issues have also been identified in gao and ig reports , by some members of congress , and by other stakeholders .

for example , fsa's oversight of its contracted loan servicers has come under scrutiny from congress , ed's ig , gao , and the cfpb .

seemingly large deficiencies in ed's implementation of and communication with borrowers about of the pslf program have been identified by gao and have garnered congressional interest as well .

concerns have also been raised over fsa's ability to identify and address poorly performing ihes or those that may be at risk of closure .

these more recent issues are discussed in more detail below .

ed's federal student aid operations were statutorily reorganized into a pbo with the hope of addressing significant management problems , including limited progress in integrating numerous data systems , student aid delivery delays and breakdowns , and infighting over student aid delivery turf among ed's senior managers .

in this context , the then - untried pbo model seemed promising: it was built on the idea that business - like performance incentives and management flexibility would motivate and permit the organization and its leaders to provide economical , efficient , and effective service to student aid recipients .

the organization would be given a higher - than - typical level of independence from political leadership and direction on operational processes in return for accountability for results , as measured by performance agreements and assessments .

potential concerns about independent policymaking by a pbo's leaders could be allayed by separating the policymaking functions from the operational functions .

the former would remain accountable to administration leadership , and the latter would be vested in the semi - independent pbo .

while the establishment of fsa as a pbo seems to have addressed at least some of the congressional concerns prompting its establishment , new issues have arisen in recent years , and some of the previously cited issues that led to the adoption of a pbo approach may yet remain unresolved .

federal oversight entities and other outside observers have raised issues pertaining to fsa , including those relating to oversight , transparency , and accountability .

as these issues receive continued attention , and as congress contemplates the reauthorization of the hea , this final section of the report highlights some of the issues relating to fsa's operations that have garnered attention over the past several years .

issues highlighted and options for addressing them have , for the most part , been gathered from reports from gao , ed's ig , and outside organizations .

crs has identified some of the options available to address these issues .

in some instances , documents referenced here refer to ed and / or the secretary of education and not specifically to fsa and / or its coo .

however , based on its functions , fsa is likely pertinent to the topics being addressed .

where possible , crs has indicated in footnotes where a cited source refers to ed more generally and crs has inferred that fsa has some responsibility for a function or activity being discussed .

hea section 141 specifies that one of fsa's functions as a pbo is to ensure the integrity of the federal student aid programs .

thus , fsa is tasked with overseeing a variety of entities that play a role in administration of the title iv student aid programs .

fsa's oversight of ihes and contracted loan servicers has been criticized in recent years .

some criticisms have focused on perceived deficiencies in fsa's assessment of ihes , its ability to proactively mitigate risk in the title iv programs , and its ability to resolve issues at ihes in a timely manner .

similarly , fsa has experienced difficulties in its monitoring of loan servicers .

some of these difficulties seem to have stemmed from fsa providing incomplete or fragmented guidance to loan servicers , which have impeded their efforts to comply with requirements for servicing federally held loans and to assist borrowers in navigating the aid programs .

the oversight issues introduced here are explored in greater depth below .

should any congressional action be taken to address these issues , congress might consider whether or how it should specify desired outcomes and actions taken by fsa .

there may be tradeoffs between meeting congressional goals and shoring up current perceived oversight deficiencies and enabling fsa to operate independently and with flexibility to address difficult or novel issues .

consideration might also be given to the apparent difficulties in separating operational functions delegated to fsa from policymaking retained by ed .

fsa oversees , through enforcement activities , ihe compliance in meeting requirements to participate in the title iv aid programs .

these requirements are intended to ensure that ihes provide sufficient educational quality , provide a level of consumer protection , and ensure administrative and fiscal integrity of title iv programs at ihes .

through oversight of the ihes participating in the title iv student aid programs , fsa is able to identify instances of noncompliance and take appropriate action , such as sanctioning ihes or providing assistance to ihes to come into compliance—both tools that can help mitigate student and taxpayer risk .

interest in the issue of fsa's oversight of ihes has arisen , at least in part , due to the prominent closures of several large multi - campus ihes in recent years , affecting thousands of students .

in response to these closures , gao and ed's ig have launched several investigations and have found that fsa staff do not always follow internal procedures for institutional review and that some internal procedures did not have controls in place to prevent ihes from manipulating title iv participation requirements .

these frailties could result in failure to identify ihes that are not complying with title iv requirements or that are at risk of abruptly closing .

for example , one ig report found that fsa did not conduct ihe program reviews in accordance with its own internal procedures , which could lead to "limited assurance that program reviews are appropriately identifying and reporting all instance of noncompliance. .

the ig noted that fsa staff did not consistently complete and maintain required program review forms , adequately document institutional fiscal testing requirements relating to title iv aid disbursement at ihes , or obtain all required information for review of an ihe's distance education programs .

perhaps relatedly , some fsa staff reported feeling "overwhelmed" with the amount of work they were required to perform in the time allotted , and some of their managers believed that allotted time may be inadequate to complete some more complex program reviews , which could have been contributing factors to fsa not consistently conducting program reviews according to procedures .

in another report , the ig found that fsa needed to improve internal processes to help it identify ihes that may be at risk of an abrupt closure .

specifically , the ig found that fsa did not act in a timely manner to resolve corinthian college's ( a large ihe that abruptly closed in 2015 ) failing composite score appeal , nor did it promptly require corinthian college to post a letter of credit upon finding that the school's composite score was failing .

the ig asserted that such weaknesses may enable some ihes to avoid fsa sanctions or additional oversight , which in turn may result in a greater risk of harm to students ( eg , enrollment in an ihe that may be at risk of a precipitous closure ) and loss of taxpayer funds ( eg , the cost of student loan discharges due to the ihe's closure ) .

the ig also found that fsa had taken some steps to implement new tools and processes to help identify ihes at risk of closure , such as participating in ope efforts to enhance information sharing between ed and an ihe's accreditor and creating an enforcement office responsible for investigating complaints made against ihes .

it appears that the enforcement office has since been largely disbanded .

however , it is possible that subsequent steps may have been taken to strengthen monitoring and response practices .

ensuring ihes compliance with title iv requirements arguably addresses one of the hea - specified functions of fsa as a pbo: ensuring integrity of the title iv aid programs .

it also arguably addresses fsa's strategic goal to " proactively manage the student aid portfolio and mitigate risk ," which fsa describes as aimed to "strengthen fsa's role in working to ensure protection of customers and holding stakeholders accountable for their actions. .

under the two metrics fsa has identified as measures of its performance under this goal , fsa has had mixed success ( see table 4 ) .

however , neither metric seems to directly address ihe oversight and accountability in the title iv aid programs .

fsa - contracted loan servicers are tasked with various day - to - day administrative tasks associated with federal student loans and some other forms of student aid .

fsa's oversight of loan servicers generally consists of ensuring that the loan servicers are meeting federal requirements for student loans ( eg , ensuring that borrowers' interest rates are correctly calculated ) and fulfilling the terms and conditions of their contracts with fsa and providing guidance to loan servicers to enable them to meet such standards .

oversight of contracted loan servicers can help fsa mitigate risks in the title iv program and enable it to help ensure the provision of effective customer service to students and their families .

in recent years , issues associated with federal student loan servicing have received considerable attention .

for instance , some have alleged that some loan servicers have engaged in undesirable conduct , such as steering borrowers away from more beneficial loan repayment options or providing inaccurate or incomplete information to borrowers .

still others have detailed borrowers' experiencing problems when seeking to have loan servicers resolve servicing errors , identified issues with loan payment processing that may cause problems for borrowers seeking to repay their loans , and identified issues with respect to the implementation of specific loan terms and conditions such as the pslf program .

concerns raised about loan servicing have focused in particular on whether fsa is sufficiently reviewing , monitoring , and holding loan servicers accountable .

gao has reported that fsa's monitoring of loan servicers' interaction with borrowers may be insufficient to ensure that servicers are providing accurate information and quality customer service to borrowers .

for instance , gao found that fsa primarily monitored inbound calls from borrowers to loan servicers , which constitute a small percentage of the calls loan servicers participate in .

thus , gao opined that "fsa may not be focusing its call monitoring on the most frequent and critical types of calls. .

gao also found that fsa's call monitoring was poorly documented and its tracking of borrower complaints was disjointed , with complaints being tracked across multiple systems .

while some of these issues have seemingly been resolved , it is unclear whether others have been resolved .

without a systematic approach to reviewing loan servicer interactions with borrowers , it may be difficult for fsa to target oversight of its loan servicers and improve its services to student loan borrowers .

more recently , ed's ig found that while fsa regularly identifies instances of servicer noncompliance with federal servicing requirements , fsa neither tracked instances of noncompliance that were remedied by loan servicers nor analyzed information relating to the noncompliance .

moreover , the ig found that fsa rarely used available tools to hold loan servicers accountable , nor did fsa incorporate a performance metric relating to servicer compliance into the otherwise performance - driven terms of its contracts with loan servicers .

finally , the ig found that fsa employees did not always follow internal policy when evaluating interactions between servicers' representatives and borrowers .

these issues may make it difficult for fsa to identify recurring issues in loan servicing , mitigate the risk of potential harm to borrowers for loan servicer noncompliance , and hold loan servicers accountable for poor servicing .

a difficulty loan servicers may face in complying with requirements for servicing federally held students loans is the fragmented and incomplete guidance for a complex student loan system provided to them from fsa .

gao has found that fsa may provide insufficient guidance to servicers regarding certain aspects of loan administration , such as how to apply borrower over - or under - payments to an account balance .

moreover , when fsa does provide guidance , it may not consistently share that information with all loan servicers or all relevant individuals .

such gaps in authoritative guidance to loan servicers may create a risk of inconsistent interpretations of law and procedures , which could lead to inefficiencies in federal student loan administration and could negatively affect borrowers' abilities to use the features of their loan terms and conditions .

to help address these concerns , treasury has recommended , and congress has previously directed , fsa to publish a common loan servicing policies and procedures manual .

however , it appears that fsa has not published such a manual .

another difficulty loan servicers face is that federal student loan terms and conditions have become increasingly more complex over the years .

this may contribute to some of the problems loan servicers have in administering them .

for example , fsa recently stated that it , along with its loan servicers , is working to enhance communications with borrowers regarding the pslf program's requirements but acknowledged that the program is fundamentally complex and that fsa does not have the authority to change congressionally mandated pslf eligibility requirements .

thus , while there are likely instances in which fsa oversight of loan servicers could be strengthened to ensure that borrowers receive the loan benefits to which they are entitled , there may also be inherent difficulties in administering the loan programs themselves , which might be addressed with policy changes to the programs .

ensuring loan servicer compliance with title iv and contract requirements arguably addresses one of the hea - specified functions of fsa as a pbo—ensuring integrity of the title iv aid programs—and fsa's strategic goal to " proactively manage the student aid portfolio and mitigate risk . .

under the two metrics fsa has identified as measures of its performance under this goal , fsa has had mixed results ( see table 4 ) .

while some of the metrics fsa has identified under this performance goal seem intended to address loan servicing practices , the extent to which they may do so is unclear .

for instance , it is unclear whether the metrics used to assess the efficacy of fsa directly gauge the accuracy and completeness of information provided by their contracted loan services .

in determining the desired level of oversight of ihes and loan servicers , congress might consider whether to specify desired outcomes and actions to be taken by fsa .

while fsa is tasked with the day - to - day functions of administering the title iv programs , congress can guide and affect these efforts in a variety of ways , including amending the portions of the hea that relate to fsa's functions , providing stipulations regarding the use of annual appropriations , exercising oversight of fsa through mechanisms such as congressional hearings , further emphasizing the importance of stakeholder input ( discussed below in the section entitled "stakeholder accountability" ) , or statutorily specifying more goals and performance metrics for fsa .

some of these changes might involve tradeoffs between improving perceived oversight deficiencies and enabling fsa to operate independently and with flexibility to address difficult or novel issues .

to the degree that additional statutorily specified direction might stipulate the way in which fsa is to conduct day - to - day operations , there may be potential for it to be in tension with the goal of accountability for results , as opposed to processes , that is key to the pbo model .

arguably , such action might also impair the agency's ability to make business - like operational decisions based on nonpolitical considerations rather than responsiveness to political leaders .

the choice of the pbo model was predicated on the idea that ed's political leadership would retain policymaking functions and that the pbo's role would be limited to operational functions .

seemingly , ed and fsa have made organizational adjustments—such as fsa's office of policy liaison and implementation staff , which consults with the secretary on the development and promulgation of title iv student aid policies and regulations—that allow for fsa input into the formal policymaking process that is at least nominally under the authority of ed .

a different kind of policymaking—that which occurs as a byproduct of implementation—is a long noted facet of public administration that might prove more difficult to address .

issues around loan servicing illustrate how it may be difficult to completely remove policymaking from the operational functions delegated to fsa .

for example , congress sets the terms and conditions of federal student loans in general , and ed may add precision to them , while fsa designs and enforces contracts for loan servicers to administer the loan programs .

however , a program's administration may shape how policies work in real life .

for instance , some have observed that the payment structure of loan servicing contracts established by fsa may incentivize loan servicers to encourage borrowers to pursue one loan benefit ( eg , forbearance ) over another ( eg , income - based repayment ) , which may contradict ed's policy preferences .

although such policymaking through implementation probably can be reduced by limiting the scope of discretion in a delegated authority or by increasing oversight of the agency's activities , these steps might reduce agency efficiency and hinder the effectiveness of the pbo model .

numerous outside parties have a stake in the aid programs and rely on fsa to provide timely and accurate information about them .

criticisms have been raised that fsa may lack sufficient transparency regarding title iv program operations .

congress and other entities with oversight responsibilities ( eg , the cfpb ) sometimes seem to have incomplete or imperfect information on title iv program performance and operations , which may make it difficult to make informed , well - honed policy or enforcement decisions .

many consumers are also seemingly have incomplete or imperfect consumer information on the title iv programs and title iv participation , which may make it difficult for them to make informed college - going and financial decisions .

some have called on fsa to publicly release a variety of data and to enhance communications regarding such information .

it does not appear that fsa's pbo model would necessarily hinder transparency , nor would increasing transparency appear to be directly at odds with the model's design .

however , there may be some tradeoffs between increasing transparency and maintaining the effectiveness of the pbo's business - like design , which was specifically intended to shield title iv aid administration , at least in part , from political pressures and increase efficiency within the aid programs .

additionally , fsa must grapple with privacy requirements when contemplating the potential release of , and how to appropriately make available , many types of data in its possession .

congress and other policymakers have an interest in understanding how the title iv federal student aid programs operate and the outcomes associated with those programs , as the dollar amount of federal student aid awarded and number of aid recipients represents a large federal investment .

in fy2019 , fsa provided approximately $130.4 billion in title iv aid to approximately 11.0 million students , and fsa managed a student loan portfolio encompassing approximately 45 million borrowers with outstanding federal student loans totaling about $1.5 trillion .

concerns have been raised that fsa may not provide access to information that may enable stakeholders to make informed policy recommendations and decisions .

some have noted that while fsa possesses large quantities of student - level records that measure grant and loan receipt , postsecondary education completion status , and loan repayment , fsa has "often been less than responsive to requests for data and research that would benefit the rest of the nation. .

even when information on title iv program performance is made available , some have found it to be insufficient .

for example , ed's ig recently found that while fsa has provided , through its data center , information on the loan portfolio that was formerly unavailable , it does not include other potentially relevant information , such as more detailed information on costs to the federal government associated with the income - driven repayment plans and loan forgiveness programs—two loan features that are increasingly being used by borrowers and garnering attention—that could assist policymakers and the public understand the future impact of those loan terms .

at least one federal entity has seemingly been unable to carry out some of its duties due to a perceived lack of transparency from fsa .

the cfpb has indicated that recent fsa guidance to its contracted loan servicers regarding the release of certain student loan records may be hampering cfpb's ability to conduct supervisory examinations of them to ensure that they are in compliance with federal consumer protection law .

the guidance prohibits loan servicers from responding directly to information requests by third parties , including regulators such as the cfpb , and specifies that , pursuant to the privacy act of 1974 , third - party requests should be made directly to ed .

providing requested information to stakeholders arguably aligns with at least one of fsa's strategic goals: " foster trust and collaboration among stakeholders . .

based on the three performance metrics fsa has identified as measures of its performance under this goal , fsa has seemingly generally succeeded in fulfilling this goal in recent years ( see table 4 ) .

however , generally speaking , the performance metrics do not appear to encompass the provision of timely and useful information to stakeholders .

moreover , it is unclear how some of the three performance metrics ( eg , collection rate ) address the strategic goal in general .

the metric " ease of doing business with fsa " seems most relevant to the quality and timeliness of its efforts to meet the information needs of the stakeholders discussed here .

however , it is not clear that this metric is constructed in a manner that would capture the extent to which fsa's efforts are successful in meeting the information needs of policymaking and oversight entities who presumably constitute high - priority stakeholders .

members of the general public—particularly those who need or may need student aid—may have an interest in understanding how the title iv programs operate and the outcomes associated with those programs .

their interests may relate to having access to information that allows them to make informed college - going and financial decisions and understanding potential financial risks associated with those decisions .

concerns have been raised that fsa may not be releasing some information relating to ihes' performance in meeting title iv institutional eligibility requirements that may be indicators of an ihe's educational quality or financial stability and may be of use to consumers when deciding in which ihes to enroll .

in one report , gao found that while fsa publicly discloses information on some ihes' financial composite scores ( an indicator of an ihe's financial stability ) , it did not publicly disclose all ihes' composite scores .

since the report's publication , fsa has taken some steps to enhance the availability and usefulness of publicly available composite score information .

however , "without complete and transparent data on schools' financial conditions," which may include aspects other than an ihe's composite scores , "it may be difficult for students to make informed decisions as to whether a school is a safe investment of their time and money. .

concerns have also been raised that fsa may not consistently provide information on federal student aid terms and conditions that may enable recipients to make sound financial decisions .

gao has found that while fsa makes available detailed information about loan terms and conditions , borrowers must often actively seek out the information .

moreover , fsa often relies on its loan servicers to communicate loan terms and conditions to borrowers , but there may be inconsistencies among loan servicers in the information they provide to borrowers .

communications about program requirements among borrowers , fsa , and loan servicers may also be imperfect .

inconsistent and / or imperfect information about program terms may lead to borrowers' being unaware of or confused about program requirements , which may put them at risk of making suboptimal financial decisions , some of which may lead to financial distress such as loan delinquency or default .

fsa has taken steps to increase borrower awareness of some loan terms and conditions .

however , all communication issues may not be fully resolved .

in response to some of these concerns , congress has on occasion directed fsa to perform customer outreach .

providing complete and accurate information to customers arguably addresses some of the hea - specified purposes of fsa as a pbo: "to improve service to students and other participants in the student financial assistance programs authorized under title iv , including making those programs more understandable to students and their parents. .

it also arguably aligns with fsa's strategic goal of " i mprov[ing] quality of service for customers across the entire student aid life cycle . .

under the five metrics fsa has identified as measures of its performance under this goal , fsa has seemingly generally succeeded in fulfilling this goal in recent years ( see table 4 ) .

however , concerns over communications with customers remain .

some have suggested that fsa's independence and leadership by non - political appointees enable it to be unresponsive to requests for information from congress , political and career staff within ed , and outside stakeholders .

they point out that the coo is accountable to the secretary on the basis of measurable organizational and individual performance goals , arguably rendering removal by the secretary or the president more difficult politically .

with better access to information , it is argued , researchers and policymakers could more readily judge policies and federal investments .

however , other factors , such as compliance with other federal statutes ( eg , ed's interpretation of its responsibilities under the privacy act of 1974 ) , may hinder fsa's responsiveness to information requests .

increasing access to title iv program performance and operations information might detract from or improve the effectiveness of the pbo's business - like design features .

sharing such information generally entails the ongoing development of information - sharing policies and procedures .

staff hours would be needed to carry out functions associated with the dissemination process , which could result in reduced economy and efficiency in addressing the pbo's statutory purposes—which do not explicitly include data sharing .

furthermore , it could increase scrutiny and evaluation of the agency's operational processes rather than the results by which pbo performance is to be measured .

on the other hand , the sharing of such information could improve the ability of stakeholders to assess the results of fsa's work , perhaps using different measures of performance , and hence address accountability for results beyond the specific targets identified by fsa .

section 141 of the hea mandates that fsa develop five - year performance plans and annual reports .

in doing so , fsa is to engage with relevant stakeholders , which may enable it to glean new information about program performance , leverage that information to create efficiencies , and provide a level of accountability to stakeholders in its operations .

in addition , the coo and senior managers are to enter into annual performance agreements that set forth measurable organizational and individual goals .

the awarding of annual performance bonuses is tied to meeting these goals .

each of these provisions is intended to provide a layer of accountability to stakeholders , including students , borrowers , ihes , ffel program lenders and guaranty agencies , contracted student loan servicers , congress , and other parties that may have an interest in federal student aid .

concerns about accountability relate to whether fsa is fulfilling its statutory mandate to consult with such stakeholders in developing performance plans and annual reports and whether fsa is leveraging information garnered from stakeholder interactions to make improvements .

they also relate to whether fsa is sufficiently responsive to customer needs .

consideration might be given to whether improvement of performance agreements and measures and more meaningful use of stakeholder feedback may streamline operations at fsa and / or improve customer service to students and other aid participants—two statutorily specified purposes of establishing fsa as a pbo .

criticisms in this area raise questions about the effectiveness of the pbo's statutory performance planning and measurement mechanisms .

consideration might be given to amending these provisions .

at least one stakeholder organization , representing student aid administrators , has reported that while fsa may reach out to stakeholders for input in developing its performance plans and annual reports , the engagement may be only perfunctory in nature and may not provide stakeholders a meaningful opportunity to provide potentially useful feedback to fsa to enable it to fulfill its functions .

the same stakeholder organization has also asserted that performance metrics developed by fsa and ed are vague or inappropriate .

gao has raised concerns regarding how fsa communicates with aid recipients and whether it leverages information from customer interactions to make program improvements .

assertions of a lack of engagement with stakeholders and meaningful assessment of fsa's performance raise concerns about whether statutory mandates are being adhered to and whether fsa is sufficiently attuned to outside views to effectively and efficiently administer a program in which many actors are engaged .

they also raise concerns about whether fsa is sufficiently accountable to those stakeholders .

the extent to which fsa engages with and leverages information from student aid recipients and organizations who represent them may affect students and their families .

they may be limited in their ability to shop around for postsecondary financial assistance , as title iv student aid makes up approximately half of the financial assistance available to postsecondary students .

moreover , student loan borrowers often have even fewer options regarding choosing loan products to finance their postsecondary education , as private lenders are often unwilling to provide loans to individuals who may have limited creditworthiness , whereas title iv student loans are generally made without regard to creditworthiness .

in those instances where private education loans are made , they often do not contain the same favorable terms and conditions ( eg , availability of loan forgiveness programs ) as title iv student loans .

it might be argued that because fsa has no comparable competitors , it may have less motivation to seek or respond to customer feedback to improve services .

arguably , the criticisms of fsa discussed above expose a potential flaw in the pbo model as implemented under the hea .

the ed secretary and the fsa coo have a joint responsibility to set ( in consultation with stakeholders ) and measure organizational performance .

they each have an incentive ( as leaders of ed and fsa , respectively ) to show continuous improvement in fsa performance .

this incentive might affect the degree to which stakeholder input is incorporated into the process as well as the specificity and nature of the goals and measures adopted .

vague goals and measures with seemingly perfunctory stakeholder feedback processes could mask performance problems that might exist .

some potential changes in this area could maintain fsa as a pbo but also modify statutory provisions related to accountability and stakeholder input .

improvement of performance agreements and measures would seemingly be in line with the pbo model's results orientation .

for example , congress might more specifically identify in statute the domains and metrics to be used in establishing annual performance plans and evaluating agency performance .

such provisions have been enacted in other contexts , such as the performance accountability system that was established by the workforce innovation and opportunity act .

similarly , more meaningful incorporation of certain types of stakeholder feedback into the performance plan and evaluation process would seemingly be consistent with the pbo model .

potential approaches to emphasizing the importance of stakeholder input during this planning and assessment might include specifying in statute a more formal input process .

for example , congress has directed state agencies to solicit written comments from the public and to respond to such comments in writing when establishing career and technical education performance standards .

appendix a .

selected bibliography the following appendix provides a bibliography of selected reports authored by ed's oig and gao that address fsa and its operations and that have been published since january 1 , 2014 .

sources listed in the bibliography largely relate to fsa but may also include information and findings relating to other ed offices , such as ope .

in some instances , sources refer to ed and / or the secretary of education and not specifically to fsa and / or its coo .

crs is including these documents in this bibliography as , given fsa's functions , some of the information in these reports likely relate to fsa .

for each category , reports are presented in reverse chronological order .

u.s. department of education , office of inspector general federal student aid's oversight of schools' compliance with satisfactory academic progress regulations , july 17 , 2019 .

federal student aid's process to select free application for federal student aid data elements and students for verification , april 26 , 2019 .

federal student aid: additional actions needed to mitigate the risk of servicer noncompliance with requirements for servicing federally held student loans , february 12 , 2019 .

federal student aid: efforts to implement enterprise risk management have not included all elements of effective risk management , july 24 , 2018 .

federal student aid's contractor personnel security clearance process , april 17 , 2018 .

the department's communication regarding the costs of income - driven repayment plans and loan forgiveness programs , january 31 , 2018 .

federal student aid's borrower defense to repayment loan discharge process , december 8 , 2017 .

federal student aid's processes for identifying at - risk title iv schools and mitigating potential harm to students and taxpayers , february 24 , 2017 .

misuse of fsa id and the personal authentication service , september 26 , 2016 .

fsa oversight of the development and enhancement of information technology products , june 30 , 2016 .

kathleen tighe , ed inspector general , "servicemembers civil relief act," letter to senators patty murray , elizabeth warren , and richard blumenthal , february 29 , 2016 .

functionality of the debt management collection system 2 , november 5 , 2015 .

federal student aid's oversight of schools participating in the title iv programs , september 29 , 2015. review of debt management collection system 2 ( dmcs2 ) implementation , august 24 , 2015 .

audit of the followup process for external audits in federal student aid , june 17 , 2015 .

pell grant lifetime eligibility limit , march 31 , 2015 .

federal student aid's oversight of schools' compliance with the incentive compensation ban , march 24 , 2015 .

the u.s. department of education's administration of student loan debt and repayment , december 11 , 2014 .

oversight of guaranty agencies during the phase - out of the federal family education loan program , september 29 , 2014. review of federal student aid's oversight and monitoring of private collection agency and guaranty agency security controls , september 22 , 2014 .

handling of borrower complaints against private collection agencies , july 11 , 2014 .

third - party servicer use of debit cards to deliver title iv funds , march 10 , 2014. review of federal student aid's plans for schools closures by a for - profit entity , february 28 , 2014 .

title iv of the higher education act programs: additional safeguards are needed to help mitigate the risks that are unique to the distance education environment , february 21 , 2014 .

u.s. government accountability office public service loan forgiveness: improving the temporary expanded process could help reduce borrower confusion , gao - 19-595 , september 5 , 2019 .

federal student loans: education needs to verify borrowers' information for income - driven repayment plans , gao - 19-347 , june 25 , 2019 .

priority open recommendations: department of education , april 9 , 2019 .

cybersecurity: office of federal student aid should take additional steps to oversee non - school partners' protection of borrower information , gao - 18-518 , september 17 , 2018 .

public service loan forgiveness: education needs to provide better information for the loan servicer and borrowers , gao - 18-547 , september 5 , 2018 .

federal student loans: further action needed to implement recommendations on oversight of loan servicers , gao - 18-587r , july 27 , 2018 .

federal student aid: education's postsecondary school certification process , gao - 18-481 , july 17 , 2018 .

federal student loans: actions needed to improve oversight of schools' default rates , gao - 18-163 , april 26 , 2018 .

federal student aid: better program management and oversight of postsecondary schools needed to protect student information , gao - 18-121 , november 27 , 2017 ( reissued december 4 , 2017 ) .

higher education: education should address oversight and communication gaps in its monitoring of the financial condition of schools , gao - 17-555 , august 21 , 2017 .

student loans: oversight of servicemembers' interest rate cap could be strengthened , gao - 17-4 , november 15 , 2016 .

federal student loans: education could improve direct loan program customer service and oversight , gao - 16-523 , may 16 , 2016 .

federal student loans: key weaknesses limit education's management of contractors , gao - 16-196t , november 18 , 2015 .

federal student loans: education could do more to help ensure borrowers are aware of repayment and forgiveness options , gao - 15-663 , august 25 , 2015 .

higher education: better management of federal grant and loan forgiveness programs for teachers needed to improve participant outcomes , gao - 15-314 , february 24 , 2015 .

higher education: education should strengthen oversight of schools and accreditors , gao - 15-59 , december 22 , 2014 ( reissued january 22 , 2015 ) .

federal student loans: better oversight could improve defaulted loan rehabilitation , gao - 14-256 , march 6 , 2014 .

appendix b .

selected acronyms used in this repor .

