u nder long - standing supreme court precedent , congress has "plenary power" to regulate immigration .

this power , according to the court , is the most complete that congress possesses .

it allows congress to make laws concerning non - u.s. nationals ( aliens ) that would be unconstitutional if applied to citizens .

and while the immigration power has proven less than absolute when directed at aliens already physically present within the united states , the supreme court has interpreted the power to apply with most force to the admission and exclusion of nonresident aliens .

the court has upheld or shown approval of laws excluding aliens on the basis of ethnicity , gender and legitimacy , and political belief .

it has also upheld an executive exclusion policy that was premised on a broad statutory delegation of authority , even though some evidence considered by the court tended to show that religious hostility may have prompted the policy .

outside of the immigration context , in contrast , laws and policies that discriminate on such bases are almost always struck down as unconstitutional .

to date , the only judicially recognized limit on congress's power to exclude aliens concerns lawful permanent residents ( lprs ) : they , unlike nonresident aliens , generally cannot be denied entry without a fair hearing as to their admissibility .

the plenary power doctrine has roots in the chinese exclusion case of 1889 , which upheld a federal statute that provided for the exclusion of chinese laborers .

some jurists and commentators have criticized the chinese exclusion case for indulging antiquated notions of race .

more generally , many legal scholars contend that the plenary power doctrine lacks a coherent rationale and that it is an anachronism that predates modern individual rights jurisprudence .

yet the supreme court continues to employ the doctrine .

some commentators have argued that the court is in the process of narrowing the parameters of the doctrine's applicability , but they find support for this argument mainly in cases outside the exclusion context .

in the exclusion context , the court's 2018 decision in trump v. hawaii reaffirms the exceptional scope of the plenary power doctrine .

congress's plenary power to regulate the entry of aliens rests at least in part on implied constitutional authority .

the constitution itself does not mention immigration .

it does not expressly confer upon any of the three branches of government the power to control the flow of foreign nationals into the united states or to regulate their presence once here .

to be sure , parts of the constitution address related subjects .

the supreme court has sometimes relied upon congress's enumerated powers over naturalization and foreign commerce , and to a lesser extent upon the executive's implied article ii foreign affairs power , as sources of federal immigration power .

significantly , however , the court has also consistently attributed the immigration power to the federal government's inherent sovereign authority to control its borders and its relations with foreign nations .

it is this inherent sovereign power , according to the court , that gives congress essentially unfettered authority to restrict the entry of nonresident aliens .

the court has determined that the executive branch , by extension , possesses unusually broad authority to enforce laws pertaining to alien entry , and to do so under a level of judicial review much more limited than that which would apply outside of the exclusion context .

recent events have generated congressional interest in the constitutional division of responsibilities between congress and the executive in establishing and enforcing policies for the exclusion of aliens .

through three iterative executive actions in 2017 , commonly known as the "travel ban," the president provided for the exclusion of broad categories of nationals of specified countries , most of which were predominantly muslim .

these executive actions relied primarily upon a delegation of authority in the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) allowing the president , by way of proclamation , to exclude "any aliens" or "any class of aliens" whose entry he determines would be "detrimental to the interests of the united states. .

in june 2018 , the supreme court upheld the third iteration of the travel ban as likely lawful , rejecting claims that it was motivated by unconstitutional religious discrimination and that it exceeded the president's authority under the ina .

since that decision , some members of congress have proposed curtailing executive authority to craft exclusion policy or subjecting executive exclusion decisions and policies to more stringent judicial review .

this report provides an overview of the legislative and executive powers to exclude aliens .

first , the report discusses a gatekeeping legal principle that frames those powers: nonresident aliens outside the united states cannot challenge their exclusion from the country in federal court because congress has not expressly authorized such challenges .

but aliens at the threshold of entry have more access to judicial review of exclusion decisions , compared to aliens abroad , because of statutory provisions and other considerations .

next , the report analyzes the extent to which the constitutional and statutory rights of u.s. citizens limit the exclusion power .

specifically , the report examines a line of supreme court precedent , starting with kleindienst v. mandel and ending with trump v. hawaii , that makes a highly curtailed form of judicial review available to u.s. citizens who claim that the exclusion of one or more aliens abroad violates the u.s. citizens' constitutional rights .

the report concludes by analyzing the implications of these cases for the scope of the congressional power to legislate for the exclusion of aliens and , separately , for the scope of the executive power to take action to exclude aliens .

as discussed later , supreme court case law on the exclusion of aliens has come to focus upon whether the rights of u.s. citizens limit the government's power to exclude .

the case law arrived at this issue , however , only after the supreme court developed an underlying principle: nonresident aliens outside the united states do not have constitutional rights with respect to entry .

further , any statutory provisions that govern the admission of nonresident aliens do not permit judicial review unless congress "expressly authorize[s]" such review , something that federal courts generally conclude congress has not done .

put differently , congress's plenary power over immigration includes not merely the power to set rules as to which aliens may enter the country and under what conditions , but also the power to have such rules "enforced exclusively through executive officers , without judicial intervention" unless congress provides otherwise .

because congress has not provided otherwise , judicial review of decisions to exclude aliens abroad is generally unavailable .

the supreme court developed these general principles against judicial review of exclusion decisions in a series of cases between the late 19th and mid - 20th centuries about aliens denied admission after arriving by sea .

in one illustrative early case , the 1895 decision lem moon sing v. united states , a chinese national contended that immigration officers improperly denied him admission under the chinese exclusion laws .

those laws barred the entry of chinese laborers , but the chinese national described himself as a merchant and argued that the laws therefore did not apply to him .

as a consequence of his exclusion , he was detained by the steamship company .

the supreme court recognized that the professed merchant could challenge the legality of his detention through a petition for habeas corpus .

this procedural right ultimately proved hollow , however , because the court held that it could not review the immigration officials' determination that the petitioner fell within the scope of the provision excluding chinese laborers .

the court explained that congress had precluded such review by providing in statute that the decisions of immigration officers to deny admission to aliens under the chinese exclusion acts "shall be final , unless reversed on appeal to the secretary of the treasury. .

in other words , the statute allowed only the secretary of the treasury to review exclusion decisions under the acts .

accordingly , the court limited its consideration of the habeas petition to the narrow question of whether the immigration officers who excluded the professed merchant had authority to make exclusion and admission decisions under the statutes ( in other words , whether the officers had jurisdiction ) .

determining that the immigration officers did have such statutory authority , the court rejected the habeas petition without reviewing the petitioner's contention that he was in fact a merchant , not a laborer .

to review that contention , the court reasoned , would "defeat the manifest purpose of congress in committing to subordinate immigration officers .

 .

 .

exclusive authority to determine whether a particular alien seeking admission into this country belongs to the class entitled by some law or treaty to come into the country. .

the court saw no constitutional problem in congress's assignment of final authority over exclusion decisions to executive officials .

the court considered it a settled proposition that , because aliens lack constitutional rights with respect to entry , exclusion decisions "could be constitutionally committed for final determination to subordinate immigration or other executive officers .

 .

 .

thereby excluding judicial interference so long as such officers acted within the authority conferred upon them by congress. .

two major supreme court decisions from the 1950s appeared to transform the principle from lem moon sing and earlier cases—that congress may bar judicial review of exclusion decisions affirmatively—into a presumption that judicial review of exclusion decisions is barred unless congress expressly provides otherwise .

first , in the 1950 case united states ex rel .

knauff v. shaughnessy , the court declared itself powerless to review an executive branch decision to exclude the german bride of a u.s. world war ii veteran , even though executive officials failed to explain the exclusion beyond stating that the woman's entry would have been "prejudicial. .

the court reiterated that aliens do not have constitutional rights with respect to entry and reasoned that , as a consequence , "[w]hatever the procedure authorized by congress is , it is due process as far as an alien denied entry is concerned. .

in what would become an oft - cited sentence , the court also announced the presumption against judicial review of exclusion decisions: "it is not within the province of any court , unless expressly authorized by law , to review the determination of the political branch of the government to exclude a given alien. .

next , in the 1953 case shaughnessy v. mezei , the court refused to question the executive's undisclosed reasons for denying entry to an essentially stateless alien returning to the united states after a prior period of residence , even though the exclusion relegated the stateless alien to potentially indefinite detention on ellis island .

the mezei court cited knauff for the proposition that federal courts may not review exclusion decisions "unless expressly authorized by law," and the court held that the attorney general's decision to exclude mezei and detain him as a consequence of that exclusion was "final and conclusive. .

the issue of detention complicated the knauff and mezei cases .

because the aliens in both cases suffered detention as a result of their exclusion , they filed petitions for habeas corpus challenging the legality of their detention .

and in both cases , in accord with lem moon sing and other early precedents , and notwithstanding the court's declaration in knauff and mezei that judicial review of the exclusion decisions was unavailable , the court conducted a limited inquiry into whether the governing statutes empowered the attorney general to exclude the aliens without a hearing .

as explained further below , in the immigration context , the supreme court does not construe a general bar on judicial review to preclude habeas corpus review , although the proper scope of habeas review in cases concerning the exclusion of arriving aliens remains unclear .

in any event , even though the knauff and mezei courts conducted a limited habeas inquiry into the attorney general's statutory authority to exclude aliens without a hearing , federal courts often cite the cases ( and especially knauff ) for the proposition that courts may not review exclusion decisions unless congress expressly provides otherwise .

many scholars criticize knauff and mezei as incorrectly decided .

the aspect of mezei that upholds as constitutional the indefinite detention of an arriving alien , in particular , is controversial and has been limited by some lower federal courts to apply only in cases that implicate national security .

the supreme court , however , has cited knauff and earlier exclusion cases for the proposition that excluded nonresident aliens do not have grounds to challenge their exclusion in federal court .

under current law , this proposition forms the basis for the doctrine of consular nonreviewability , which bars judicial review in almost all circumstances of the denial of visas to aliens abroad .

the general principle against judicial review of exclusion decisions applies with less force to executive decisions to exclude aliens arriving in the united states , even though the rule arose from cases about such aliens .

the general principles that govern reviewability of both of these two categories of exclusion decisions— ( 1 ) visa denials and other exclusion decisions concerning aliens located abroad ; and ( 2 ) decisions to deny entry to aliens arriving at u.s. borders or ports of entry—are discussed below .

even as applied to aliens abroad , the rule against nonresident alien challenges to denials of entry has a major limitation: the rule only clearly forecloses challenges brought by nonresident aliens themselves .

thus , if a u.s. citizen claims that the exclusion of an alien violated the u.s. citizen's constitutional rights , the rule against alien challenges does not apply with its full force .

cases that invoke this limitation account for the entirety of the supreme court's modern exclusion jurisprudence .

the court has not considered a nonresident alien's own challenge to a denial of entry in decades .

the question about the extent to which u.s. citizens can challenge an alien's exclusion , on the other hand , has occupied the court in four important cases since 1972: kleindienst v. mandel , fiallo v. bell , the splintered kerry v. din , and trump v. hawaii .

under the rule that these cases establish , the government need satisfy only a "highly constrained" judicial inquiry into whether the exclusion "had a justification independent of unconstitutional grounds" in order to prevail against an american citizen's claim that the exclusion violated his or her constitutional rights .

this is an extremely limited level of judicial review under which the government has always prevailed before the supreme court .

the mandel line of cases embraces the broad view of congressional power over the admission and exclusion of aliens that the supreme court established in knauff and earlier precedent , although the cases do leave some uncertainty about the outer edges of the congressional power .

mandel and din appeared to take the absoluteness of congress's exclusion power as a given .

in din , justice kennedy grounded his conclusion—that a visa denial withstands constitutional attack so long as the government ties the exclusion to a statutory provision—on the premise that congress can impose whatever limitations it sees fit on alien entry .

in other words , because congress's limitations are valid per se , executive enforcement of those limitations is also valid .

mandel makes the same point , albeit mainly through omission .

recall that the case concerned application of an ina provision that rendered the belgian academic ineligible for a visa because he held communist political beliefs .

the court acknowledged that the statute triggered first amendment concerns by limiting , based on political belief , u.s. citizens' audience with foreign nationals .

but the court did not assess whether the statute violated the first amendment .

rather , the court accepted without significant analysis that congress had the power to impose such an idea - based entry limitation .

as a result , the mandel decision considered only the first amendment implications of the attorney general's refusal to waive mandel's communism - based ineligibility , not the statutory premise of the ineligibility .

the untested assumption underlying mandel and din —that congress's immigration power encompasses the power to exclude based on any criteria whatsoever , including political belief—raises a fundamental question about the nature of the plenary power .

often , the supreme court has described the power as one that triggers judicial deference , meaning that courts may conduct only a limited inquiry when considering the constitutionality of an exercise of the immigration power .

but the plenary power doctrine , as some scholars have noted , can be understood another way , one that perhaps makes more sense of mandel : the "plenary" refers to the scope of the power itself , in substance , and not to its immunity from judicial review .

the congressional power to admit or exclude aliens is so complete , this theory goes , as to override the constitutional limitations that typically constrain legislative action .

for example , the power overrides the first amendment principles that would invalidate legislation that expressly provides for unfavorable treatment based on political belief in almost any other context .

aspects of fiallo , however , arguably do not support this concept of a substantively limitless congressional power to regulate alien entry .

unlike mandel and din , which examined the executive's application and implementation of authority delegated by statute , fiallo squarely considered the constitutionality of a statute itself .

and while fiallo 's outcome ( upholding an immigration law that discriminated by gender and legitimacy ) aligns with the concept of an unbridled legislative power , the court's reasoning wavered between statements suggesting that the legislative power might have limits and statements describing the power as absolute .

the lack of clarity in the opinion seemed to stem from the awkwardness of applying mandel —which fashioned a rule for review of executive action ( the "facially legitimate and bona fide" test ) —in a case reviewing legislative action .

ultimately , the fiallo court cited the mandel test as an analogue but did not actually apply the test .

rather , the court upheld the statute at issue under something that looked like a version of rational basis review , one in which a hypothetical justification suffices to sustain the statute .

while extremely deferential , this version of rational basis review implies an underlying constitutional limitation against legislative unreasonableness , at least in theory .

in other words , an even - handed reading of fiallo suggests that statutes regulating the admission of aliens must at least be reasonable .

some scholars have argued that fiallo was incorrectly decided and that stricter constitutional scrutiny should apply to admission and exclusion laws that classify aliens by factors such as race , religion , and gender .

to date , this argument does not find support in supreme court precedent , particularly not after the court relied on fiallo in trump v. hawaii to describe the breadth of the political branches' exclusion power .

to be sure , the supreme court has made clear that congress cannot deny certain rights to aliens subject to criminal or deportation proceedings within the united states , and that the federal government cannot deny some procedural protections to lprs returning from brief trips from abroad .

but the court has never suggested that laws regulating the admission of non - lpr aliens trigger anything more than the deferential rational basis review that it applied to the gender - based immigration preferences statute at issue in fiallo .

in other words , the court has never called fiallo into question .

in one recent case , sessions v. morales - santana , the supreme court applied heightened constitutional scrutiny to strike down a derivative citizenship statute that , much like the statute in fiallo , used gender classifications .

however , the morales - santana court distinguished fiallo and the plenary power doctrine by noting that the statute before it concerned citizenship , not immigration .

accordingly , morales - santana does not appear to portend imminent reconsideration of fiallo .

the term after morales - santana , the court applied rational basis review in trump v. hawaii to an executive exclusion policy that was based on a statutory delegation of authority , suggesting that nothing more than rational basis review could apply to an exclusion statute itself .

to summarize , dicta in two of the exclusion cases that decided challenges to executive action , mandel and din , give the impression of a substantively absolute congressional power to control the entry of aliens .

but courts have generally interpreted fiallo , which concerned a direct challenge to a law regulating alien admission and exclusion , to mean that such laws must at least survive a review for reasonableness .

to date , the supreme court has not heeded calls by some scholars and litigants for more exacting review of laws regulating alien entry .

mandel , din , and trump v. hawaii trace the contours of the executive's exclusion power .

as described above , mandel 's "facially legitimate and bona fide reason" test governs claims that an exclusion decision or policy violates a u.s. citizen's constitutional rights .

the executive satisfies the test by identifying the statutory basis for the exclusion .

where the u.s. citizen challenger proffers extrinsic evidence that the executive acted with an unconstitutional purpose , it might be proper for a reviewing court to consider that evidence , but only as part of a rational basis inquiry under which the exclusion decision or policy must be upheld if "it can reasonably be understood to result from a justification independent of unconstitutional grounds. .

however , the cases do not resolve definitively at least three issues about the executive power .

these issues , discussed below , are ( 1 ) whether the executive possesses inherent exclusion power , as opposed to solely statutory - based power ; ( 2 ) the extent to which u.s. persons or entities may challenge an alien's exclusion on statutory grounds ; and ( 3 ) the extent to which the constitution limits the executive's application of broad delegations of congressional power to make exclusion determinations .

the supreme court has consistently reaffirmed that legislative and executive decisions to exclude aliens abroad are "'largely immune from judicial control.' .

the doctrine of consular nonreviewability bars judicial review of decisions to exclude aliens abroad in most circumstances .

and even where such decisions burden the constitutional rights of u.s. citizens , the mandel line of cases stands for the proposition that federal courts must grant the decisions a level of deference so substantial that it mostly assures government victory over any challenges .

notably , however , supreme court precedent mainly describes the deference due to executive exclusion decisions as an issue within congress's control .

the doctrine of consular nonreviewability and the mandel line of cases take their cue from legislative inaction: because congress has not said that courts may review executive decisions to exclude aliens abroad , courts mostly do not conduct such review or ( where constitutional claims of u.s. citizens are at stake ) conduct only an extremely limited form of review .

ultimately , the cases indicate that congress has authority to expand review through affirmative legislation .

