whether many provisions of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( fd&c act ) apply to a particular drug product turns in part on the novelty of the "active ingredient" of the drug in question .

in particular , the food and drug administration ( fda ) must assess the novelty of the active ingredient in a new drug , comparing it to a previously approved drug's active ingredient to determine whether the new drug qualifies for the five - year "new chemical entity" ( nce ) exclusivity .

fda generally cannot accept new drug applications or abbreviated new drug applications that refer to a drug with nce exclusivity ( i.e. , rely on its clinical data and fda's approval of the drug ) for five years .

companies that receive approval for drugs with new active ingredients generally enjoy a competitive advantage in the market while the exclusivity is in effect until generic drugs enter the market .

given how expensive it can be to bring a new drug to market , when congress passed the hatch - waxman amendments in 1984 to allow an abbreviated pathway for approval of generic drugs , it also created nce exclusivity to reward innovators of new pharmaceutical products with an opportunity to recoup their investment .

to determine whether fd&c act provisions that depend in part on the drug's "active ingredient" apply , fda must evaluate the "active ingredient ( s ) " of both the drug under review and any previously approved drug that may contain the same active ingredient .

this process can be technically quite complicated .

for instance , compounds in a final drug product may convert to other compounds through chemical reactions inside the body before arriving at the site of the therapeutic effect , and related but distinct drug molecules may be clinically indistinguishable or convert into the same pharmacologically or physiologically active component inside the body .

this phenomenon raises the question of which molecule—the one existing before or after ingestion—should be the relevant molecule for purposes of determining active ingredient .

alternatively , two drug molecules with the same core compound may have different compounds appended to them by either covalent ( i.e. , shared electrons ) or noncovalent ( i.e. , no shared electrons ) bonds .

for example , replacing a hydrogen atom in an acid molecule with "a metal or its equivalent" forms a salt , whereas replacing the hydrogen atom with "an organic radical" forms an ester .

these derivatives may or may not vary from each other in clinically significant ways , raising the question of which derivative ( s ) , if any , should be considered as the same active ingredient as the core or base molecule .

generally , a more expansive interpretation of the phrase "active ingredient," that is , one that considers more types of derivatives to be the same active ingredient , reduces the number of drugs eligible for nce regulatory exclusivity by expanding the drug ingredients considered previously approved , which , in turn , allows for earlier introduction of generic versions of those drugs .

as discussed in more detail below , historically , for purposes of the exclusivity provisions , fda has interpreted "active ingredient," as the term appears in statute , to mean "active moiety," as defined by fda regulations .

fda generally defines active moiety as the core molecule or ion of a drug ( i.e. , the drug molecule without certain appendages ) that is "responsible for the physiological or pharmacological action of a drug substance. .

fda's interpretation has generated disputes between fda and pharmaceutical companies , as fda's approach tends to exclude some drugs from being afforded five - year nce exclusivity under the fd&c act .

in 2015 , a federal district court rejected fda's interpretation as inconsistent with the statutory language , though it did not explicitly invalidate fda's regulations .

this report discusses fda's interpretation of the fd&c act as referring to active moieties , judicial review of fda's interpretation , and how fda's rationale has changed over time .

in the 116th congress , legislation has been introduced that would generally codify fda's current approach to evaluating nce exclusivity and extend that approach to other provisions under the fd&c act that include the phrase "active ingredient ( including any ester or salt of the active ingredient ) . .

multiple provisions of the fd&c act use the phrase "active ingredient ( including any ester or salt of the active ingredient ) . .

among them are a provision for five - year exclusivity to drugs approved under a new drug application ( nda ) with active ingredients that fda has not previously approved , a provision for three - year exclusivity for drugs with the same active ingredient as previously approved drugs that required additional clinical studies for approval due to other changes , and provisions authorizing priority review vouchers for certain types of drugs .

in the context of the five - year - exclusivity , which fda has coined "new chemical entity" or nce exclusivity , fda interprets the term "active ingredient" to mean "active moiety. .

fda reasons that this definition , which allows a wider range of molecules to be considered previously approved , is warranted in the new drug context to encourage innovation by ensuring that a new drug is truly innovative .

this interpretation of "active ingredient" in the nce exclusivity context has been the subject of a decades - long debate .

the statutory provision on nce exclusivity states , in relevant part , if an application submitted under subsection ( b ) of this section for a drug , no active ingredient ( including any ester or salt of the active ingredient ) of which has been approved in any other application under subsection ( b ) of this section , is approved .

 .

 .

no application may be submitted under this subsection which refers to the drug for which the subsection ( b ) application was submitted before the expiration of five years from the date of approval of the application under subsection ( b ) of this section .

 .

 .

 .

disputes over how fda should interpret this provision have centered on the meaning of the phrase "active ingredient ( including any ester or salt of the active ingredient ) . .

the fd&c act does not define the term "active ingredient. .

rather than define "active ingredient" for purposes of the exclusivity provisions , fda examines the relevant drugs' active moieties .

specifically , fda defines nce exclusivity in its regulations as "a drug that contains no active moiety that has been approved by fda in any other application submitted under section 505 ( b ) of the act. .

the various other exclusivity regulations also refer to active moieties .

fda defines "active moiety" in its regulations as follows: active moiety is the molecule or ion , excluding those appended portions of the molecule that cause the drug to be an ester , salt ( including a salt with hydrogen or coordination bonds ) , or other noncovalent derivative ( such as a complex , chelate , or clathrate ) of the molecule , responsible for the physiological or pharmacological action of the drug substance .

as one court put it , "[f]or salts , esters , and noncovalent derivatives , a molecule's 'active moiety' can be thought of as its core ; salt , ester and noncovalent derivative versions of the same basic molecule have different appendages , but they share the same active moiety. .

put another way , because these specified derivatives would be considered to have the same "active moiety," if fda approves a drug containing any one of the specified derivatives as the active ingredient , a later approved drug containing another form of a specified derivative or even the core molecule would not be entitled to nce exclusivity .

for instance , if drug a contains as its active ingredient a salt , ester , or other noncovalent derivative of a molecule that fda previously approved as part of drug b , drug a would not be entitled to nce exclusivity because fda had previously approved that active moiety .

similarly , if drug b contains as its active ingredient a salt derivative of a molecule , and drug a contains that same molecule or an ester derivative of that molecule and is approved after drug b , drug a would not be entitled to nce exclusivity .

in contrast , if drug a contained as its active ingredient a non - ester covalent derivative of a molecule that fda previously approved in drug b , drug a could be considered to have a new active moiety and be eligible for nce exclusivity if other relevant conditions are met .

if a drug molecule is converted to a different but related compound after ingestion , the relevant molecule for determining active moiety is the compound in the final drug product before the drug is ingested .

in the nce exclusivity context , fda's interpretation of "active ingredient" as "active moiety," as well as its definition of "active moiety," have both been subject to dispute .

challenges to fda's approach to nce exclusivity have generally addressed two questions: 1 .

whether fda may permissibly interpret the phrase "no active ingredient ( including any ester or salt of the active ingredient ) of which has been approved" as "a drug that contains no active moiety that has been approved. .

2 .

whether fda has correctly defined "active moiety," including whether fda may permissibly deny exclusivity for—in addition to "salts and esters," which appear in the statute—other noncovalent derivatives of the underlying drug molecule .

against this backdrop of decades of complex litigation over fda's interpretation of active ingredient , three bills have been introduced in the 116th congress that address this issue .

each proposed legislation would generally ( 1 ) codify fda's interpretation that eligibility for nce exclusivity should be based on the drug's active moiety and ( 2 ) incorporate fda's definition of active moiety by reference .

specifically , the proposed legislation would do so by replacing the entire phrase "active ingredient ( including any ester or salt of the active ingredient ) " with "active moiety ( as defined by the secretary in section 314.3 of title 21 , code of federal regulations ( or any successor regulations ) ) " wherever it is found , except for a few provisions that expired in 1984 .

this change would be made to several fd&c act provisions , including the nce exclusivity provision , three - year exclusivity for other changes , and provisions providing priority review vouchers for tropical disease treatments , rare pediatric disease treatments , and countermeasures for agents that threaten national security .

adopting this interpretation would resolve certain legal uncertainties under current case law .

in amarin pharmaceuticals v. fda , the court rejected fda's interpretation but did not explicitly invalidate fda's regulations .

though it left fda's interpretation in place , the court's decision left uncertain fda's ability to defend its interpretation going forward .

the proposed legislation would address those questions by adopting fda's interpretation .

the proposed legislation would also resolve the questions that have been raised as to whether fda's decision to include other noncovalent derivative forms of the molecule in its definition of active moiety , but not other covalent derivatives , accords with congressional intent and a justifiable distinction .

the proposed legislation would both adopt fda's current approach , by incorporating fda's current definition , and allow fda to modify its approach going forward as its understanding changed , by including any successor regulations .

in effect , the proposed legislation would commit the decision as to which molecules should be deemed effectively the same and therefore not innovative enough to merit nce exclusivity to fda's judgment .

