the federal tax treatment of the family is affected by several major structural elements of the income tax code applicable to all taxpayers: deductions such as the standard deduction , personal exemptions , and itemized deductions ; the marginal tax rate structure ( which varies by filing status ) ; the earned income credit and the child credit ; and the alternative minimum tax .

some of these provisions affect only high - income families and some only low - income families , but they are the tax code's fundamental structural features .

they lead to varying tax burdens on families depending on whether the family is headed by a married couple or a single individual , whether children are in the family , and the number of children if so .

the 2017 tax revision ( p.l .

115-97 , popularly known as the tax cuts and jobs act , or tcja ) changed many of these fundamental provisions , although those changes are scheduled to expire after 2025 .

this report examines these temporary changes and how they affect families .

the prior provisions ( and ones that will return absent legislative changes ) are discussed in a previous crs report , which also includes the historical development of family - related provisions and some of the justifications for differentiating across families , especially with respect to the number of children .

this report does not consider other , more narrowly focused tax code provisions , such as those that apply only to certain types of income ( eg , special treatment for certain types of capital income or self - employment income ) or particular additional benefits ( eg , benefits for the blind and elderly or for child care expenses ) .

the first section discusses the structural changes made in the tcja , and the following sections discuss equity issues and the marriage penalty .

taxes are determined by first subtracting deductions ( either the standard deduction or the sum of itemized deductions ) and personal exemptions ( for the taxpayer , their spouse [if married filing jointly] , and any dependents ) from income to arrive at taxable income .

then the marginal rate structure is applied to this measure of taxable income .

finally , tax credits are subtracted from this amount to determine tax liability .

two of the major credits claimed by families are the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) and the child tax credit .

the new law expanded the child credit for many taxpayers , although it did not change the earned income tax credit .

in addition to these provisions , the law changed the exemption levels for the alternative minimum tax ( a tax aimed at broadening the overall tax base and applying flat rates with a large fixed exemption ) , which is imposed if it is larger than the regular tax .

all amounts in this discussion are for 2018 , the year the tax changes were first implemented .

some amounts will change in the future as they are indexed for inflation .

the revision also changed the measure used to index for inflation to the chained consumer price index ( cpi ) rather than the basic cpi .

the chained cpi takes into account changes in the mix of spending , and because spending tends to increase for goods with smaller price increases , the chained cpi is smaller than the basic cpi .

for 2018 , it only affected the eitc ( in a minor way ) , as the other provisions ( such as standard deductions and the rate structure ) were stated explicitly in the tax revision .

the new income tax code ( as well as the income tax under prior law ) is progressive: as income increases and taxpayers have an increased ability to pay , tax rates rise .

studies generally suggest , however , that after taking all of the 2017 tax revision's provisions into account , higher - income groups tend to have the largest percentage increase in after - tax income .

hence , while still progressive , the new income tax is less progressive in comparison to the prior - law income tax .

in addition , as time goes on , the relative tax burden on low - income families is expected to increase .

this increase at the lower end of the income distribution is partially due to the new inflation indexing provision , which will reduce the earned income credit's value for low - income working families .

the increased tax burden also reflects the loss of health care subsidies due to the elimination of the penalty for not purchasing health insurance .

the decreased tax burdens ( relative to prior law ) for high - income individuals also reflect , in this distributional estimate , lower taxes' effects on capital income ( including lower corporate tax rates and the pass - through deduction for business income ) , which affect higher - income individuals , who own most of the capital .

because of the progressive rate structure , taxes can be affected by marriage , introducing either a penalty or a bonus when two individuals get married .

concerns about the marriage penalty reflect a reluctance to penalize marriage in a society that upholds such traditions .

as the tax law shifted in the past to reduce the marriage penalty , it also expanded marriage bonuses .

studies of this issue indicate that the tax system favors marriage , conferring significant bonuses on married couples ( or penalties on singles ) .

the new law retains many of the elements that affect marriage penalties and bonuses , including wider tax brackets for joint returns ( which eliminate marriage penalties and produce bonuses for those without children in the middle - income brackets ) , the more generous rate structure for head of household ( which affects penalties and bonuses for families with children ) , and marriage penalties embedded in the alternative minimum tax .

under the new rate structure , the income levels at which marriage penalties are precluded because of the doubling of the brackets are higher .

at the same time , the law also introduces a new potential source of a marriage penalty at high income levels by retaining the same dollar cap on state and local tax deductions for both joint and single returns .

these choices have consequences not only for incentives but for equitable treatment of singles and married couples .

as shown above in table 6 and table 7 , in the middle - income brackets , where the marriage penalty was largely eliminated , singles with the same ability to pay are subject to higher taxes than married couples .

singles benefit at lower income levels because their lower required incomes do not phase them out of the earned income credit .

in contrast , lower - income married taxpayers are more likely to be subject to marriage penalties because of the eitc's structure .

under prior law , at very high incomes , married couples may have paid a larger share of their income because of marriage penalties that remained in the amt and the upper brackets of the rate structure , but these effects do not appear in any of the current - law examples , in part because the amt does not apply .

this section explores the treatment of married couples and singles in an additional dimension by assuming that singles live together and share the same economies of scale that married couples do .

these individuals could be roommates , but they could also be partners who differ from married couples only in that they are not legally married .

single individuals who live together in the same fashion as married couples have the same ability to pay with the same income .

however , remaining single can alter their tax liability , causing it to either rise or fall , depending on the split of income between the two individuals .

if one individual earns most of the income , tax burdens will be higher for two individuals who are not married than for a married couple with the same total income , because the standard deductions are smaller and the rate brackets narrower ( up to the 35% tax rate , tax brackets for singles are half those of joint returns ) .

if income is evenly split between the two individuals , there can be a benefit from remaining single .

married individuals have to combine their income , and the rate brackets for joint returns in the higher - income brackets , although wider than those for single individuals , are not twice as wide .

at all levels they are not twice as wide as for heads of household .

in addition , the earned income credit contains marriage penalties and bonuses .

the marriage penalty or bonus might , in the context of the measures of household ability to pay , also be described as a singles bonus or penalty .

in any case , in considering this issue's incentive and equity dimensions , these families' tax rates should be compared across family marital status at each income level .

table 8 and table 9 show the average effective tax rates for married couples and for unmarried couples with the same combined income , both where income is evenly split and where all income is received by one person .

in one case there is no child and in the other one child .

these income splits represent the extremes of the marriage penalty and the marriage bonus .

the same reference income classes and equivalency scales as in table 6 and table 7 are used .

note that uneven income splits in the case of a family with a child can yield different results depending on whether the individual with the income can claim the child and therefore receive the benefits of the head - of - household rate structure , the higher earned income credit , the dependency exemption , and the child credit .

if not , that individual files as a single .

the tables indicate that both marriage penalties and bonuses persist .

in the case of families without children , however , penalties do not exist in the middle - income ranges , only bonuses .

in this case , singles who live together and have uneven incomes would see their tax rates fall if they got married .

both bonuses and penalties exist at the lower income levels because of the earned income tax credit .

if income is evenly split , the phaseout ranges are not reached as quickly for singles because each of the partners has only half the income .

if all of the income is earned by one of the singles in the single partnership , phaseout of the credit still occurs and the individual also has a smaller standard deduction , and thus pays a higher tax .

the smaller deductions and narrower rate brackets also cause the higher tax rates through the middle - income brackets .

at very high income levels , marriage penalties can also occur .

the penalty is due to not doubling the rate brackets after the 12% bracket .

in addition , the dollar limit on the deduction of state and local taxes is the same for married couples and individual taxpayers , so that if two singles with high incomes and high state and local taxes marry , they can lose $10,000 in deductions .

at the same time , taxpayers tend not to be subject to the amt , which retains marriage penalties ( by having an exemption for joint returns that is less than twice that for single returns ) .

as compared to prior law , marriage penalties at higher income levels are mixed .

in some cases penalties are lower , presumably due to the extension of the reach of the double width of rate brackets for singles versus joint returns , as well as lower tax rates in general and the amt's more limited reach .

in some cases penalties are higher due to the state and local tax deduction limit .

matters are more complex for families with children .

table 8 and table 9 illustrate this effect for a family with one child .

at the lowest income level , and a 50 / 50 split , one of the singles files a single return with a very small negative rate because of the small earned income credit for those without children , whereas the other claims a child and has a much higher negative tax rate than a married couple because there is no phaseout of benefits .

the combination also involves a smaller child credit because it is not completely refundable .

the combined result is a lower benefit than that of a married couple , and thus there is a marriage bonus .

this income split eventually leads to a marriage penalty because of the favorable head - of - household standard deduction and rate structure , as well as the state and local tax deduction cap .

with one of the pair earning all of the income , the results depend on whether the partner with the income can claim the child .

if that person cannot , the tax burden is higher throughout the income scale , reflecting the loss of benefits from the child via credits and the rate structure .

if the person with the income can claim the child ( thus using the more favorable head - of - household schedule and receiving a child credit ) , joint returns are still favored ( except at the lowest income levels ) , but not by nearly as much .

which of these last two assumptions seems more likely depends on the circumstances .

when couples divorce , they typically move to different residences , and the most usual outcome is that the mother , who typically has lower earnings , has the child .

according to the census bureau , 83% of children who live with one parent live with their mother .

in that case , there would likely be a marriage bonus .

if the couple divorce but live together , presumably the higher - income spouse would claim the child .

however , if a couple never married and the child is only related to one parent , that person , more likely the mother and more likely to have low income , would claim the child .

if such a couple married and had low incomes , they could obtain the earned income credit , and a study of low - income families indicates that this latter effect , the bonus , is the eitc's most common effect .

which circumstances are more characteristic of the economy ? .

note first that , although people refer to the marriage penalty for a particular family situation or the aggregate size of the marriage penalty , it is really not possible , in many cases , to determine the size of the penalty or bonus .

the effect of the assignment of a child is demonstrated in table 8 and table 9 , but other features matter .

only when a married couple has only earned income , no dependent children , and no itemized deductions or other special characteristics , and only if it is assumed that their behavior would not have been different if their marital status had been different , can one actually measure the size of the marriage penalty or bonus .

there is no way to know which of the partners would have custody of the children and therefore be eligible for head - of - household status and the accompanying personal exemptions and child credits .

if the marriage bonus is viewed instead as a singles penalty on cohabitating partners , the share of the population affected is limited to less than 10% of households .

about a third of those have children .

cohabitating partners are more likely than roommates to fully enjoy the consumption of joint goods that would equate them to married couples .

the 2017 tax revision continued , and in some cases expanded , the favorable treatment of families with children in the lower and middle income levels on an ability - to - pay basis .

at the lowest incomes , this treatment was maintained largely due to the eitc's preexisting effects , although increasing the refundable child tax credit added to this favorable treatment .

more favorable treatment was increased and extended up through the income classes because of the increase in the child tax credit amount and the increase in the income level at which the credit is phased out .

at the highest income levels , rate changes tended to favor joint returns over singles and heads of household , largely due to the rate structure .

as was the case with prior law , marriage bonuses occur through most income brackets , but penalties can exist at the lower end of the income distribution , particularly for families with children in which the lower income earner has custody of children , due to the earned income credit and the child credit .

the rate structure continues to lead to a potential marriage penalty at high income levels .

the 2017 revisions also introduced a new provision that could contribute to the marriage penalty at high incomes: the $10,000 limit on itemized deductions for state and local taxes , which is the same amount for married and single individuals .

