congress has a long - standing interest in ensuring access to broadband internet service in rural areas .

federal subsidies underwritten by taxes and long - distance telephone subscriber fees have injected billions of dollars into rural broadband markets over a period of decades—mostly on the supply side—in the form of grants , loans , and direct support to broadband providers .

as of 2019 , more than 20 million americans still lacked broadband access .

according to many stakeholders and policy experts , federal spending on broadband expansion has not adequately accounted for local conditions in rural areas that depress effective demand for broadband .

lower demand in rural areas may discourage private - sector investment and reduce the effectiveness of federal efforts to expand and improve broadband service .

according to the authors of a 2015 study on rural broadband expansion , "while the vast majority of federal programs dealing with broadband have focused on the provision of infrastructure , many economists and others involved in the debate have argued that the emphasis should instead be on increasing demand in the areas that are lagging behind. .

the study found that rural households' broadband adoption rate lagged that of urban households by 12-13 percentage points and that while 38% of the rural - urban "broadband gap" in 2011 was attributable to lack of necessary infrastructure , 52% was attributable to lower adoption rates .

"implicit in many supply - side arguments is an assumption that demand - side issues will resolve themselves once there is ample supply of cheap and ultra - fast broadband," wrote the directors of the advanced communications law & policy institute ( aclp ) in a public comment to the commerce department's broadband opportunity council in 2015 .

"though appealing , this reductive cause‐and‐effect has been questioned by social scientists , researchers , practitioners , and others who have worked to identify and better understand the complex mechanics associated with broadband adoption across key demographics and in key sectors. .

the geographic and demographic distribution of rural broadband demand is uneven .

there is unmet demand in some rural areas .

in others , even where there is access , that may not translate into widespread adoption .

observers cite a range of factors .

on average , rural areas are less wealthy than urbanized areas , and have older populations with lower educational attainment—factors which negatively correlate with demand for broadband service .

related barriers to adoption , such as lower perceived value , affordability , computer ownership , and computer literacy , have persisted over many years .

rural areas with relatively favorable geography and demographics may attract significant investment in broadband service , but even subsidies may fail to spur buildout in less - attractive rural markets .

this report complements separate crs analyses of major federal subsidy programs on the supply side of the market by providing an analysis of demand - side issues at the nexus of infrastructure buildout and adoption .

it focuses exclusively on demand for fixed broadband among rural households and small businesses .

it does not address the role of schools , healthcare facilities , public libraries , and other "community anchor institutions" as end users of broadband .

however , it does include discussion of the role schools and libraries play as providers of broadband service and training to rural residents who may lack home access to the internet , and how this may affect overall household adoption behavior .

it also includes discussion of broadband - enabled services , such as telemedicine and precision agriculture , which may incentivize more rural households and small businesses to adopt broadband service .

the report begins with a discussion of the rural broadband market—specifically , the characteristics of demand in rural households and small businesses , and how these affect private - sector infrastructure investments .

it then provides a survey of federal broadband programs and policies designed to spur broadband buildout and adoption , with a discussion of how demand - side issues may impede achievement of these goals .

it concludes with a discussion of selected options for congress .

according to the u.s. census bureau , 60 million americans , or 19.3% of the total population , live in rural areas , defined as "all population , housing , and territory not included within an urbanized area or urban cluster. .

as of 2010 , urbanized areas and urban clusters occupied about 3% of the u.s. land mass , yet contained more than 80% of the u.s. population .

as a result , fixed broadband network infrastructure , which largely relies on wireline connections to the physical addresses of subscribers , is geographically concentrated .

urban areas have benefited from this concentration , especially areas with favorable geographic locations and economic conditions .

for example , the city of huntington beach , ca , charges broadband providers rent for access to its utility poles—$2,000 per pole per year—and leases access to city - owned fiber - optic cable ( fiber ) infrastructure .

"we continue to have a lot of carriers wanting to site on our poles in our downtown area which is next to the beach," a city official said during a 2019 webinar , noting that other , less favorably located cities had not been able to duplicate huntington beach's development model .

"[an] inland city is not going to get what we get here on the coast. .

in contrast , in many rural areas , the cost of providing broadband service may approach—or even exceed—the predicted return on investment .

broadband providers may not be willing to serve these areas without support from direct government subsidies , grants , or loans .

local conditions in rural areas vary widely , though .

some rural markets may be relatively attractive on commercial terms , because of unique characteristics such as the presence of post - secondary educational institutions or tourism attractions , relatively high levels of economic development and educational attainment , favorable demographics , or proximity to urban areas .

other rural markets that lack these characteristics are likely to be less commercially attractive .

long - term demographic trends suggest a growing bifurcation of the rural broadband market .

according to a 2018 u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) analysis , rural areas have witnessed "declining unemployment , rising incomes , and declining poverty," as well as more favorable net migration rates since 2013 .

however , the analysis also found that "people moving to rural areas tend to persistently favor more densely settled rural areas with attractive scenic qualities , or those near large cities .

fewer are moving to sparsely settled , less scenic , and more remote locations , which compounds economic development challenges in those areas. .

for reasons that will be explained in more detail below , household and small business demand for broadband service is likely to be impacted in rural areas by demographic trends , geography , and economic context .

as a result , these factors affect the infrastructure investment behavior of broadband providers , raising policy questions about the appropriate level of federal assistance and how it can be distributed most effectively and efficiently .

the next three sections of this report discuss the adoption of broadband service by rural households and rural small businesses and the implications of market demand for private - sector investment in rural broadband infrastructure .

federal programs and policies play a significant role in the development of rural broadband markets , given their often - challenging economics .

in 2018 , usda and the fcc spent a combined $9.1 billion on broadband programs , largely in rural areas ( see figure 1 ) .

the following four sections discuss the major usda and fcc broadband programs , rural considerations for the fcc's broadband speed benchmarks , demand factors in awarding federal funds for broadband infrastructure buildout , and selected federal broadband adoption programs that may influence rural demand .

promoting universal access to broadband has generally enjoyed wide bipartisan support in congress .

despite federal support for broadband infrastructure buildout , however , adoption continues to lag in rural areas , even where the infrastructure exists and service is available .

in turn , low adoption rates may lower the private sector's incentive to invest in nascent rural broadband markets , despite federal subsidies for high - cost service .

this section highlights selected options congress could consider as it addresses rural broadband demand issues .

in the lifeline program , intended to address broadband affordability for low - income households , fcc changes to provider eligibility rules and minimum service requirements have prompted considerable debate ( see " end - user subsidies " ) .

the fcc has wide latitude to set program rules , subject to the established rulemaking process .

congress might continue its oversight of that rulemaking process or might choose in some cases to direct fcc actions through legislation .

issues of potential interest include beneficiary eligibility requirements , beneficiary eligibility verification procedures , the level of the benefit ( currently $9.25 per household , with additional benefits for beneficiaries who reside on tribal lands ) , isp eligibility requirements , isp minimum service requirements , and how oversight authorities are shared between the federal government and the states .

in addition to the direct cost of broadband connectivity , cost barriers may reduce the attractiveness of broadband - related services that might otherwise stimulate rural broadband demand .

for example , access to affordable health insurance may be one factor affecting the affordability , and hence adoption , of telehealth services ( see " telemedicine and telehealth " ) .

similarly , the upfront costs of sensors and other technology may be slowing the adoption of precision agriculture practices ( see " precision agriculture " ) .

congress might consider mandating further research on the extent to which these factors influence broadband demand , and how such barriers could be overcome .

with the exception of btop , most federal support for broadband - related education and outreach activities has been through housing and education grant programs that include internet and computer skills among numerous other eligible funding categories ( see " outreach and education programs " ) .

grant recipients typically expend the majority of funds on the non - broadband - related categories , which may be considered more central to housing development and education goals .

congress might consider whether a focused grant program or programs specifically designated for support of broadband - enabled applications would be more effective , and if so , how lessons from btop might be applied to program design and implementation .

in addition to general internet and computer skills , congress might consider including broadband - enabled applications in such an education and outreach program .

rural adoption of precision agriculture practices may be stymied if the benefits are not fully understood or if familiarity with the technology is lacking .

rural small businesses often do not make full use of broadband technology , even when adequate connectivity is available ( see " valuation of broadband service " ) .

even farmers and small rural business owners who can afford broadband service might benefit from education on the use of web - based applications to improve their operations or on how to calculate long - term benefits more accurately .

rural use of telehealth services might increase if potential users were more aware of the health and convenience benefits offered by emerging applications .

the rus and usf programs that support broadband infrastructure buildout ( see " major usda and fcc broadband programs " ) rely on private - sector broadband providers for on - the - ground deployment .

therefore , the conditions of federal support need to be sufficiently attractive in business terms to elicit participation from the private sector .

at the same time , taxpayer or ratepayer value - for - money is also a policy concern that becomes especially salient if wide scale broadband adoption does not follow subsidized buildout .

under current rus program rules , award recipients must demonstrate the economic viability of proposed projects .

however , scoring criteria heavily favor applicants proposing to build out infrastructure in the most remote , underserved areas , which are least likely to present a strong business case .

some in congress have expressed concern about rus loan subscription rates ( see " federal programs' consideration of market demand when awarding funds for broadband infrastructure buildout " ) .

through legislation or enhanced oversight of rus program rules , congress might seek to change end - user subsidy programs to improve the business case for buildout projects , or to adjust program rules in other ways to mitigate disincentives for investment .

under current usf program rules , participating broadband providers have limited responsibility to develop the demand side of local broadband markets .

they are only responsible for ensuring availability of service at a given speed and latency benchmark , and advertising it within a designated service area .

there is no other requirement for broadband providers to develop their subscriber base or otherwise promote adoption .

the fcc included requests for comments on this issue in its 2019 proposal for the rdof program .

congress might consider legislation or oversight to effect changes in program rules that would incentivize isp investments in broadband adoption .

for example , under current fcc rules , the term of support for high cost program subsidies is 10 years ; congress might consider directing the fcc to lengthen or shorten this term to adjust isp business incentives .

finally , broadband speed benchmarks and other service quality metrics are frequently debated as part of the congressionally mandated requirement for the fcc to assess deployment of communications technology under section 706 of the telecommunications act ( see " fcc service benchmarks and market demand for higher speeds " ) .

higher service quality requirements may boost american technological leadership and ensure that citizens can use high - bandwidth internet applications , but they may also impose costs on broadband providers and lead to higher costs for customers—pricing some of them out of the market .

congress may consider the costs and benefits of proposed service requirements , and how such requirements might affect rural broadband adoption , when exercising oversight of the fcc's section 706 responsibilities .

