medicaid is a joint federal - state program that finances the delivery of primary and acute medical services , as well as long - term services and supports ( ltss ) , to a diverse low - income population .

this population includes children , pregnant women , adults , individuals with disabilities , and those aged 65 and older .

medicaid is authorized under title xix of the social security act ( ssa ) and financed by the federal government and the states .

federal medicaid spending is an entitlement , with total expenditures dependent on state policy decisions and enrollees' use of services .

participation in medicaid is voluntary , though all states , the district of columbia , and the territories choose to participate .

states design and administer their medicaid programs based on broad federal guidelines .

the federal government requires states to cover certain mandatory populations and services but allows states to cover other optional populations and services .

in addition , several waiver and demonstration authorities in statute allow states to operate their medicaid programs outside of certain federal rules .

due to this flexibility , factors such as eligibility , covered benefits , and provider payment rates vary substantially by state .

at the federal level , the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) is responsible for administering medicaid .

this report focuses on medicaid eligibility for adults aged 65 and older—referred to as older adults—and adults under the age of 65 and children with disabilities .

specifically , this report examines the statutory provisions that provide medicaid eligibility for individuals who are considered to be aged , blind , or disabled .

these populations are of interest to lawmakers primarily for two reasons: ( 1 ) they are more likely to need ltss , and ( 2 ) they account for a large share of medicaid spending .

older adults and individuals with disabilities are more likely to need ltss due to physical limitations , cognitive impairment , or chronic disabling health conditions .

those with ltss needs are a diverse group that range in age from very young children to older adults .

disabilities can be wide ranging , including , for example , physical limitations , visual impairments ( i.e. , blindness ) , intellectual or developmental disabilities , cognitive and behavioral health conditions , traumatic brain injuries , and hiv / aids .

federal policymakers have an interest in understanding medicaid eligibility as the program is an important source of coverage for those with long - term care needs .

medicaid provides ltss coverage ( eg , extended nursing facility care , personal care , and other home and community - based services ) that is generally not covered by medicare or major health insurance plans offered in the private market .

as the largest single payer of ltss in the united states , medicaid plays a key role in providing ltss coverage .

in 2016 , total medicaid ltss spending ( federal and state combined ) was $154 billion , accounting for 42% of all ltss expenditures nationally .

because many older adults and individuals with disabilities use ltss , they tend to account for a disproportionate share of medicaid spending , which has implications for both federal and state budgets .

in fy2016 , medicaid provided health care services to about 71 million enrollees , with expenditures of approximately $538 billion ( federal and state combined ) .

although older adults and individuals with disabilities made up only about one - quarter ( 23% ) of all medicaid enrollees that year , they accounted for more than half ( 54% ) of all benefit spending .

among all medicaid enrollees , 30% of medicaid spending in fy2013 was on ltss , compared with 62% among older adults ( i.e. , aged ) and 36% among individuals with disabilities ( i.e. , disabled ) .

the next section of this report provides an overview of medicaid eligibility , followed by a summary of eligibility pathways for older adults and individuals with disabilities .

the report then describes specific information about each eligibility pathway for older adults and individuals with disabilities .

the appendix includes summary tables with statutory references and general financial eligibility criteria for each of the eligibility pathways described in this report .

eligibility for medicaid is determined by both federal and state law , whereby states set individual eligibility criteria within federal minimum standards .

this arrangement results in substantial variability in medicaid eligibility across states .

therefore , the ways that individuals can qualify for medicaid reflect state policy decisions within broad federal requirements .

in general , individuals qualify for medicaid coverage by meeting the requirements of a specific eligibility pathway ( sometimes referred to as an eligibility group ) offered by the state .

some eligibility groups are mandatory , meaning all states with a medicaid program must cover them .

other eligibility groups are optional , meaning states may elect to cover them .

within this framework , states may have some discretion to determine certain eligibility criteria for both mandatory and optional eligibility groups .

in addition , states may apply to cms for a waiver of federal law to expand health coverage beyond the mandatory and optional eligibility groups specified in federal statute .

ssi - related pathways consist of mandatory and optional eligibility groups that meet the general requirements of the ssi program .

these groups include aged , blind , or disabled individuals who are ssi eligible , deemed to be ssi eligible , or would be ssi eligible if not for a certain ssi program rule .

this report organizes the ssi - related pathways into three subgroups , each of which contains multiple eligibility pathways: ( 1 ) ssi recipients , ( 2 ) special groups of former ssi recipients , and ( 3 ) other ssi - related groups .

states may extend medicaid coverage to older adults and individuals with disabilities who have higher levels of income or resources than those permitted by ssi program rules under optional aged , blind , or disabled ( abd ) eligibility pathways .

in addition , some optional abd eligibility pathways allow states to choose their own methodology for counting income and resources ; others permit states to use less restrictive income - or resource - counting methodologies compared with ssi rules .

as previously mentioned , certain optional eligibility pathways for older adults and individuals with disabilities ( eg , special income level , special home and community - based waiver group , home and community - based services [hcbs] state plan , and katie beckett ) establish eligibility to medicaid , in general , along with medicaid - covered ltss .

in addition , medicaid gives states the option to extend eligibility to individuals who "spend down" or deplete their income on medical expenses , including ltss , to specified levels .

therefore , some individuals with higher levels of income and resources compared with those permitted under ssi rules may be medicaid - eligible .

this section describes the following optional medicaid eligibility pathways for abd individuals: ( 1 ) poverty - related ; ( 2 ) special income level ; ( 3 ) special home and community - based services waiver group ; ( 4 ) home and community - based services state plan option ; ( 5 ) katie beckett ; ( 6 ) buy - in groups ; and ( 7 ) medically needy .

enacted under the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1986 ( obra '86 ; p.l .

99-509 ) , the optional poverty - related eligibility pathway allows states to cover aged and / or disabled individuals who have incomes that are higher than ssi standards , with family income up to 100% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) , provided that the state also covers certain eligible pregnant women and children .

aged individuals are defined as being 65 years old and older , and disabled individuals must meet the ssi program's applicable definition of disability .

states may employ a reasonable definition of a "family" for purposes of the individual's countable income .

in general , states must use ssi rules in determining what income is counted or not counted .

an individual's resources cannot exceed the ssi resource standard with ssi rules used in determining countable resources .

however , states may use section 1902 ( r ) ( 2 ) of the ssa to disregard additional countable income or resources .

in 2018 , 24 states and the district of columbia ( dc ) offered the optional poverty - related eligibility pathway .

seventeen states and dc had an income standard that was set at 100% of the fpl under the poverty - related pathway ; seven maintained a more restrictive income standard than 100% of the fpl .

for example , florida's standard was 88% of the fpl , and idaho's was 77% of the fpl .

the optional special income level eligibility pathway allows states to establish a higher income standard for medicaid coverage of nursing facility services and other institutional services , sometimes referred to as the special income rule , or the "the 300% rule. .

to be eligible for medicaid through this pathway , individuals must require care provided by a nursing facility or other medical institution for no less than 30 consecutive days , and have an income standard that does not exceed a specified level—no greater than 300% of the ssi fbr ( i.e. , the maximum ssi payment ) , which is approximately 222% of the fpl .

only the applicant's income ( i.e. , no income from spouses ) is counted , and all income sources are counted in determining eligibility ; there are no income disregards or deductions .

for individuals seeking eligibility based on being aged 65 and older , or having blindness , or disability , the ssi resource standard and resource - counting methodology are used to determine eligibility .

states may also use section 1902 ( r ) ( 2 ) of the ssa to disregard additional income or resources .

under the special income level pathway , eligibility starts on the first of the 30 days that the individual resides in an institution .

thus , medicaid can cover all of the care an individual receives in a nursing facility .

in 2018 , 42 states and the district of columbia used the special income level to enable persons to qualify for medicaid coverage of institutional care .

the special home and community - based services ( hcbs ) waiver group eligibility pathway allows states to extend medicaid eligibility to individuals receiving hcbs under a waiver program who require the level of care provided by a nursing facility or other medical institution .

this eligibility pathway is sometimes referred to as the "217 group" in reference to the specific regulatory section for this group , 42 c.f.r .

section 435.217 .

states use the highest income and resource standard of a separate eligibility group covered by the state plan under which an individual would otherwise qualify if institutionalized .

for example , states that offer the special income level pathway described above can extend eligibility to waiver program participants with income up to 300% of the ssi fbr .

states must use the income - and resource - counting methodologies used to determine eligibility for this same eligibility group .

states may also apply section 1902 ( r ) ( 2 ) 's more liberal income - counting rules to this group .

states may establish an independent eligibility pathway into medicaid through the home and community - based services ( hcbs ) state plan option .

this option is made available by extending the required and optional medicaid state plan services , sometimes referred to as "traditional" medicaid services , to individuals who are also receiving a targeted package of hcbs state plan services .

in general , receipt of the medicaid hcbs state plan option is conditional on an individual having a need for long - term care ( i.e. , individuals must meet certain level - of - care criteria ) .

unlike section 1915 ( c ) hcbs waiver programs , which require that eligible individuals need the level of care provided in an institution ( eg , hospital or nursing facility ) , the hcbs state plan option delinks this requirement so that individuals with long - term care needs are not required to meet an institutional level of care need .

the hcbs state plan option was first enacted under the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( dra ; p.l .

109-171 ) and amended under the aca .

the income standard for the hcbs state plan option applies to individuals who have income no higher than 150% of the fpl .

for individuals who otherwise meet the requirements for an approved waiver program , the income standard can be no higher than 300% of the ssi fbr .

states may choose to cover individuals under either or both income standards .

generally , states use ssi income - counting methodologies ; however , states have some discretion to apply alternative methodologies , subject to the approval of the secretary of hhs .

there are no resource standards for this eligibility group , with the exception for those individuals who seek to establish eligibility based on an approved waiver program .

for these individuals , states must use the same income and resource standards and counting methodologies as applied to those individuals eligible under the applicable waiver program .

states may also use section 1902 ( r ) ( 2 ) of the ssa to disregard additional income or resources .

in 2018 , the most recent year for which data are available , 15 states and the district of columbia offered at least one section 1915 ( i ) hcbs state plan option ; however , only two states ( indiana and ohio ) used this state plan authority as an independent eligibility pathway to medicaid .

as another option , states may choose to provide hcbs state plan services to those who are eligible for medicaid under one of the state's existing medicaid eligibility pathways .

enacted under the tax equity and fiscal responsibility act of 1982 ( tefra ; p.l .

97-248 ) , the katie beckett optional pathway provides coverage to severely disabled children whose parents' income is otherwise too high for the child to qualify for medicaid ltss at home .

under the katie beckett pathway , states may extend medicaid coverage to disabled children who meet the applicable ssi definition of disability and who are age 18 or younger and live at home .

in addition , the state must determine that ( 1 ) the child requires the level of care provided in an institution , ( 2 ) it is appropriate to provide care outside the facility , and ( 3 ) the cost of care at home is no more than institutional care .

states electing this option are required to cover all disabled children who meet these criteria .

states must use ssi income and resources rules to determine eligibility ; however , only the child's income and resources , if any , are counted .

parents' income and resources are not counted .

a child's income cannot exceed the highest income standard used to determine eligibility for any separate group under which the individual would be eligible if institutionalized .

in general , states set income standards up to 300% of the ssi fbr , which is about 222% of the fpl .

states may not use section 1902 ( r ) ( 2 ) of the ssa to use more liberal income - or resource - counting methodologies .

in 2018 , the most recent year for which data are available , 24 states and the district of columbia offered the katie beckett pathway under their medicaid state plan .

there are several optional medicaid buy - in eligibility pathways for working individuals with disabilities or working families who have a child with a disability .

in general , individuals eligible under buy - in pathways would be eligible for medicaid except for the fact that their income is higher than the income standard allowed by the ssi program under section 1619 ( b ) of the ssa , which varies by state .

medicaid buy - in pathways are designed to allow disabled individuals to work and still retain their medicaid coverage , or to use their medicaid coverage to access wraparound services that are not covered under an employer - sponsored plan .

states can also impose premiums or other types of cost - sharing requirements on eligible individuals , which can be done on a sliding scale based on income .

the extent to which states impose premiums and cost - sharing varies by state .

medicaid buy - in pathways include the bba 97 eligibility group , the basic eligibility group , and the medical improvement group .

there is also a separate buy - in pathway for disabled children , called the family opportunity act .

in 2018 , the most recent year for which data are available , 44 states and the district of columbia chose to offer coverage through at least one buy - in pathway .

enacted under section 4733 of the balanced budget act of 1997 ( bba 97 ; p.l .

105-33 ) , this optional pathway is available to individuals with disabilities who work and have family income below 250% of the fpl , based on the size of the family .

individuals with disabilities must meet the ssi program's applicable definition of disability .

each state determines what constitutes a "family" for the purposes of this eligibility group .

family income is determined by applying the ssi income - counting methodology .

in addition to the family income requirement , the applicant's unearned income must be less than the ssi income standard .

all earned income is disregarded .

an individual's countable resources must be less than or equal to the ssi resource standard using the ssi resource - counting methodology .

however , states may use section 1902 ( r ) ( 2 ) of the ssa to disregard additional income or resources .

enacted under section 201 of the ticket to work and work incentives improvement act of 1999 ( twwiia ; p.l .

106-170 ) , this optional pathway is similar to the bba 97 eligibility group but is available to people with higher levels of income ( i.e. , above 250% of the fpl ) .

there are no federal income or resource standards for the basic eligibility group ; rather , states can determine the income and resource standards , including no standards , rather than using the ssi program's requirements .

however , if a state chooses to establish an income and / or resource standard , ssi income - and resource - counting methodologies apply .

states may use section 1902 ( r ) ( 2 ) of the ssa to disregard additional earned income above the ssi - earned - income disregard , including disregarding all earned income .

individuals with disabilities eligible under this pathway must be aged 16 to 64 and meet the ssi program's applicable definition of disability .

the medical improvement group pathway was also enacted under section 201 of twwiia .

for states to cover this eligibility group , they must also cover the twwiia basic eligibility group .

individuals eligible under the medical improvement group were previously eligible under the basic eligibility group but lost that eligibility because they were determined to have "medically improved," meaning they no longer meet the definition of disability under the ssi or social security disability insurance ( ssdi ) programs but continue to have a severe medically determinable impairment .

eligible individuals must be aged 16 to 64 , earn at least the federal minimum wage , and work at least 40 hours per month or be engaged in a work effort that meets certain criteria for hours of work , wages , or other measures , as defined by the state and approved by the secretary of hhs .

as with the basic eligibility group , states may determine the income and resource standards , including no standards , for this pathway .

similarly , states may use section 1902 ( r ) ( 2 ) of the ssa to disregard additional earned income above the ssi - earned - income disregard , including disregarding all earned income .

established under section 6061 of the dra , the family opportunity act ( foa ) optional pathway allows families with income up to 300% of the fpl to buy medicaid coverage for their disabled child aged 18 or younger ( states can exceed 300% of the fpl without federal matching funds for such coverage ) .

when determining a child's medicaid eligibility , states choosing this pathway use the ssi program's applicable definition of disability , as well as ssi's income - counting methodology for a family , based on its size .

there is no resource standard or applicable resource - counting methodology .

states may use section 1902 ( r ) ( 2 ) of the ssa to disregard additional earned income above the ssi - earned - income disregard .

states must require certain parents of eligible children under the foa optional coverage group to enroll in , and pay premiums for , family coverage through employer - sponsored insurance as a condition of continuing medicaid eligibility for the child .

the medically needy option is targeted toward individuals with high medical expenses who would otherwise be eligible for medicaid except that their income exceeds the income standards for other state - covered eligibility pathways .

individuals may qualify in one of two ways: either ( 1 ) their income or resources are at or below a state established standard , or ( 2 ) they spend down their income to the state - established standard by subtracting incurred medical expenses from their income .

for example , if an individual has $1,000 in monthly income and the state's income threshold is $600 , then the applicant would be required to incur $400 in out - of - pocket medical expenses during a state - determined budget period before being eligible for medicaid .

examples of medical expenses that may be deducted from income include medicare and other health insurance premiums , deductibles and coinsurance charges , and other medical expenses included in the state's medicaid plan or recognized under state law .

for individuals who spend down to medicaid eligibility , states select a specific time period for determining whether or not the applicant meets the spend - down obligation , often referred to as a "budget period," which generally ranges from one to six months .

states that choose to offer the medically needy option must cover pregnant women and children under the age of 18 , and may choose to extend eligibility to the aged , blind , or disabled , among other groups .

the medically needy option allows aged and disabled individuals who need expensive institutional ltss to qualify for medicaid nursing facility services .

however , nursing facility services are optional services that states may elect to cover for medically needy individuals .

under the medically needy option , states establish the income eligibility standard ; however , it may be no higher than 133⅓% of the state's afdc level in 1996 .

typically , the afdc level is lower than the income standard for ssi benefits .

for example , in 2015 the median medically needy income standard for an individual was $483 per month , or about 49% of the fpl .

states use the ssi income - counting methodology for aged , blind , or disabled individuals .

states also set the resource standards within certain federal requirements .

for aged , blind , or disabled individuals , the resource standard is generally the same as in the ssi program .

in general , states must use ssi's applicable definition of disability when determining eligibility for the disabled eligibility group .

in 2018 , 32 states and the district of columbia offered coverage to the medically needy .

 table a - 1 lists selected medicaid eligibility pathways that cover older adults and individuals with disabilities .

these eligibility pathways are organized into two broad coverage groups: ( 1 ) ssi - related pathways and ( 2 ) other abd pathways .

the table includes a brief description of each pathway , the age criterion for eligibility , whether the pathway is mandatory or optional , the social security act citation , and any applicable regulatory citations .

table a - 2 lists the income and resource standards , as well as the counting methodology , that applies to each standard for the selected medicaid eligibility pathways that cover older adults and individuals with disabilities .

in general , standards or limits on the amount of income and resources required for eligibility are expressed in relationship to the federal poverty level ( fpl ) or the ssi federal benefit rate ( fbr ) .

where applicable , the income standard is presented as a monthly dollar amount for an individual in 2019 .

for state - specific information on medicaid eligibility pathways for older adults and individuals with disabilities , see the following resources: m. musumeci , p. chidambaram , and m. o'malley watts , medicaid financial eligibility for seniors and people with disabilities: findings from a 50-state survey , the kaiser family foundation , june 2019 , https: / / www.kff.org / medicaid / issue - brief / medicaid - financial - eligibility - for - seniors - and - people - with - disabilities - findings - from - a - 50-state - survey / .

macpac , macstats: medicaid and chip data book , exhibit 37 , pp .

109-111 , december 2018 , https: / / www.macpac.gov / wp - content / uploads / 2018 / 12 / december - 2018-macstats - data - book.pdf .

