on june 5 , 2019 , the commissioners of the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) voted to adopt regulation best interest ( reg bi ) .

reg bi is arguably the centerpiece and most controversial part of a set of regulatory reforms related to financial professionals adopted by the sec on that day .

a new rule under the securities and exchange act of 1934 ( p.l .

73-291 ) , reg bi changes broker - dealers' obligations in their relationships with retail customers .

according to the sec , the regulation is meant to "enhance the broker - dealer standard of conduct beyond existing ... obligations [by] requiring broker - dealers ... to: ( 1 ) act in the best interest of the retail customer at the time the recommendation is made , without placing the financial or other interest of the broker - dealer ahead of the interests of the retail customer ; and ( 2 ) address [various broker - dealer] conflicts of interest [with those clients]. .

h.r .

3351 , the fy2020 financial services and general government appropriations bill as passed by the house included an amendment sponsored by house financial services committee chair maxine waters that would have forbidden the sec from using any of its congressional spending authority to implement , administer , enforce , or publicize the final rules and interpretations with respect to reg bi .

this language , however , was not included in h.r .

1865 / p.l .

116-94 , the further consolidated appropriations act , 2020 , as enacted .

this report examines reg bi in that it ( 1 ) provides background on the roles and the regulation of two types of financial professionals , broker - dealers and investment advisers ; ( 2 ) provides background on the obama administration department of labor's 2016 fiduciary rule for broker - dealers under the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa , p.l .

93-406 ) ; ( 3 ) describes the component obligations required to fulfill reg bi's best interest broker - dealer standard ; ( 4 ) examines state - based broker - dealer fiduciary regulatory and statutory developments ; ( 5 ) examines congressional concerns and actions regarding reg bi ; ( 6 ) presents some key supportive and critical perspectives on reg bi ; and ( 7 ) examines research with potential relevance to the debate over the potential costs and benefits of reg bi .

broker - dealer firms or their affiliated persons act as brokers when they execute securities trades for their clients and as dealers when they trade their own securities for their own benefit .

they are often discussed as a joint entity because most broker - dealers must register with the sec , and must generally be members of and comply with the rules and guidance of a self - regulatory organization ( sro ) , the financial industry regulatory authority ( finra , an sec - regulated nonprofit ) .

in addition , broker - dealer sales personnel ( called registered representatives ) register with their state securities regulator .

sec - registered broker - dealers are largely regulated under the securities exchange act of 1934 ( p.l .

73-291 ) and comprise a small set of large and medium - sized broker - dealers and thousands of smaller broker - dealers who compete in small niche or regional markets .

broker - dealers , or simply brokers , have significant range in the kinds of services they provide and generally divide into two groups , full - service and discount brokerage firms .

broker - dealers typically provide discrete , transaction - specific investment recommendations and are compensated via the commissions they receive for each individual transaction .

a broker - dealer's investment recommendations suite may include buying securities from or selling securities to retail customers on a principal basis or recommending the purchase of proprietary products .

in their investment recommendations , they are generally subject to what is known as the suitability standard , which requires them to "reasonably believe that a client recommendation is suitable given the client's investor profile. .

investment a dvisers are firms or persons who provide investment advice directly to their clients .

clients include individuals and institutional investors , such as mutual funds and hedge funds .

pursuant to the investment advisers act of 1940 ( iaa , which regulates key aspects of investment advisers ; p.l .

76-768 ) , advisers with more than $110 million in assets under management ( aum ) must register with the sec .

states generally register and regulate investment adviser firms with between $25 million and $110 million in aum .

investment advisers typically provide ongoing investment advice and services with respect to client portfolio management .

their compensation is generally determined by the client's account aum size , a fixed fee , or other arrangements , such as a fee - based compensation model .

although not expressly written in the iaa , court rulings and decisions from sec enforcement cases have helped establish the fiduciary standard , the prevailing standard of retail customer care for investment advisers .

under this standard , advisers are generally expected to serve the best interests of their clients and are required to subordinate their own interests to those of their clients .

ideally , advisers are also expected to either eliminate material conflicts of interest or be fully transparent to the client about the existence of such conflicts .

by contrast , broker - dealers are generally subject to a less demanding standard of client care that is found in finra's rule 2111 , the suitability standard .

triggered when a broker - dealer makes an investment recommendation , the "standard requires that a firm or associated person have a reasonable basis to believe a recommended transaction or investment strategy involving a security or securities is suitable for the customer.... [it] is based on the information obtained through reasonable diligence of the firm or associated person to ascertain the customer's investment profile. .

also , unlike investment advisers , brokers do not have an ongoing duty to monitor their clients' financial positions .

broker - dealers are , however , subject to a fiduciary standard ( 1 ) when they have control of a client's discretionary account ( meaning that they have a client's authority to buy and sell securities on the client's behalf ) generally , according to case law ; or ( 2 ) in a few states—california , missouri , south dakota , and south carolina—where state courts have reportedly "imposed an unambiguous fiduciary standard" on them .

the overall number of sec - registered broker - dealers fell from more than 6,000 in 2005 to fewer than 4,000 in 2018 , in contrast to an increase of sec - registered investment advisers from about 9,000 in 2005 to more than 13,000 in 2018 .

during the late 1980s and early 1990s , the landscape for the delivery of investment advice began to shift as broker - dealers increasingly offered financial advisory services somewhat akin to investment advisers , including investment and retirement planning .

the expansion was reportedly helped along by the brokers' reliance on the iaa's "solely incidental" exemption from compliance with the act , and the growth of dually registered firms ( i.e. , firms registered with finra and the sec as both broker - dealers and investment advisers ) .

compounding the potential retail customer perplexity over who is an investment adviser and who is a broker - dealer is the existence of "dozens of titles [in the broker world] , including generic titles , such as financial advisor and financial consultant , as well as advertisements that reportedly claim that 'we do it all.' .

as a consequence of these developments , various surveys report that retail customers are often confused over the distinctions between broker - dealers and advisers and the unique set of customer obligations attached to each of them .

this was encapsulated in an observation made in a rand corporation study: "[t]he industry is becoming increasingly complex , firms are becoming more heterogeneous and intertwined , and investors do not have a clear understanding of the different functions and fiduciary responsibilities of financial professionals. .

in 2009 , the u.s. department of the treasury issued a white paper on potential financial reforms in the wake of the financial crisis , financial regulatory reform — a new foundation: rebuilding financial supervision and regulation .

a section of the report observed that for many investors there was little if any difference in the way they perceived brokers and advisers .

it then argued that "retail customers repose the same degree of trust in their brokers as they do in investment advisers , but the legal responsibilities of the intermediaries may not be the same. .

the white paper then recommended the enactment of new legislation "requiring that broker - dealers who provide investment advice about securities to investors have the same fiduciary obligations as registered investment advisers. .

on the heels of the treasury report and driven in part by similar concerns regarding investor confusion over the roles of investment advisors and broker - dealers , section 913 of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act , p.l .

111-203 ) did a number of things in this area .

among them was granting the sec authority to impose fiduciary rules on broker - dealers subject to certain conditions and requiring the sec to study various aspects of financial professionals' standards of retail customer care .

among other questions , the study was asked to evaluate "whether there are legal or regulatory gaps , shortcomings , or overlaps in legal or regulatory standards in the protection of retail customers relating to the standards of care for providing personalized investment advice about securities to retail customers that should be addressed by rule or statute. .

released in 2011 , the staff study recommended that the sec bolster investor protection and reduce investor confusion regarding the differences between brokers and investment advisers .

the staff study then recommended "establishing a uniform fiduciary standard for investment advisers and broker - dealers when providing investment advice about securities to retail customers that is consistent with the standard that currently applies to investment advisers. .

after the study , then - sec chair mary schapiro noted that the sec staff had been tasked with considering the various ramifications of the recommended rulemaking .

no such rulemaking was proposed or adopted by the sec under chair schapiro or her successor , chair mary jo white , who in 2015 reportedly said that the agency should "implement a uniform fiduciary duty for broker - dealers and investment advisers where the standard is to act in the best interest of the investor. .

in april 2016 , the obama administration's department of labor ( dol ) adopted new rules under the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ; p.l .

93-406 ) .

previously , under erisa , securities brokers - dealers who provided services to retirement plans and who were not fiduciaries were generally subject to a suitability standard .

the 2016 dol rules represented a significant change from this .

under them , broker - dealers were generally deemed to be fiduciaries while providing recommendations to retirement plan participants .

major parts of the rules were not to be implemented until 2018 .

in making the case for the reform , the obama administration argued that the definition of investment advice needed to be revised given the changed nature of how americans were readying themselves for retirement after erisa's enactment in 1975 .

more specifically , the number of participants in traditional defined benefit ( db ) plans had significantly declined , whereas the number of participants in defined contribution ( dc ) plans , such as 401 ( k ) plans , had surged .

the administration argued that dc plan participants tend to confront more decision options , such as contribution amounts , investment allocations , rollovers , and withdrawals , than do db plan participants .

as such , it was argued that those in db plans may have greater need for investment assistance and advice subject to the more strenuous fiduciary standard .

supporters of dol's fiduciary rules , including investor advocates , argued that financial advisers ( including broker - dealers ) would no longer be able to direct clients to products that awarded them larger commissions at the client's expense .

detractors , including broker - dealers , financial planners , and various members of congress , stressed that the rules would increase the cost of retirement accounts and would curtail various investors' access to investment advice .

in february 2017 , president trump released a presidential memorandum ordering the labor department to reexamine the rule .

later , between april and november 2017 , dol ordered a series of delays for key parts of the rule that stretched until july 2019 .

on march 15 , 2018 , the fifth circuit court of appeals vacated the dol rules .

it ruled that dol had exceeded its statutory authority under erisa in writing the rules .

the decision formally halted implementation of the rules .

the adjudication was the result of a lawsuit brought by various business groups , including the u.s. chamber of commerce ( a major business trade group ) , the financial services roundtable ( a group that represents the nation's largest firms in banking , insurance , and investment services ) , and the securities industry and financial markets association ( sifma , a major trade group for broker - dealers , investment banks and asset managers ) .

the trump administration's dol has not challenged the fifth circuit's decision .

however , in fall 2018 , dol officially announced that it was "considering regulatory options in light of the fifth circuit opinion" and projected a september 2019 date for the potential new final rules .

in june 2019 , various dol officials , including then - dol secretary alexander acosta , reportedly said that the agency "was working with the sec to promulgate new rules. .

the same month , jeanne klinefelter wilson , deputy assistant secretary of the employee benefits security administration , the dol unit that oversees erisa , observed that although dol and the sec operate under different regulations , "the goal is to proceed under a raw common framework and propose department of labor rules [that] track as closely as possible with [the] sec's best - interest regulations. .

in july 2019 , president trump nominated eugene scalia to succeed alexander acosta as secretary of labor .

scalia was later confirmed for that post by the senate on september 26 , 2019 .

while a partner with the law firm gibson , dunn , & crutcher , scalia presented oral arguments on behalf of the plaintiffs in the aforementioned case in which the court vacated dol's fiduciary rule .

scalia has reportedly described the rule as "an immensely controversial and burdensome rule that really pushed the envelope of the agency's regulatory authority. .

the possibility has been raised that secretary scalia may have to recuse himself from involvement in the development of a fiduciary rule because of government ethics rules that guard against conflicts of interest by prohibiting officials from participating in issues they were involved with in the private sector .

on june 5 , 2019 , the sec commissioners separately approved parts of a package of final rules related to the duty of care financial professionals owe to retail investors .

the package contained reg bi ; the form customer relationship summary , a short - form disclosure that would identify key distinctions in the types of services offered by broker - dealers and investment advisers to their clients ; applicable legal standards , and potential conflicts of interest ; a clarification of the fiduciary duty owed by investment advisers to their clients under the investment advisers act ; and an interpretation of the "solely incidental" broker - dealer exclusion under the iaa aimed at clarifying when a broker - dealer's exercise of investment advisory activities redefines it as an investment adviser according to the iaa .

as observed earlier , in addition to its stated goal of requiring a broker - dealer to act in the best interest of a retail customer making recommendations , reg bi also seeks to address some remaining conflict - of - interest concerns .

reg bi will do so by requiring broker - dealers to "address conflicts of interest by establishing , maintaining , and enforcing policies and procedures reasonably designed to identify and fully and fairly disclose material facts about conflicts of interest , and in instances where [the sec] ... determined that disclosure is insufficient to reasonably address the conflict , to mitigate or , in certain instances , eliminate the conflict. .

according to sec officials , under reg bi , which the sec deliberately constructed to be a principles - based set of obligations rather than an expressly defined one , when retail investor clients receive and use a broker - dealer recommendation , the broker - dealer will be required to act in the retail customer's best interest without placing the broker - dealer's financial or other interests ahead of the retail customer's .

the sec interprets regulation bi to apply to recommendations of ( 1 ) "any securities transaction" ( purchase , sale , and exchange ) ; and ( 2 ) any "investment strategy" involving securities ( including account recommendations ) .

in addition to investors receiving broker - dealer recommendations for non - retirement - based investment accounts , reg bi also defines an applicable retail investor to include a "person receiving recommendations for his or her own retirement account , including but not limited to iras and individual accounts in workplace retirement plans , such as 401 ( k ) plans and other tax - favored retirement plans. .

it also interprets applicable broker - dealer "account recommendations to include … recommendations to roll over or transfer assets from one type of account to another ( eg , converting a workplace retirement plan account to an ira ) . .

broker - dealers will have until june 30 , 2020 , to comply with reg bi .

officials at finra have reportedly characterized reg bi as "sort of federalizing [broker - dealer] sales practice issues. .

noting that "most of the [broker - dealer] sales practice requirements historically have come from the finra rulebook," they indicated that finra will likely have to adjust its rules to align with reg bi .

broker - dealers are subject to state securities laws , known as "blue sky laws," state common laws , and judicial rulings from a state's highest court .

as discussed earlier , reports indicate that the common law derived from judicial rulings in four states—california , missouri , south dakota , and south carolina—imposes an "unambiguous fiduciary standard" for broker - dealers who do business in the states .

state common laws , however , lack the authority of state regulations and statutes .

under state blue sky laws , it is generally unlawful for any person to transact business in a state as a broker - dealer or agent unless they are registered with the state's securities regulatory authority .

during the past few years , several states have been attempting to impose either state statutory or regulatory requirements stipulating that state - registered broker - dealers have a fiduciary duty to their retail customers .

and as of september 2019 , new jersey , nevada , massachusetts , and new york reportedly had ongoing initiatives that would impose fiduciary requirements on broker - dealers in various stages of development .

of these state initiatives , only massachusetts' ( proposed in june 2019 ) began after the reg bi proposal and final rule .

explaining the rationale for the massachusetts initiative , secretary of the commonwealth william galvin blamed the inadequacies of reg bi: "we are proposing this standard , because the sec has failed to provide investors with the protections they need against conflicts of interest in the financial industry , with its recent 'regulation best interest' rule. .

barbara roper , director of investor protection at the consumer federation of america , a consumer advocacy group , has raised concerns that the state - based fiduciary laws could create loopholes to the detriment of broker - dealer customers .

she noted that the nevada initiative would not recognize insurance agents as financial planners , excluding them from the fiduciary regulation , which she argued could significantly disadvantage consumers within the state .

meanwhile , the brokerage industry and its trade groups have reportedly been lobbying states , such as new jersey , to halt state - based fiduciary actions .

their arguments are two - pronged: ( 1 ) states should reconsider their fiduciary efforts in light of reg bi ; and ( 2 ) if adopted , multiple state - based fiduciary broker - dealer standards will result in a messy patchwork of "laws that would be duplicative of , different than , and possibly in conflict with federal standards. .

jay clayton , the sec chair , has raised related concerns ; he identified "the potential patchwork of inconsistent state - level standards [as a development that he] and many others believe ... will increase costs , limit choice for retail investors and make oversight and enforcement more difficult. .

by contrast , sec commissioner robert jackson , who provided the sole dissenting vote on reg bi , has characterized the state fiduciary effort as a potentially encouraging fix to the perceived inadequacies of reg bi .

the national securities markets improvement act ( nsmia ; p.l .

104-290 ) is often cited as being in potential conflict with the state fiduciary proposals .

aimed at increasing financial services industry efficiency , the act expanded federal regulators' authority by taking some authority away from state securities regulators .

among other things , it also prohibited states from imposing additional or different books and records requirements on broker - dealers outside of federal requirements .

the provision is often cited as a potential source for a legal challenge in the event that any of the state broker - dealer fiduciary regimes are adopted .

before the sec's adoption of reg bi , sifma , a critic of the state fiduciary proposals , asked the agency to consider inserting language into reg bi noting that nsmia provides for federal preemption of such actions .

the final rule does not contain any such language , a position advocated by an association of state and provincial securities regulators , the north american securities administrators association .

instead , the commentary accompanying the rule notes that "the preemptive effect of regulation best interest on any state law governing the relationship between regulated entities and their customers would be determined in future judicial proceedings based on the specific language and effect of that state law. .

in september 2018 , 35 house and senate democratic members—including house committee on financial services then - ranking member maxine waters , who now chairs the committee , and senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs ranking member sherrod brown—sent a letter to sec chair jay clayton criticizing the then - proposed reg bi .

the letter stated the following: regulation bi falls woefully short… we urge the sec to revise its proposal consistent with [the dodd - frank law] and require brokers to abide by the same high standard that currently applies to investment advisers so that their advice to retail investors is provided without regard to their financial and other interests .

regulation bi for brokers and the sec's interpretation of the "fiduciary" obligation owed by investment advisers fail to clearly do this , enabling investors to 'consent' to harmful conduct in complex and legalistic disclosures that most will never read and would not understand if they did .

in march 2019 , in advance of the sec's adoption of reg bi , chair waters reportedly said the following: [w]e have to be concerned about best interests of our consumers and our seniors in particular .

when you have investment advisors who are not acting in [consumer's] best interest , but are acting in their own best interest , it does not bode well for our senior investors in particular .

so we are going to continue to pay attention to that .

i don't know what the sec has decided about what their role should be in this [fiduciary realm] , but it's of interest to us .

on june 26 , 2019 , the house passed h.r .

3351 , the financial services and general government appropriations act for fy2020 .

the bill included an amendment sponsored by chair waters that would have forbidden the sec from using any of its congressional spending authority "to implement , administer , enforce or publicize the final rules and interpretations" with respect to reg bi .

on december 20 , 2019 , president trump signed h.r .

1865 , the further consolidated appropriations act , 2020 , which became p.l .

116-94 and will fund the federal government through fy2020 .

it does not contain the aforementioned sec restrictions contained in h.r .

3351 .

responses to the congressional action generally reflect where observers stand on the merits of reg bi itself .

like the wide - ranging comments that followed the release of the proposed reg bi in 2018 , the adoption of the final 2019 rule also elicited an expansive range of responses .

this section first identifies the three broad reactions to the reform .

it then provides quoted excerpts from various observers and stakeholders that either ( 1 ) provide support for or ( 2 ) are critical of several concerns regarding reg bi , including its failure to provide for a broker - dealer fiduciary standard .

in its 700-page reg bi release , the sec spoke of its inability to employ data - based research to gain insight into the reform's probable impact: because the commission does not have , has not received , and , in certain cases , does not believe it can reasonably obtain data that may inform on certain economic effects , the commission is unable to quantify certain economic effects.... [e]ven in cases where it has some data or it has received some data regarding certain economic effects , the quantification of these effects is particularly challenging due to the number of assumptions that it would need to make to forecast how broker - dealers will respond to regulation best interest , and how those responses will , in turn , affect the broader market for investment advice and the retail customers' participation in financial markets .

the release , however , included a discussion of theoretical costs and benefits from an alternative to reg bi that would have imposed fiduciary standards on broker - dealers akin to those that generally apply to investment advisers .

the release asserted that a major theoretical benefit to such a uniform fiduciary standard would be reduced customer confusion surrounding what obligations both brokers and investment advisers have toward them .

moreover , the release argued that such a change could also reduce potential customer costs associated with choosing a financial professional who is not a good fit since both brokers and investment advisers would be subject to the same standard of customer care .

the release noted , however , that a uniform fiduciary standard could result in a standard of care for brokers "that is not appropriately tailored to the structure and characteristics of the broker - dealer model ( i.e. , transaction specific recommendations and compensation ) . .

because of this possibility , it argued that the range of options in the financial advice market would shrink .

it contended that at least in the short run , brokers would face greater compliance costs , possibly encouraging them to transition into offering advice in an investment adviser capacity and discouraging them from continuing to offer advice in a broker capacity .

in turn , the release observed that brokers formally exiting their roles as broker - dealers could limit retail customers' access to particular securities or investment strategies as well as how they would pay for such advice .

as a result , customers' costs for such advice could increase .

the release then examined the potential fallout from a hypothetical scenario in which brokers operate under a new fiduciary standard but uniformly remain broker - dealers .

according to the release , this could result in increased compliance costs for brokers that could be fully or partially passed on to their clients .

that possibility , it argued , could lead to some customers problematically engaging less expensive investment advice providers outside of the regulated world of investment advisers and broker - dealers .

some data - based research has also examined the implications of a hypothetical final rulemaking that imposed a fiduciary standard on brokers .

several examples of this research are examined below , illustrating that research has resulted in disparate views on the nature of such impact .

the deloitte - sifma study .

in 2017 , the business consultant deloitte and sifma , the broker - dealer trade group , released the results of a collaborative survey conducted by deloitte on sifma members .

the study yielded results from the responses of 21 large national corporate sifma members on their reactions to the partially implemented dol fiduciary rule , which the members had responded to by making plans to modify their retail customer - based services and products .

of the 21 respondents , 53% reported that they had either eliminated or limited access to brokerage advice services and 67% had migrated away from open choice to fee - based or limited brokerage services .

the study also found that a "trend towards fee - based accounts was likely accelerated by the rule. .

it noted that "[t]ypically , fee - based accounts offer a higher level of service than brokerage accounts and often include automatic rebalancing of accounts , comprehensive annual reviews , enhanced reporting to account holders , and access to third party money managers .

the fees are generally an 'all - in' asset - based fee that is generally higher than the fees paid in an advised brokerage account. .

finke and langdon .

as indicated earlier , some states have common laws that impose a fiduciary standard of care on brokers , but many do not .

by surveying broker - dealer registered representatives subject to differing state common law - based fiduciary requirements , finke and langdon , two academics , exploited those differences to ascertain whether a relatively stricter fiduciary standard of care affected brokers' willingness to provide advisory services to retail consumers .

among other things , the 2012 research found that the number of registered representatives conducting business within a state as a percentage of total households did not significantly change whether or not a state had a stricter fiduciary standard .

it also found no significant differences among such financial professionals in states with a strict fiduciary standard compared with states that did not have a fiduciary standard with respect to ( 1 ) whether they were limited in their ability to recommend certain products or to serve clients with limited wealth ; ( 2 ) the percentage of clients with lower incomes and higher levels of wealth ; ( 3 ) their ability to provide a broad range of investment products including those that involve commission - based compensation ; and ( 4 ) the ability to provide tailored customer advice .

bhattacharya , padi , and illanes .

the researchers analyzed patterns of sales behavior for annuities issued by a large national financial company sold between 2013 and 2015 by broker - dealers based in adjacent counties separated by state lines .

released in 2019 , the analysis hinged on the fact that some of the counties were in states with common law - based broker fiduciary standards , but adjacent counties were in states without such standards .

among other things , they found that subjecting brokers to a fiduciary duty shifted the suite of investment products that they sell to retail investors .

relative to counties without broker fiduciary obligations , brokers in counties with fiduciary standards saw increased costs of doing business , but the jurisdictions also witnessed direct improvements in the quality of the financial advice .

