t he national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) currently supports natural , nature - based , or green infrastructure and other related types of features ( hereinafter referred to as nature - based infrastructure ) as part of its statutory mandates to support , research , restore , and conserve natural resources .

practitioners and decisionmakers have been using the term nature - based infrastructure and supporting nature - based infrastructure features since at least the late 2000s ( although these types of features have been assigned various names over time ) .

nature - based infrastructure may continue to be appealing due to ( 1 ) stakeholder emphasis on infrastructure features that benefit both humans and the environment in multiple ways and ( 2 ) recognition that infrastructure may be longer lasting if it can adjust to changing environmental conditions in the short and long terms .

members of congress may consider whether and how to support nature - based infrastructure activities at federal agencies , including noaa , with these objectives , among others , in mind .

this report describes how noaa characterizes nature - based infrastructure and the agency's current activities supporting research and implementation of nature - based infrastructure .

the report also discusses potential issues for congress including ( 1 ) definitions of nature - based infrastructure in statute , ( 2 ) noaa's authority to support nature - based infrastructure , ( 3 ) how noaa coordinates with other federal agencies and nonfederal entities on nature - based infrastructure activities , and ( 4 ) how noaa funds nature - based infrastructure activities and its total nature - based infrastructure - related expenditures .

noaa has defined natural infrastructure and nature - based infrastructure in noaa administrative order ( nao ) 216-117: noaa national habitat policy .

noaa defines natural infrastructure as "healthy ecosystems , including forests , wetlands , floodplains , dune systems , and reefs , which provide multiple benefits to communities , including storm protection through wave attenuation or flood storage capacity and enhanced water services and security. .

similarly , noaa defines nature - based infrastructure as "engineered systems where natural features are combined with more hard or structural engineering approaches to create a hybrid system. .

however , across noaa's publicly accessible documents and websites , the agency appears to use the terms nature - based infrastructure , natural infrastructure , and green infrastructure interchangeably .

table 1 lists several types of nature - based infrastructure features as identified by noaa .

according to noaa , nature - based infrastructure projects may include features that are completely natural , such as open lands and trees , or may incorporate varying degrees of hard or "gray" steel and concrete structures , such as bulkheads ( figure 1 ) .

often , multiple types of nature - based infrastructure features are combined within a project .

the selection of nature - based infrastructure features often depends on a combination of available funding , space constraints , land or roof availability , technical feasibility , hydrologic impact , and community acceptance , among other factors .

according to noaa , nature - based infrastructure can provide several benefits in addition to flood , erosion , and runoff management , such as improved water quality , wildlife habitat , opportunity for groundwater recharge , recreation uses , and aesthetic appeal , among others .

the extent to which nature - based infrastructure features provide these benefits is partially dependent on the location and types of features used .

noaa's national habitat policy ( nao 216-117 ) directs the agency to protect , maintain , and restore ocean , coastal , and great lakes ecosystems by "applying natural and nature - based infrastructure," among other activities .

according to the agency , this work is supported by a variety of statutory mandates and authorities .

congress has not defined in statute nature - based or related terms for noaa , nor has it explicitly directed noaa to broadly support nature - based features or related activities across the agency .

noaa's nature - based infrastructure activities fall primarily under three line offices: the national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) , national ocean service ( nos ) , and office of oceanic and atmospheric research ( oar ) .

according to noaa , many of the agency's nature - based infrastructure activities are related to restoration and conservation projects ; the projects are typically local or regional in scale and take place within coastal or great lakes states .

nmfs's restoration center administers the community - based restoration grant program with congressionally appropriated funds to support nature - based infrastructure activities , among other restoration activities , implemented by institutions of higher education ; nonprofit and for - profit organizations ; u.s. territories ; and state , local , and tribal governments .

the noaa restoration atlas , a project - tracking database , lists over 2,000 community - based restoration projects , many of which include nature - based infrastructure features and multiple benefits .

for instance , the restoration center provided funds for the planting of marshgrass along the coast of northumberland county , va , to reduce shoreline erosion and improve fish habitat ( figure 2 ) .

several programs and activities under nos support research and implementation of nature - based infrastructure .

for example , the coral reef conservation program , national coastal zone management program , and national estuarine research reserve system provide technical assistance and administer competitive grant programs to a variety of entities , such as institutions of higher education ; nonprofit organizations ; and local , state , and tribal governments , among others .

coastal scientists with noaa's national centers for coastal ocean science have estimated the economic value of nature - based infrastructure to stabilize coastlines along the pacific northwest .

additionally , the damage assessment , remediation , and restoration program , a program with components in both nmfs and nos , supports nature - based infrastructure implementation through funds recovered in settlements or litigation .

for example , it has supported the design and implementation of a living shoreline with breakwaters in pensacola , fl , to ( 1 ) create and restore salt marsh and reef habitat and ( 2 ) protect and stabilize the shoreline , with funds from the bp deepwater horizon spill settlement ( figure 3 ) .

under oar , the climate program office and the national sea grant college program ( sea grant ) both support research and implementation of nature - based infrastructure through competitive grant programs on a variety of topics , including nature - based infrastructure .

for example , the climate program office has awarded grants to institutions of higher learning and agencies within state government to support the development and application of methodologies to value nature - based infrastructure .

sea grant also may support research or provide technical assistance for nature - based infrastructure projects .

for instance , alaska sea grant organized trainings in "green infrastructure for coastal resilience" for municipal and borough planners , designers , landscape architects , public housing authority planners , academics , and nonprofits .

in another case , new york sea grant funded the monitoring of nature - based shoreline erosion management measures in various regions of new york .

additional noaa programs may have roles related to nature - based infrastructure , such as reviewing projects that may use nature - based infrastructure and providing underlying data for decisionmaking .

for example , the nmfs office of protected resources is often involved in reviewing nature - based infrastructure projects that may affect protected species under noaa's jurisdiction .

noaa may also direct appropriated funding to nonfederal organizations , such as the national fish and wildlife foundation , to support nature - based infrastructure activities .

for example , noaa provides funds and program oversight to the foundation's national coastal resilience fund , which in fy2019 funded grants to "create , expand , and restore natural systems in areas that will both increase protection for communities from coastal storms , sea - and lake - level changes , inundation , and coastal erosion while also improving valuable habitats for fish and wildlife species," among other objectives .

congress has not defined the term nature - based infrastructure , or similar terms , in statute for noaa as it has for usace and epa .

for example , in p.l .

114-322 congress defined natural and nature - based features and directed usace to consider the features when studying the feasibility of flood risk management , hurricane and storm damage reduction , and ecosystem restoration projects ( 33 u.s.c .

â§2289a ) .

in p.l .

115-436 , which amended the clean water act , congress defined green infrastructure and directed epa to promote green infrastructure use , among other activities ( 33 u.s.c .

â§1362 ( 27 ) and 33 u.s.c .

â§1377a ) .

congress may consider whether and how to define the term and the types of nature - based infrastructure for noaa .

some members of congress have proposed definitions within the context of new noaa programs .

for example , h.r .

1317 in the 116 th congress would provide definitions for natural , nature - based , and nonstructural features to be used as criteria for new noaa financial assistance programs .

two other nearly identical bills in the 116 th congress , h.r .

3115 and s. 1730 , define the term living shoreline for the use within a new agency - administered grant program .

a noaa - specific definition of nature - based infrastructure and similar terms in statute may help the agency prioritize and manage its nature - based infrastructure activities .

a definition also could potentially limit the types of nature - based infrastructure , by inhibiting the development and adoption of new designs and features that are not captured in a statutory definition .

further , a noaa - specific definition may conflict with other federal agency definitions for nature - based infrastructure .

congress may consider whether one definition should be used among all federal agencies to minimize the potential for confusion .

a single definition across all federal agencies , however , could conflict with the various missions and activities of the different federal agencies .

congress has directed noaa to support , research , restore , and conserve natural resources in a variety of statutes .

congress has not enacted authorities specifically for nature - based infrastructure activities ; however , noaa has interpreted some of its authorities to include support for nature - based infrastructure activities .

for example , in 2009 congress directed noaa to create the coastal and estuarine land conservation program ( celcp ) under the coastal zone management act ( czma ; p.l .

111-11 , 16 u.s.c .

â§1456-1 and â§1456d ) .

congress established the celcp to provide grants to nonfederal entities to protect "important coastal and estuarine areas that have significant conservation , recreation , ecological , historical , or aesthetic values" ( 16 u.s.c .

â§1456d ) , which may include natural or open lands , identified by noaa as nature - based infrastructure in table 1 .

similarly , congress instructed noaa to conduct and support "activities to conserve coral reefs and coral reef ecosystems" ( 16 u.s.c .

â§â§6401-6409 ) .

noaa has identified coral reefs as a type of nature - based infrastructure ( table 1 ) ; coral reefs have been shown to buffer waves and provide protection from shoreline erosion .

some stakeholders contend that noaa is already authorized to support nature - based infrastructure features through its existing statutes .

others in congress , however , have proposed legislation that would expand the type of nature - based infrastructure activities noaa currently supports .

for example , in the 116 th congress , h.r .

1317 would direct noaa to "improve the resilience of the built and natural environment to natural disasters and climate change" by using natural , nature - based , and nonstructural features , among other features .

another bill , h.r .

3115 , would require noaa to administer grants for "designing and implementing ... living shorelines ; and ... innovative uses of natural materials and systems to protect coastal communities , habitats , and natural system functions," among other provisions .

expanding noaa's authority for nature - based infrastructure activities has been met with some opposition .

for example , some in congress have argued that a new noaa grant program that h.r .

3115 would authorize "strays from the long - standing congressional intent of providing eligible coastal states and territories the flexibility to design programs that best address local challenges by inserting federal priorities into a state - run program. .

noaa often supports nature - based infrastructure activities alongside other federal and nonfederal partners .

for example , the agency has provided financial and technical support to the aforementioned pensacola bay living shoreline project , which also receives support from the florida department of environmental protection .

in addition , noaa has been a part of several federal interagency and interorganizational efforts to better understand and support nature - based infrastructure .

for instance , noaa was a part of the federal coastal green infrastructure and ecosystem services task force established in response to hurricane sandy rebuilding strategy recommendations .

the task force was co - chaired by noaa and the u.s. geological survey and resulted in the development of a 2015 report .

report recommendations focused on "coastal green infrastructure" metrics , production functions ( eg , how can the united states better track how ecosystem changes may impact infrastructure ) , ecosystem - service valuation , social factors , and decisionmaking support .

noaa also has been a member of the interorganizational systems approach to geomorphic engineering ( sage ) working group .

sage includes representatives from federal and state agencies , academic and research institutes , nongovernmental organizations , and the private sector .

sage is a "community of practice" and aims to share advances in the science , engineering , policy , and financing of nature - based infrastructure across organizations .

for example , organizations , including noaa , have been a part of sage pilot projects in selected locations working to address issues such as shoreline loss using nature - based infrastructure .

sage also brings organizations together to discuss technical , policy , and financial issues through periodic meetings and serves as a public resource aggregator by compiling links to technical guidance , conference proceedings , research , and other materials .

congress may deliberate whether and how to direct noaa to manage nature - based infrastructure activities within the agency or with non - noaa organizations in specific ways .

for example , congress may require noaa to coordinate its nature - based infrastructure within an intra - agency working group or task force .

alternatively , congress could establish an advisory board or similar group to provide recommendations for better intra - agency , interagency , and interorganizational coordination .

for coordination with organizations outside of noaa , congress may authorize in statute an already established working group , such as sage , or create a new group focused on nature - based infrastructure .

some stakeholders may argue that a statutory requirement for noaa to coordinate with federal and nonfederal partners may facilitate information sharing , promote the efficient use of available funding , and streamline permitting across federal agencies .

others may argue that unless congress specifically authorizes noaa to support nature - based infrastructure activities , the agency should ( 1 ) focus resources solely on meeting current congressional directives and / or ( 2 ) coordinate at their own discretion .

congress funds noaa to support , research , restore , and conserve natural resources primarily through the annual appropriations process .

noaa reports its spending to congress on a program - by - program basis , but nature - based infrastructure activities are not tracked specifically as line items in either the agency's annual budget request or in congressional appropriations bills and reports .

for example , congress appropriated $68 million to the national sea grant college program in fy2019 ; however , noaa does not track what portion of that funding was used to support nature - based infrastructure activities .

similarly , noaa does not report the proportion of funding supporting nature - based infrastructure activities in other noaa programs .

congress may consider requiring noaa to track and / or report its spending on nature - based infrastructure activities .

other federal agencies also likely do not track spending related to nature - based infrastructure activities , and congress may consider requiring all federal agencies to report their nature - based infrastructure expenditures .

congress has sometimes required federal agencies to submit crosscut budgets detailing individual agency expenditures ( eg , usace water resources research and technology institutes expenditures as required under 42 u.s.c .

â§10303 ) as well as some interagency expenditures ( eg , great lakes restoration activity expenditures as required under 33 u.s.c .

â§1268a ) .

stakeholders hold different views about whether or how congress should fund nature - based infrastructure activities .

congress could continue to appropriate funds that support noaa's core capabilities and mission , without specifying they be used for nature - based infrastructure activities .

alternatively , congress could , for example , appropriate funds for existing or new noaa programs that provide grants to nonfederal entities explicitly for research and implementation of nature - based infrastructure .

several bills introduced in the 116 th congress address funding for nature - based infrastructure activities in various ways .

for example , h.r .

3115 would create a new grant program to fund the installation of living shorelines , a type of nature - based infrastructure feature .

h.r .

1317 would ( 1 ) issue a u.s .

postal service semipostal stamp and use some of its proceeds to fund prize competitions and research catalog development , and ( 2 ) authorize appropriations for capitalization funds to establish state community resilience revolving funds for the implementation of nature - based infrastructure , among other projects .

s. 2284 would establish the carbon dividend trust fund with requisite fund transfers to federal agencies .

as proposed in s. 2284 , noaa's portion of the fund transfer would support several programs , including a coastal resiliency program that would be required to prioritize the consideration of natural and nature - based infrastructure .

however , some members of congress have argued that the establishment of new grant programs , such as the living shoreline grant program in h.r .

3115 , are "duplicative and wasteful," as congress already appropriates funding to noaa that may be used to support nature - based infrastructure .

