u nder the endangered species act of 1973 ( esa or the act ) , the u.s .

fish and wildlife service ( fws ) and the national marine fisheries service ( together , the services ) determine which species to "list" as "endangered species " or "threatened species ," terms defined in the act .

species , subspecies , and distinct population segments ( dpss ) may all be listed as "species" under the act .

listing a species invokes certain protections under the act and a requirement that the services develop a recovery plan to conserve the species .

listed species may be reclassifie d by the services from threatened to endangered or vice versa .

the services may also remove a species from the list , often called delisting , if it no longer meets the definition of an endangered or threatened species .

the services list , reclassify , and delist species pursuant t o statutory criteria and definitions through the agency rulemaking process .

persons may—and often do—challenge the legality of those final rules through litigation .

when such challenges succeed , the court remands the rule to the applicable service for further proceedings and may vacate the challenged rule .

the gray wolf ( canis lupus ) presents a useful example of the legal issues that arise with listing and delisting species as threatened and endangered under the esa and how fws has addressed those issues .

t he gray wolf was among the first species identified by federal law as endangered after being nearly hunted to extinction in the lower 48 states .

fws has issued numerous rules in connection with its efforts to recover the gray wolf under the esa .

many of those rules have been challenged in court , and a number of them have been vacated and remanded to fws .

fws has addressed issues such as uncertainties in gray wolf taxonomy , ambiguous statutory terms ( eg , " foreseeable future " and "significant portion of its range " ) , and the adequacy of state management plans .

this r eport uses fws's regulation of the gray wolf under the esa and related litigation as a case study in how legal challenges have shaped fws's interpretation of esa provisions when listing and delisting species under the act .

the report begins by laying out general legal principles governing agency rulemaking under the esa before reviewing the history of fws's actions to list , recover , and delist the gray wolf and subsequent litigation .

the report then uses this regulatory and litigation history to analyze specific issues that arise when listing and delisting species under the act .

the esa aims to accomplish its goal of conserving fish , wildlife , and plants species threatened with extinction by "listing" species the services determine to be endangered or threatened .

the esa's provisions and protections generally apply only to these listed species .

the act's legal framework determines when and how species are listed , reclassified , and delisted .

the secretary of the interior and the secretary of commerce ( this report refers to "the secretary" to mean either the secretary of the interior or the secretary of commerce , as applicable ) review species' statuses under the act on their own initiative or in response to petitions .

any person may petition the secretary to list , reclassify , or delist a species .

the esa prescribes when and how the secretary is required to respond to such petitions , as shown in figure 1 .

a status review , conducted pursuant to a petition that may be warranted or at the secretary's initiative , determines whether a species should be or remain listed .

figure 2 depicts the general pathway for a species from status review and listing through post - delisting monitoring and management under the esa framework .

a brief explanation of each stage is provided below figure 2 .

listing .

as a threshold matter , the secretary may list only groups of organisms that qualify as a "species" under the esa , defined to include subspecies and dpss .

because the term "species" under the act has a distinct legal meaning that may differ from its conventional or taxonomic meaning , this report uses the term "species" to refer to species as defined by the act ( i.e. , including subspecies and dpss ) and the term "full species" when referring to a taxonomic species .

for species eligible for listing , the secretary examines whether the species qualifies as an endangered species or threatened species , as defined by the act , because of any of the five factors listed in figure 2 .

the esa requires the secretary to make this determination "solely" based on the "best scientific and commercial data available. .

based on this evaluation , the secretary either lists the species as endangered or threatened , as appropriate , or determines the species is ineligible for listing and , if the secretary conducted the status review pursuant to a petition to list , denies the petition .

the secretary may also determine that a species qualifies as an endangered or threatened species but that the species cannot be listed at the time due to the services' priorities and limited resources .

in that case , the secretary may deny a petition as warranted but precluded .

the secretary publishes listing determinations in the federal register and the code of federal regulations .

listed .

once endangered and threatened species are listed , the esa directs federal agencies to "conserve" them and their ecosystems .

as shown in figure 2 , the act provides two types of mechanisms to conserve listed species and facilitate their recovery .

first , as shown in the protections box of figure 2 , it protects the species by prohibiting certain acts with respect to endangered species ; similar prohibitions may also be extended to threatened species .

the act further protects listed species by requiring federal agencies to consult with the services when their actions , or actions they approve or fund , could affect listed species—often called section 7 consultations .

through this process , federal agencies assess the potential effects of their actions on any endangered or threatened species and evaluate , as necessary , alternatives that would mitigate the impact .

second , as shown in the recovery tools box in figure 2 , the esa provides tools to facilitate the recovery of the species .

the act generally requires the secretary to develop and implement a recovery plan for each listed species unless such a plan would "not promote the conservation of the species. .

the recovery plan includes any site - specific management actions needed to conserve the species , objective and measureable criteria that would merit delisting the species if met , and estimates of timelines and costs .

in addition to recovery plans , congress amended the esa in 1982 to allow the services to reintroduce experimental populations of listed species , which are regulated as threatened species regardless of the listed species' status .

experimental populations must be "wholly separate geographically" from existing natural populations of the species .

as shown in the review status box in figure 2 , the secretary must review the status of a listed species every five years —or pursuant to a petition to reclassify or delist the species that may be warranted —to determine whether it still qualifies as an endangered or threatened species .

species are reclassified or delisted based on the same criteria used to list species , as shown in the status box in figure 2 .

post - d elisting .

once a species is delisted , the states in which the species resides resume control over management of the recovered species .

the secretary and the states monitor the status of a recovered species for at least five years after delisting .

in this period , if the secretary determines that there is a significant risk to the well - being of the species , the secretary must exercise emergency powers to restore the act's protections to the species for 240 days , during which time the secretary may begin rulemaking proceedings to relist the species .

the gray wolf has a long history as a listed species under the esa and its predecessors .

as discussed in this section , from the initial listing to the present , nearly every element of the listing and delisting legal framework has been implicated in regulating the gray wolf under the act .

 ( see " listing and delisting species under the endangered species act " section. ) .

table 1 includes a timeline of legislative , regulatory , and litigation actions by population , and table a - 1 in the appendix provides a more detailed version .

the substantive issues that have been raised in the various rulemakings and court opinions described in this section are discussed by topic in the " challenges when listing and delisting species " section .

the gray wolf's traits and history inform much of fws's analysis of threats to the species and pathways to recovery .

gray wolves are the largest member of the canidae ( i.e. , dog ) family .

they are frequently found in packs and occupy defined territory , but lone gray wolves may leave their packs to join another pack or wander alone .

gray wolves are effective and adaptive predators who generally hunt large prey , such as moose , elk , caribou , bison , and deer ; they also have been known to eat smaller prey .

historically , gray wolves ranged throughout most of north america , europe , and asia .

on the north american continent , gray wolves were once found from canada and alaska to northern mexico except for much of the southeastern united states ( where the related but distinct red wolf lived ) and parts of southern california .

the arrival of european settlers and their expansion into the western frontier led to widespread persecution of wolves as a result of fear , superstition , and perceived and real conflicts between wolves and humans , such as attacks on humans , domestic animals , or livestock .

encouraged by federal , state , and local bounties , settlers poisoned , trapped , and shot wolves until they were eliminated from more than 95% of their historical range .

fws has encountered a host of legal challenges when listing or delisting the gray wolf .

this section reviews by topic the substantive challenges fws has encountered in rulemaking and litigation .

though specific to the gray wolf , the challenges fws has faced provide insight into the issues the services generally encounter with listing and delisting species and how courts may react to the services' approaches .

the history of the gray wolf under the esa illustrates the challenges fws has faced in conserving the species as the act intended .

in implementing the esa , the services must contend with disagreements over how to interpret ambiguous terms , uncertain and ever - changing scientific data , and conflicting views on what it means to conserve species and the role of the states in that effort .

these issues can complicate the services' efforts to conserve endangered and threatened species and delist them , consistent with the act's purposes .

difficulties that delay delisting species may frustrate certain stakeholders , such as state wildlife agencies that want more flexibility in managing the species or private entities in the species' habitat who must comply with the act's prohibitions and section 7 consultation requirements .

other stakeholders such as conservation groups or animal rights activists may raise concerns that species are inadequately regulated to ensure their long - term recovery or continued biodiversity due to uncertainties in the science and ambiguities in the statute .

either set of stakeholders may question whether the act is effectively promoting the recovery of listed species .

in light of the scientific and administrative challenges fws has encountered with regulating the gray wolf under the act , congress could consider amending the act to address these issues and ensure the act is implemented in accordance with congressional intent .

such legislation could amend the act generally or specifically with respect to a particular action , such as the act directing fws to reinstate the rule designating and delisting the northern rocky mountain dps except for wyoming .

legislative proposals have been introduced in the 116th congress that would pursue each of these approaches: amending the act generally or specifically directing fws to issue new rules or reissue vacated ones regarding the gray wolf .

