as the term is currently being discussed , surprise billing typically refers to situations where a consumer is unknowingly , and potentially unavoidably , treated by a provider outside of the consumer's health insurance plan network and , as a result , unexpectedly receives a larger bill than he or she would have received if the provider had been in the plan network .

most recently , in federal policy discussions , surprise billing has commonly been discussed in the context of two situations: ( 1 ) where an individual receives emergency services from an out - of - network provider and ( 2 ) where a consumer receives nonemergency services from an out - of - network provider who is working in an in - network facility .

however , surprise billing may occur in other situations ( eg , ground ambulance and air ambulance services ) where consumers are unknowingly and unavoidably treated by an out - of - network provider .

as these situations imply , surprise billing is rooted in most private insurers' use of provider networks .

therefore , this report begins with a discussion of the relationship between provider network status and private health insurance billing before discussing existing federal and state requirements around surprise billing .

this report then discusses various policy issues that congress may want to consider when assessing surprise billing proposals .

such policy topics include what plan types should be addressed ; what types of services or provider types should be addressed ; what types of consumer protections should be established ; what requirements ( including financial requirements ) should be placed on insurers , providers , or both ; how these policies will be enforced ; and what is the role of the state .

the list of topics discussed in this report is not exhaustive but should touch on many aspects of the surprise billing proposals currently under consideration .

the report also briefly discusses potential impacts of the various surprise billing approaches .

it then concludes with an appendix table comparing two federal proposals that have gone through committee markup procedures .

specifically , the proposals included in the appendix are title i of s. 1895 ( alexander ) , which went through a senate committee health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) markup session on june 26 , 2019 , and title iv of the amendment in the nature of a substitute ( ans ) to h.r .

2328 , which went through a markup session held by the house committee on energy and commerce on july 17 , 2019 .

as of the date of this report , no other proposals have been approved through committee markup or gone further in the legislative - making process .

federal surprise billing proposals , like state laws , typically seek to address the current financial relationships between insurers , providers , and consumers for certain services .

in doing so , the proposals generally would establish new requirements on insurers , providers , or both in specified billing situations to create a degree of consumer protection .

as an example , requirements on insurers may address how the insurer pays for specified services or what consumer cost - sharing requirements would be under specified plans .

requirements on providers may address the extent to which providers may balance bill consumers .

requirements on both entities may establish the terms under which insurers and providers participate in alternative dispute resolution processes ( eg , arbitration ) to determine the amount providers are paid by insurers and consumers for surprise bills .

surprise billing can be addressed in a variety of ways , and the following sections discuss questions policymakers may want to consider when evaluating these different approaches .

the following policy discussions are examples of the types of questions policymakers may want to consider when evaluating surprise billing proposals and should not be treated as an exhaustive list .

furthermore , due to the development , introduction , and modification of numerous federal proposals on this topic during the 116 th congress , the policy discussions in this section of the report generally do not include specific references to any current or historical federal proposals .

the report references state surprise billing laws to provide examples and context , but such references should not be considered comprehensive references of all applicable state laws .

although specific federal policies are not explicitly discussed in this section of the report , the report concludes with an appendix that provides side - by - side summaries of the two surprise billing proposals from the 116 th congress that have passed through committee markups , both as part of larger bills .

specifically , the proposals included in the appendix are title i of s. 1895 ( alexander ) , which went through a senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) markup session on june 26 , 2019 , and title iv of the amendment in the nature of a substitute ( ans ) to h.r .

2328 , which went through a markup session held by the house committee on energy and commerce on july 17 , 2019 .

since policy decisions rarely occur in a vacuum , many of the aforementioned policy considerations directly affect one ( or multiple ) aspects of the billing process .

these impacts can be considered narrowly , by looking at how specific actors ( i.e. , insurers , providers , and consumers ) may respond to such policy considerations .

for example , consider the effects of a federal policy that ( 1 ) establishes a benchmark reimbursement rate that is lower than what insurers currently typically pay out - of - network providers for a specific service provided to consumers and ( 2 ) prohibits balance billing .

from the insurer's perspective , an insurer may decide to lower premiums for plans that cover out - of - network benefits if its net payments to providers decrease after adjusting for any changes in consumer cost sharing under the policy .

relatedly , to the extent that such policy requires insurers to cover a portion of other consumer costs for specific services , insurers may choose to increase premiums on plans that do not cover out - of - network benefits to cover these additional costs .

from the provider perspective , impacted out - of - network providers may see a reduction in revenue from the lower payment rate and the prohibition on balance billing consumers for those services .

the provider also may see a reduction in the administrative costs associated with being an out - of - network provider ( eg , costs associated with communicating with and collecting payments from numerous consumers and / or insurers , costs associated with failure to collect payments from consumers ) .

depending on the extent to which the provider is affected , the provider may respond to this example federal policy by adjusting the prices of other services not affected by the policy or adjusting what services are offered .

a different surprise billing policy that would establish an arbitration process could create greater administrative costs for insurers and providers .

these costs could subsequently be incorporated into premium prices or provider charges for services .

policy impacts also can be considered more generally by identifying how these policies could alter the relationships between insurers , providers , and consumers .

for example , policies that require insurers to pay providers specified amounts for out - of - network services might affect contract negotiations between insurers and providers .

if a proposal required insurers to pay out - of - network providers their median in - network rate for services , insurers might be incentivized to reduce rates for those providers earning above the median amount or be less likely to contract with such providers during subsequent contract negotiations .

if insurers did not contract with such providers , the provider would be considered out of network and the plan would pay providers the plan's median rate for services included in the surprise billing proposal .

inversely , providers earning below the median rate might be likely to demand increased payment rates or to consider dropping out of the network , the latter of which would result in those providers also being paid at a plan's median rate .

together , if insurers and providers responded accordingly , a plan's payment rates for the specified services included in a surprise billing proposal would move to the median rates for both in - network and out - of - network providers .

if a proposal required insurers to pay out - of - network providers based on an arbitration model ( i.e. , dispute resolution process ) , then some providers that furnish specialized services or work on complex cases might be more likely to demand increased payment rates .

this could occur because these providers would otherwise be more likely to receive results that are more favorable as an out - of - network provider participating in an arbitration process that considers the extent of the provider's expertise and the complexity of each case .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimated the net effects of these types of policies on insurance premiums and the related effects on the federal budget in its scoring of two surprise billing bills from the 116 th congress ( s. 1895 and h.r .

2328 , which are compared in the appendix ) .

as implied by the policy impacts of these types of proposals on premiums , different policies also could have varying effects on national health expenditures .

for example , the surprise billing proposal that required insurers to pay out - of - network providers their median in - network rate for services likely would reduce the aggregate dollar amount of private health insurance spending on out - of - network care relative to current law .

this shift likely would occur even if consumers utilized the same amount of services , because "median rates are generally lower than the current overall average rates. .

future health expenditures also could grow slower than what is expected under current law if such a benchmark were indexed to an inflationary rate that is generally smaller than the rate of growth for provider rates .

relative to a benchmark - type policy that is tied to median in - network rates , an arbitration model policy likely would result in greater heath expenditures because arbitration would likely affect the negotiation of in - network rates .

the potential threat of arbitration may afford certain providers increased leverage during the negotiation of in - network rates .

however , the total effect of such policies on national health expenditures would be contingent upon the percentage of expenditures affected by the federal policies .

the discussion of the aforementioned policies should not be interpreted as likely effects of all benchmark or all arbitration type policies .

for example , a benchmark rate set at median rates would have different effects than a benchmark rate set at billed charges .

although comprehensive studies of state surprise billing laws are limited , there is anecdotal evidence of the impacts of such laws .

for example , the effects of implementing a payment methodology were anecdotally evident in california , where a law required insurers to pay certain out - of - network providers the greater of the average contracted rate or an amount equal to 125% of the medicare fee - for - service ( ffs ) rate .

as a result , at least some insurers took the position that "providers should either accept a lower contract rate or not contract and , potentially , receive only 125% of medicare ffs rates. .

a related example involves insurer responses to a colorado surprise billing law that required insurers to pay the in - network payment rates for services furnished to enrollees of managed care plans by out - of - network providers at in - network facilities .

a subsequent state survey of insurers regarding the implementation of the surprise billing law highlighted that certain insurers felt that "out - of - network providers [were] encouraged not to join networks because they will receive in - network payment regardless" and "hospital - based physicians had greater leverage when negotiating contracts with managed care plans. .

the colorado law did not affect all insurers equally .

of the 52 insurers that issued managed care plans in the private health insurance market during the evaluation period and provided responses to the survey , 7 carriers reported that the law had a positive effect on network adequacy , 20 carriers indicated no change , 21 carriers indicated a negative effect , and 4 carriers indicated insufficient experience and time to evaluate the change .

relatedly , new york implemented an arbitration - type surprise billing law ( independent dispute resolution , or idr ) for emergency physician services and other specified non - emergency services .

from 2015 to 2018 , different provider types participated in the idr process differently .

for example , plastic surgery providers submitted 40% of emergency service idr disputes and neurosurgery providers submitted 31% of the specified non - emergency service idr disputes .

the colorado and new york examples highlight the likelihood that a federal surprise billing policy will affect individual actors within a market differently , which is the result of existing dynamics between insurers and providers within each specific market ( eg , market concentration and network participation ) .

cbo accounted for this effect in its scoring of the two bills from the 116 th congress .

this idea is further compounded by the fact that each state has its own set of regulations ( potentially including surprise billing laws ) .

therefore , the effects of federal surprise billing proposals also will have varying impacts on insurers and providers across states .

this appendix provides a side - by - side comparison of surprise billing provisions included within two federal bills that have gone through markup procedures .

specifically , the sections of the bills included in the appendix are title i of s. 1895 ( alexander ) , which went through a senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions markup session on june 26 , 2019 , and title iv of the amendment in the nature of a substitute ( ans ) to h.r .

2328 , which went through a markup session held by the house committee on energy and commerce on july 17 , 2019 .

the language from each bill summarized in this appendix addresses multiple medical billing situations , such as services furnished at an in - network facility by out - of - network providers , services related to an emergency medical condition , and / or air ambulance services .

as each bill addresses more than one type of situation , this appendix refers to different situations as scenarios .

for each proposal , different scenarios are identified numerically in the "applicable health services and providers" row .

where applicable , each subsequent cell under a given proposal refers back to the terminology used in the "applicable health services and providers" row to indicate how a given requirement in the proposal applies to each scenario addressed within that specific proposal .

in some instances , the requirement may apply solely to one scenario , apply differently across multiple scenarios , or apply similarly to all scenarios .

as an example , title i of s. 1895 ( alexander ) includes provisions regarding six scenarios , including ( 1 ) emergency services provided by an out - of - network provider at an emergency department of a hospital or freestanding emergency room and ( 2 ) ancillary services performed by an out - of - network provider at an in - network facility if such services would have been covered had they been provided in network .

in the "applicable health services and providers" row for the title i of s. 1895 ( alexander ) column , these scenarios are identified as scenario 1 and scenario 2 , respectively ( with additional scenarios listed accordingly ) .

subsequently throughout the title i of s. 1895 ( alexander ) column , each reference to scenario 1 discusses how that particular requirement would apply to emergency services provided by an out - of - network provider at an emergency department of a hospital or freestanding emergency room .

consumer costs for the services addressed within each of the proposals are discussed in the "consumer cost - sharing" and "other consumer costs" rows ; a distinction that incorporates ( 1 ) the aforementioned discussion ( highlighted in figure 1 ) around whether a plan does or does not cover services provided by an out - of - network provider that would have been covered if provided by an in - network provider and ( 2 ) whether a particular service is a covered benefit under the plan irrespective of the network status of the provider ( i.e. , whether the service is considered an excluded service ) .

when reading the appendix table , if the same language is used across the bills for a given feature , it means the bills have language that is identical or substantively similar .

however , there may be underlying differences between the bills .

for example , both bills create limits on consumer cost - sharing requirements , but the actual requirements that would be affected ( eg , deductible , co - payment ) may vary between the bills , depending on how cost sharing is defined in either that bill itself or the amending statute ( for bill language that does not include a definition of the term ) .

this appendix table focuses on , and incorporates , language as included and defined in the aforementioned bills .

it does not compare or analyze differences between the bill languages as a result of underlying statutory differences .

each bill summary is based on a review of the provisions as drafted .

if a given proposal lacks specificity or includes inconsistencies , no assumptions were made to fill in gaps or resolve any discrepancies .

finally , the table does not address drafting errors or other technical issues within the proposals ( unless such errors required an interpretation to incorporate bill text into the table ) .

the table also does not address policy implications or identify potential unintended consequences .

