the united states has been a global leader in developing advanced genetic technologies and applying them to crops and livestock .

federal regulators first approved a genetically engineered ( ge ) food , the flavr savr tomato , for sale in 1994 .

as additional ge crops gained federal approval , farmers rapidly adopted them .

today , about 90% of canola , corn , cotton , soybean , and sugarbeet acres in the united states are planted with ge varieties .

ge foods predominantly enter commerce as processed foods and food ingredients ( eg , soybean oil , corn syrup , and sugar ) .

some members of the public seek to avoid consuming ge foods , as advances in biotechnology have outpaced their acceptance .

in july 2016 , congress enacted p.l .

114-216 ( the 2016 act ) , requiring the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) to establish a national bioengineered food disclosure standard ( the standard ) within two years .

the 2016 act followed decades of societal debate about genetic engineering , and it marked the first time that the federal government would require the disclosure of ge foods to consumers .

 ( the 2016 act defined these as bioengineered foods . ) .

with the 2016 act , the united states joined more than 60 countries that require some form of ge labeling , or on - package disclosure of ge foods or food ingredients .

the standard provides a mandatory national standard for disclosure of the presence of bioengineered foods and food ingredients to consumers .

it details who is responsible for making disclosures , what they must look like , and when they are and are not required .

the standard provides u.s. food manufacturers , importers , and retailers with a voluntary compliance period and a mandatory compliance deadline .

the more than 126,000 comments that usda received during the rulemaking process demonstrate significant public interest in its formulation .

usda released the final rule in december 2018 , and phased implementation began in january 2020 .

stakeholder reactions to the final standard have been mixed .

several organizations immediately criticized the final rule , while others supported it .

the organic trade association ( ota ) , the center for food safety ( cfs ) , the non - gmo project , and the institute for agriculture and trade policy ( iatp ) each released statements with critical comments .

ota remarked that it is "deeply disappointed in the u.s. department of agriculture's final gmo labeling rule and calls on companies to voluntarily act on their own to provide full disclosures on their food products about gmo content. .

cfs stated that "the usda has betrayed the public trust by denying americans the right to know how their food is produce[d]. .

the non - gmo project commented that it "is disappointed by the content of the final rule , which jeopardizes gmo transparency for americans. .

iatp stated that "unfortunately , the final rule fails to fix the most egregious provisions of the draft rule and is practically useless in conveying accurate information about food ingredients to consumers while they are shopping. .

in contrast , the national corn growers association ( ncga ) , the american soybean association ( asa ) , and the food marketing institute ( fmi ) provided supportive comments .

ncga commented that "america's corn farmers need a consistent , transparent system to provide consumers with information without stigmatizing important , safe technology .

thus , we are pleased with the issuance of these rules and look forward to reviewing the details in the coming days. .

asa stated , "we believe that it allows transparency for consumers while following the intent of congress that only food that contains modified genetic material be required to be labeled bioengineered under the law , with food companies having the option of providing additional information if they choose. .

fmi stated , "the rule provides a consistent way to provide transparency regarding the foods we sell and allow[s] our customers across the country the means to learn more about grocery products containing bioengineered ingredients. .

this report provides background information on agricultural biotechnology ; reviews major provisions of the standard ( related to applicability , disclosure options , and administrative provisions ) ; and concludes with potential considerations for congress .

the appendix provides definitions of select scientific and related terms used in this report .

the standard provides a mandatory national standard for disclosure of the presence of bioengineered foods and food ingredients to consumers .

it provides u.s. food manufacturers , importers , and retailers with a voluntary compliance period and a mandatory compliance deadline .

following enactment of the 2016 act , usda delegated development and implementation of the standard to the usda agricultural marketing service ( ams ) , which oversees many other usda food - labeling programs , including mandatory country of origin labeling ( cool ) , the voluntary national organic program ( nop ) , and the voluntary process verified program ( pvp ) .

ams developed the standard through federal rulemaking , and issued the final rule in december 2018 .

the final rule defines key terms and interprets issues arising from the 2016 act .

the text box below includes terms defined in the standard .

the standard identifies regulated entities as the food manufacturers , importers , and retailers responsible for making disclosures under the standard .

all regulated entities must comply with the standard by january 1 , 2022 , although disclosures may begin during the voluntary compliance period , which started on january 1 , 2020 .

as required for economically significant regulations , ams prepared and published a regulatory impact analysis ( ria ) of the standard .

the ria estimates that implementation will cost between $570 million and $3.9 billion in the first year , and between $52 million and $118 million in each following year .

it attributes most first year costs to those incurred by manufacturers analyzing the applicability of the rule and their compliance with the rule ( $401 million to $3.1 billion ) .

after the first year , the ria attributes most ongoing costs to regulated entities avoiding mandatory disclosures by verifying that foods are not subject to the standard ( $0 to $59 million ) and replacing bioengineered ingredients with non - bioengineered ingredients ( $41 million to $44 million ) .

the ria estimates annual financial benefits of $190 million to $565 million , mostly attributed to costs avoided: the costs of complying with a patchwork of state laws , which are avoided and by implementation of the federal standard .

the ria does not anticipate that the new standard will provide any benefits to human health or the environment .

key provisions of the standard , along with associated issues raised by stakeholders , are identified below within three categories: ( 1 ) applicability , ( 2 ) disclosure options , and ( 3 ) administrative provisions .

many components of the standard remain controversial .

public reactions are discussed after each category .

the national bioengineered food disclosure standard was developed within a broader societal context .

state - level approaches to ge labeling predated the federal 2016 act .

these were driven by public interest in knowing the ge status of their foods .

in addition , some private and federal voluntary labeling programs that provide information on the ge status of foods are expected to continue after implementation of the standard .

implementation of the standard over the next two years and beyond will affect consumers , regulated entities , and ams .

many potential issues arising from the standard will become clear only as implementation continues .

the below text summarizes potential and stated concerns related to applicability , disclosure options , administrative provisions , and other issues .

congress may choose to monitor the new standard's implementation in accordance with its oversight responsibilities .

a key question for congress is whether ams's implementation of the 2016 act meets congressional intent regarding the scope of applicability and the degree of disclosure required .

in the final rule , ams asserted that it balanced flexibility for regulated entities and information to consumers regarding the bioengineered status of their foods .

stakeholders who question ams's decisions in the rulemaking process , as described above , may question the extent to which ams's implementation aligns with congressional intent .

applicability .

groups that have criticized the definition of bioengineered in the 2016 act may call on congress to amend the definition to include highly refined products derived from ge organisms and / or include products that do not meet the current definition , such as those derived from gene editing and other new technologies .

other interested groups may continue to advocate for a definition that restricts the number and types of foods to which the definition applies .

ams has committed to maintaining and updating the list through annual public reviews , and on an interim basis as needed .

such reviews can provide opportunities to add to the list any bioengineered food products that have entered commerce .

additionally , during these reviews , stakeholders with differing views may encourage the agency to adopt either a more expansive or a more restrictive listing of bioengineered foods .

disclosure .

another issue in the context of disclosure is the degree of familiarity with the required labels that consumers may have .

consumers unfamiliar with the term bioengineered may have questions about what this means on foods bearing disclosure .

public reaction to implementation of the various types of disclosure may generate calls for these options to be revised based on their success or failure to provide consumers with easily accessible and useful information .

administrative provisions .

an issue for potential consideration is the extent to which additional federal resources will be required to implement the standard in both the voluntary and mandatory compliance periods .

in its regulatory impact analysis ( ria ) , ams broadly estimated that it may need $2 million annually to implement the standard , without differentiating potential expenses during the voluntary and mandatory compliance periods .

ams proposed that it would use such funds to update the list ; conduct audits and hearings ; manage complaints and inquiries ; and provide training , education , outreach and programmatic support .

ams may need to assign staff and develop new processes to implement the standard's provisions related to audits , examinations , hearings , and publications of findings .

congress may be asked to consider allocating new resources to support continued implementation of the new standard .

in addition , congress may assess the cost and administrative overhead that regulated entities expend to identify and maintain records on foods subject to disclosure and to adjust labels on food packaging .

estimates for administrative costs to regulated entities , which ams presents in its ria , range from a lower bound of $459 million to an upper bound of nearly $3.6 billion for the first year .

ams anticipates that these costs will greatly reduce in subsequent years as potentially regulated entities replace bioengineered ingredients with non - bioengineered ingredients .

regarding enforcement , the rule largely relies on a public notification mechanism to influence the compliance of regulated entities and correct violations of the standard .

stakeholders may or may not view this mechanism as successful , depending on the extent and frequency of any such violations .

interested parties may petition congress to strengthen existing enforcement mechanisms or identify new ones to enhance compliance with the new standard .

market demand for bioengineered versus non - bioengineered products .

in the ria , ams indicates that it cannot accurately predict how consumers will react to bioengineered disclosures on food labels .

consumers may avoid foods labeled as bioengineered , they may prefer them , or such labels may make no difference to consumer purchasing behaviors .

in the ria , ams assumes that manufacturers will avoid labeling 20% of their products as bioengineered , by replacing bioengineered with non - bioengineered ingredients , due to potential consumer reactions .

ams selected 20% for purposes of estimating costs and benefits in the ria following consideration of existing studies and surveys of consumer behavior and consideration of the requirements of the standard .

depending on how consumers respond , implementation of the standard may influence manufacturer and retailer demand for bioengineered and non - bioengineered foods .

congress may respond to stakeholder concerns about any market shifts resulting from the standard .

interactions with international trade .

unexpected issues may arise as implementation begins .

for example , ams states that it does not expect the standard to impact foreign trade .

however , it also notes that the usda foreign agriculture service is prepared to work closely with foreign countries that export food and agricultural products to the united states , to facilitate their understanding of the standard .

if trade issues arise , congress may choose to address harmonization of labeling requirements with foreign trading partners by amending applicability , disclosure , or administrative requirements in the 2016 act , or by other means .

many terms are used when describing human alterations of plants and animals over time .

unless otherwise noted , the definitions in this glossary derive from usda's online agricultural biotechnology glossary and are used for the purposes of this report .

agricultural b iotechnology .

a range of tools , including traditional breeding techniques , that alter living organisms , or parts of organisms , to make or modify products ; improve plants or animals ; or develop microorganisms for specific agricultural uses .

modern biotechnology today includes the tools of genetic engineering .

conventional breeding .

undefined in usda's agricultural biotechnology glossar y. usda defines the similar term , traditional breeding , as "modification of plants and animals through selective breeding .

practices used in traditional plant breeding may include aspects of biotechnology such as tissue culture and mutational breeding. .

gene editing .

a technique that allows researchers to alter the dna of organisms to insert , delete , or modify a gene or gene sequences to silence , enhance , or otherwise change an organism's specific genetic characteristics .

ge labeling .

on - package disclosure of genetically engineered foods or food ingredients .

genetically engineered ( ge ) .

produced through genetic engineering .

genetic engineering .

manipulation of an organism's genes by introducing , eliminating or rearranging specific genes using the methods of modern molecular biology , particularly those techniques referred to as recombinant dna techniques .

genetic modification .

the production of heritable improvements in plants or animals for specific uses , via either genetic engineering or other more traditional methods .

some countries other than the united states use this term to refer specifically to genetic engineering .

genetically modified organism ( gmo ) .

an organism produced through genetic modification .

recombinant dna .

a molecule of dna formed by joining different dna segments using recombinant dna technology .

recombinant dna technology .

procedures used to join together dna segments in a cell - free system ( eg , in a test tube outside living cells or organisms ) .

under appropriate conditions , a recombinant dna molecule can be introduced into a cell and copy itself ( replicate ) , either as an independent entity ( autonomously ) or as an integral part of a cellular chromosome .

selective breeding .

making deliberate crosses or matings of organisms so the offspring will have particular desired characteristics derived from one or both of the parents .

transgenic organism .

an organism resulting from the insertion of genetic material from another organism using recombinant dna techniques .

variety .

a subdivision of a species for taxonomic classification also referred to as a "cultivar. .

a variety is a group of individual plants that is uniform , stable , and distinct genetically from other groups of individuals in the same species .

