under the terms of the u.s. constitution , it is the responsibility of the house to impeach ( meaning , formally accuse ) a federal officer of high crimes and misdemeanors , and the responsibility of the senate to try and then possibly convict that officer .

the senate therefore does not initiate impeachment proceedings , but instead acts after the house has charged a federal officer with wrongdoing .

the constitution grants the senate the sole power to try all impeachments , and establishes four requirements for an impeachment trial in the senate: ( 1 ) the support of two - thirds of senators present is necessary to convict ; ( 2 ) senators must take an oath or an affirmation ; ( 3 ) the punishments the senate can issue cannot extend further than removal from office and disqualification from holding future office ; and ( 4 ) in the case of a presidential impeachment trial , the chief justice , and not the vice president or a senator , is the presiding officer .

all other trial procedures are left to the senate to determine itself .

indeed , in 1993 , the supreme court ruled—in response to a claim by an impeached federal judge that his trial was unconstitutional because the senate relied , in part , on a committee to collect evidence—that the judicial branch did not have a role to play in assessing the validity of senate impeachment procedures .

according to the supreme court , the constitution placed a few specific requirements on the trial , and "their nature suggests that the framers did not intend to impose additional limitations on the form of the senate proceedings. .

in each of the 15 impeachment trials the senate has completed since 1789 , the senate has therefore determined its method of proceeding .

although attention was certainly paid to past precedent , the senate established unique procedures for each trial to some extent , and sometimes the decisions reached regarding process were consensual or even unanimous .

notably , of the 5 full trials conducted in the last 80 years , 4 were of federal judges .

in these four cases the senate appointed a trial committee , composed of an equal number of senators from each party , to hear and consider evidence and report it to the senate .

this history did not provide the senate with a robust set of precedents to look to for guidance on how to conduct a modern trial , particularly if a committee will not be used .

trial committees were not intended to be used for presidential impeachments , and the only trial since 1936 conducted without a committee was that of president william jefferson clinton .

that trial illustrates the many procedural decisions reached that were tailored for that particular set of circumstances .

this report summarizes the existing rules and some past practices of the senate related to an impeachment trial of a federal official .

it does not discuss possible grounds for impeachment or other constitutional or legal issues which are addressed in crs report r46013 , impeachment and the constitution , by legislative attorneys jared p. cole and todd garvey .

the information presented in this report is drawn from published sources of congressional rules and precedents , as well as the public record of past impeachment trial proceedings .

it provides an overview of the procedures and should not be treated or cited as an authority on congressional proceedings .

consultation with the office of the senate parliamentarian is always advised regarding the possible application of rules and precedents .

the senate adopted a set of impeachment rules in 1868 , recommended by a select committee appointed for that purpose , in anticipation of the trial of president andrew johnson .

these were not the first rules regarding impeachment ever agreed to in the senate .

the senate had agreed to rules for its two earliest impeachment trials ( senator william blount , 1798-1799 , and district judge john pickering , 1803-1804 ) , but it seems to have considered the rules to apply only to the trial of that particular individual .

for the third impeachment trial , that of supreme court justice samuel chase ( 1804-1805 ) , the senate approved 19 impeachment rules , and these rules appear to have been used in the next two trials ( district judge james h. peck , 1831-1832 , and district judge west h. humphreys , 1862 ) .

the 1868 select committee in the johnson impeachment was explicit in its intent to recommend permanent rules , deeming it "proper , to report general rules for the trial of all impeachments. .

the select committee recommended 25 rules , many of which were the same as those adopted for the chase trial , and some of which codified practices from previous trials .

the rules reported by the 1868 select committee in the johnson impeachment chiefly concerned the mode and manner of preparing for a trial .

some senators argued that impeachment rules should not be too prescriptive regarding the actual trial proceedings , believing such decisions to be best made after the senate had convened for the trial .

they recognized that the outcome of a trial could depend "upon the rulings and mode of proceeding during the trial. .

but the lack of detail in the rules also reflected the nature of senate proceedings in the middle of the 19 th century .

without designated party floor leaders and with very few staff , senators were accustomed to discussing procedures on the floor , effectively working out a method of proceeding on legislation as they went along .

the senate adopted the rules reported by the select committee , and they have operated as the rules for impeachment trials since 1868 , with very few changes .

during the johnson trial , when disputes arose about the interpretation of the rules , the senate agreed to three changes to clarify their intent .

despite calls to revise the rules for the impeachment trials conducted early in the 20 th century , the impeachment rules were not changed again until 1935 .

at that time , the senate , in response to reported low attendance by senators during the 1933 trial of district judge harold louderback , agreed to the current rule xi , which allows for the establishment of a committee to receive evidence and hear testimony from witnesses ( see discussion of trial committees below ) .

the senate next reviewed its impeachment rules in 1974 , when the house was expected to impeach president richard nixon .

 ( the house had not impeached a federal officer since 1936. ) .

at that time , the senate directed the committee on rules and administration to examine senate impeachment rules and precedents with a view toward recommending necessary revisions for the conduct of a trial .

the committee met twice to discuss the rules and to pose questions to the senate parliamentarian and his assistant , and over two additional days it also heard testimony from senators regarding the rules .

the majority leader wrote a letter to the rules committee proposing significant changes to the impeachment rules , and the committee discussed these proposed changes as well .

the rules committee reported an original resolution ( s.res .

390 , 93 rd congress ) proposing adjustments to 13 of the 26 rules .

of the suggested changes , nearly all were meant to clarify the meaning of the rule or to codify what had been the practice in past trials .

the committee did not recommend any major changes to the rules or report any new rules .

as the accompanying committee report explained , "there appeared to be a consensus among the members that for the most part the existing rules should be retained and that amendments thereto should be proposed only with the most valid justification. .

the senate , however , never took up the resolution reported by the rules committee in 1974 because president nixon resigned before being impeached by the house .

twelve years later , when the house next impeached an officer , the senate again directed the rules and administration committee to review the rules .

the rules committee in 1986 recommended the changes that had been approved by the committee in 1974 , and the senate agreed to them .

no further changes have been made to the impeachment rules .

the rules , formally titled the "rules of procedure and practice in the senate when sitting on the trial of impeachments" are printed in the senate manual as well as in a 1986 senate document that also describes precedents and practices at an impeachment trial , procedure and guidelines for impeachment trials in the united states senate .

the presiding officer of an impeachment trial does not possess any more independent control over proceedings than the presiding officer does during the more common senate deliberations on legislation or nominations .

while the presiding officer , in either case , may rule on the proper interpretation of the rules and procedures of the senate , that ruling can be challenged by any senator .

in legislative or executive sessions of the senate , if any senator appeals a ruling by the presiding officer , the full senate considers the question , "shall the decision of the chair stand as the judgment of the senate ? .

impeachment rule vii lays out the process of challenging a ruling as it applies during an impeachment trial .

it states in part and the presiding officer on the trial may rule on all questions of evidence including , but not limited to , questions of relevancy , materiality , and redundancy of evidence and incidental questions , which ruling shall stand as the judgment of the senate , unless some member of the senate shall ask that a formal vote be taken thereon , in which case it shall be submitted to the senate for decision without debate ; or he may at his option , in the first instance , submit any such question to a vote of the members of the senate .

in other words , while the impeachment rules grant the presiding officer the authority to rule on questions , they also state that a single senator could instead request that the full senate vote on any such question .

in that case , pursuant to this rule , the question is not debatable , and a majority of senators voting would determine the outcome .

 ( by precedent , house managers or counsel for the impeached could not ask that a question be submitted to the senate. ) .

the published precedents state that all decisions of the chair are subject to appeal .

if a ruling concerning the admissibility of evidence is appealed ( or if the presiding officer submits such a question ) , the question put to the senate is: "is the evidence admissible ? .

in the case of other procedural issues the senate would vote on , the phrasing of the question put to the senate could vary with the question .

for example , in 1986 , during the trial of judge claiborne , the presiding officer ruled , in response to a motion by the defense counsel and at the request of the majority leader , "it is the chair's determination that the question of standard of evidence is for each senator to decide individually when voting on articles of impeachment. .

a senator requested that the senate vote on the question instead , and the presiding officer put the question on whether the motion of the counsel for the impeached judge—that the senate establish a "beyond a reasonable doubt" standard of proof in the trial—was "well taken. .

by a vote of 17 yeas and 75 nays ( 8 senators not voting ) , the senate voted that the motion was not well taken , effectively agreeing with the ruling of the presiding officer .

the senate , in short , is the final arbiter on any procedural questions .

impeachment rule vii states that "the vote shall be taken in accordance with the standing rules of the senate. .

that means these questions could be settled by roll call vote , but only if that request for the yeas and nays is supported by 1 / 5 of a quorum ( 11 senators ) , or , if the senate recently voted , 1 / 5 of the senators who voted .

the impeachment rules make several other references to the presiding officer of the trial .

impeachment rule iv restates the constitutional requirement that when the president of the united states has been impeached , the chief justice of the united states shall serve as the presiding officer .

impeachment rule iii tasks the presiding officer with administering the oath to senators .

rule v grants him general power to execute decisions of the senate where necessary ( which would include , for example , signing a summons the senate ordered to be issued to the person impeached , or signing a subpoena that the senate had agreed to issue ) .

rule xiii directs the presiding officer to cause the proclamation to be declared at the start of each day commanding those present to keep silent .

rule xvi requires that the parties to the case—the house managers and the impeached officer and his counsel—address the presiding officer when proposing motions , objecting to proceedings , or making any request related to the trial .

as mentioned above , rule xix requires the presiding officer to read aloud any question submitted in writing by a senator .

the presiding officer also puts the question on the vote on the articles of impeachment , pursuant to rule xxiii and as described above .

the presiding officer of the trial can vote when he or she is a senator .

if the vice president is presiding over a trial , and if there is a tie vote , then the vice president may vote .

in presidential impeachment trials , however , the vice president cannot preside and cannot vote .

the chief justice , when presiding over an impeachment trial , would not be expected to vote , even in the case of a tie .

if a vote on a question results in a tie , the question is decided in the negative .

when the senate convenes as a court of impeachment , it is in a distinct procedural mode , different from legislation session , where it considers bills and resolutions , and executive session , where it considers treaties and nominations .

in addition to having its own set of rules , the court of impeachment also keeps a separate journal .

 ( the journal is the constitutionally - required record of parliamentary actions taken by the senate. ) .

business in these distinct procedural modes is kept entirely separate .

for example , bills and resolutions cannot be introduced when the senate is in the mode of sitting for the trial , and committee reports cannot be filed .

this might mean that the senate chooses to spend some period of a day meeting in legislative or executive session and also spend a period meeting as court of impeachment , in order to provide an opportunity for other actions to occur .

for some legislative actions , unanimous consent may effectively be required .

notably , the senate must have a period for "morning business" in legislative session for various actions to occur—including the introduction of legislation and the filing of committee reports .

in modern practice , this is provided for in unanimous consent agreements for each day the senate meets .

the senate would need to reach a similar unanimous consent agreement for legislative sessions held on days during the trial in order for these actions to be allowed .

alternatively , the senate could agree by unanimous consent to arrange other methods for these actions to occur , even though the senate has not met that day in legislative session .

the impeachment rules provide for the senate to convene for an impeachment trial at noon ( rule xiii ) every day except sunday after a trial has begun ( rule iii ) .

while this might have been the expected schedule in the middle of the 19 th century , the impeachment rules also provide for the senate to modify this schedule by "order. .

in modern practice , the senate has adjusted the meeting days and times .

most often , the senate agreed by unanimous consent to the time of the next meeting .

alternatively , a motion to adjourn the senate sitting in a trial of impeachment to a time certain is subject to amendment , but it is not debatable and could be agreed to by majority vote .

the senate also could agree to an order altering the default time for the senate to sit for the trial each day , and this order would not be subject to debate .

in short , a numerical majority can determine the day and times of meeting for an impeachment trial .

impeachment rule xiii also provides that , when the trial adjourns , the senate resumes consideration of legislative ( or executive ) business .

the rule states , " ( t ) he adjournment of the senate sitting in said trial shall not operate as an adjournment of the senate. .

as a result , it is possible for the senate to convene to conduct business in legislative ( or executive ) session before noon , convene the trial at noon pursuant to the rules ( or at some other time if decided by the senate ) , adjourn the impeachment trial for the day and return to legislative ( or executive ) session to conduct more business .

the senate could also meet for other purposes on days the senate is not meeting for the trial .

in the modern judicial trials and during the clinton trial , the senate did conduct other business on some of the days on which it also considered articles of impeachment .

limited legislative business was accomplished during the six weeks of the clinton trial , but that trial occurred at the very start of the 106 th congress ( 1999-2000 ) , while committees were still organizing and legislation may have still been developing .

other factors could certainly affect the ability of the senate to approve legislation while a trial is being conducted .

bipartisan support is generally necessary to take up most legislation in the senate , and forming such coalitions could be challenging if the impeachment proceedings are contentious .

the attention of senators and their staff might also be expected to be directed toward impeachment proceedings .

in addition , it is not clear how some procedures that apply to the consideration of legislation and nominations in the senate are impacted when the senate sits for an impeachment trial .

for example , if cloture was filed on a matter in legislative session , and the senate was sitting in trial when the cloture motion matured , it is not clear if the senate would vote on the cloture motion at that time , or instead not until it adjourned the trial for the day .

it is also not clear how legislation to be considered under expedited procedure statutes , such as the congressional review act , the war powers resolution , or the trade act ( each of which provide for specific senate actions at times certain ) could be impacted by a senate trial .

