social security provides insured workers and their eligible family members with a measure of protection against the loss of income due to the worker's retirement , disability , or death .

the amount of the monthly benefit payable to workers and their family members is based on the worker's career - average earnings from jobs covered by social security ( i.e. , jobs in which the worker's earnings were subject to the social security payroll tax ) .

although participation in social security is compulsory for most workers , about 6% of all workers in paid employment or self - employment are not covered by social security .

most noncovered workers are state and local government employees who are covered by alternative staff - retirement systems or permanent civilian federal employees hired before january 1 , 1984 , most of whom are covered by the civil service retirement system ( csrs ) or other alternative retirement plans .

social security benefits are designed to replace a certain percentage of a worker's career - average earnings ( referred to as the replacement rate ) for those who remain in covered employment throughout their careers .

the benefit formula is weighted to replace a greater share of career - average earnings ( i.e. , provide a higher replacement rate ) for low - paid workers than for high - paid workers .

however , providing an appropriate replacement rate for beneficiaries whose careers are split between covered and noncovered employment ( referred to hereinafter as split - career beneficiaries ) is challenging because years of noncovered earnings are marked as zeros in social security earnings records , so split - career beneficiaries appear to have low career - average earnings .

therefore , without adjusting for noncovered earnings , split - career beneficiaries would receive a higher replacement rate than beneficiaries with the same earnings who spent their entire careers in social security - covered employment .

the windfall elimination provision ( wep ) is a modified benefit formula that reduces social security benefits for certain retired or disabled workers who have earnings not covered by social security and are entitled to pension benefits based on those noncovered earnings ( including certain foreign pensions ) .

its purpose is to remove an unintended advantage or windfall that these workers would otherwise receive as a result of the interaction between the regular social security benefit formula and the workers' relatively short careers in social security - covered employment .

in december 2018 , nearly 1.9 million people ( or about 3% of all social security beneficiaries ) were affected by the wep .

some argue that the current - law wep formula generally fails to provide the correct benefit adjustment ( reduction ) to affected beneficiaries .

it overadjusts the benefit for some affected workers by producing a relatively large benefit reduction that gives them a lower replacement rate than similar workers whose entire careers were covered by social security ; in contrast , it underadjusts the benefit for some other affected beneficiaries by producing a relatively small benefit reduction , giving them a higher replacement rate than similar workers whose entire careers were covered by social security .

legislative proposals have been introduced to substitute the current wep with a proportional formula that would provide the same replacement rate to split - career beneficiaries and beneficiaries whose entire careers are covered .

this report explains how the proportional formula would work and how it differs from the current - law wep formula .

it also discusses how social security benefits would change under the proportional formula for workers with different levels of earnings , years of noncovered earnings , and timing of those noncovered earnings ( i.e. , early career , midcareer , or late career ) .

lastly , this report concludes with historical and recent legislative proposals that are based on the proportional formula .

the proportional formula discussed above would differ from the current - law wep formula in terms of monthly benefit amounts , improper payments , and notification to beneficiaries .

in 1981 , proposals to address social security benefits for individuals receiving pensions from noncovered employment were discussed as part of broad reform efforts to address social security's financing issues , which were a major concern at the time .

some of the proposals called for worker pia computations to use both covered and noncovered earnings , and for the pia based on combined earnings to then be reduced by the ratio of noncovered earnings to combined earnings .

this method is commonly referred to as the proportional formula , as discussed earlier in this report .

this proposal was recommended by the national commission on social security and included in section 301 of h.r .

3207 , the social security amendments of 1981 as introduced in the 97 th congress .

other proposals called for a modified benefit formula that would change the first replacement factor in the regular benefit formula for workers with pensions based on noncovered work , which is similar to current law .

for example , a may 1981 reagan administration proposal would have substituted the 90% replacement factor in the regular benefit formula with a 32% replacement factor for affected beneficiaries .

the proposal would have guaranteed that the social security benefit reduction could not exceed one - half of the noncovered pension .

in january 1983 , the national commission on social security reform ( ncssr , better known as the greenspan commission ) recommended eliminating the windfall portion of benefits for individuals who received a pension based on noncovered employment .

the two methods discussed above were suggested: ( 1 ) the proportional formula based on covered and noncovered earnings , and ( 2 ) the modified benefit formula , substituting the 90% replacement factor with 32% .

in the same year , ssa offered comments on the two methods .

the agency indicated that the proportional formula would be the most conceptually appropriate , but would require ssa to maintain detailed records on workers' noncovered earnings in a manner comparable to the current covered earnings record operations , which would have required extensive data reporting , maintenance , and correction processes , and could likely not have been done with limited cost at that time .

in contrast , ssa indicated the modified benefit formula based on the replacement factor would achieve the proportional formula's approximate results and be vastly easier to administer .

ssa also recommended lowering the 90% replacement factor to 61% ( the midpoint between the 90% factor and the 32% factor ) , as the 32% replacement factor would overadjust for the windfall .

in march 1983 , congress incorporated the ncssr's recommendations ( with some modifications ) , along with additional provisions to resolve the remaining long - range deficit , into the social security amendments of 1983 ( p.l .

98-21 ) .

the conference agreed that the 90% replacement factor in the regular benefit formula would be substituted with a 40% replacement factor ( phased in over five years ) , as in current law .

since 2004 , various bills have been introduced to replace the current wep formula with the proportional formula based on both covered and noncovered earnings .

partly because all covered and noncovered earnings have been reported to ssa on form w - 2 since 1978 , sufficient earnings records are now available to apply the proportional formula .

thus , a previous major area of concern for administering a proportional formula has been alleviated .

legislative proposals based on the proportional formula usually address two essential questions: ( 1 ) whether the proportional formula would be applied to beneficiaries affected by the current wep ; and ( 2 ) how to treat beneficiaries who would receive a lower benefit under the proportional formula compared to current law .

for the first question , proposals either apply the proportional formula to all current and future affected beneficiaries , or apply the proportional formula only to certain future beneficiaries and provide an additional monthly benefit ( usually referred to as a rebate ) to those affected by the current wep .

for the second question , some proposals include a no - benefit - cut provision such that the beneficiary would receive a benefit based on the higher of the current wep formula and the proportional formula .

for example , s. 113 and h.r .

2797 in the 112 th congress would have applied the proportional formula to all beneficiaries ( both current and future beneficiaries ) after 1985 and provided a no - benefit - cut or hold harmless provision to beneficiaries who had worked in noncovered positions prior to one year after the bill's enactment .

in a somewhat different approach , h.r .

3934 and h.r .

4540 in the 116 th congress would apply the proportional formula to beneficiaries becoming eligible after a certain date , such as december 31 , 2021 ; provide a rebate to beneficiaries affected by the current - law wep ; and mandate a no - benefit - cut provision for some or all future beneficiaries .

the above two bills introduced in the 116 th congress also include provisions to require ssa to show noncovered as well as covered earnings records on social security statements and to require studies on ways to facilitate data exchanges between ssa and state and local governments to improve current - law wep administration .

