federal rulemaking is one of the crucial methods through which public policy is established and implemented in the united states .

under the constitutional separation of powers system , congress enacts statutes th at often delegate rulemaking authority to federal agencies .

using that delegated authority , agencies issue regulations to implement those statutes and set the details of public policy .

to structure the ways in which agencies issue regulations pursuant to their delegated authority , congress has created a statutory scheme of procedural controls .

the most significant of these controls is the administrative procedure act ( apa ) of 1946 , which generally requires agencies to issue a proposed rule and take public comment prior to issuing a final rule .

congress designed these basic steps—which create the backbone of the federal rulemaking process—to allow for public input into federal agencies' policymaking decisions .

as one scholar noted , "one of the apa's objectives was to open rulemaking to public participation , especially by those whose interests might be adversely affected by an agency's actions .

congress viewed hearing from such parties as a normal part of the legislative process , and therefore applicable to rulemaking. .

the apa's notice and comment requirements are possibly the best known and most significant mechanism allowing for public input into the rulemaking process .

a lesser known procedural control that congress created in the apa is a petition mechanism through which any interested party can request an agency to issue , amend , or repeal a rule .

an agency is not necessarily required to grant the petition or take the requested action , but the apa does require the agency to respond and to do so in a "reasonable time. .

thus , the apa petition mechanism is a potentially efficient ( and arguably underused ) means for an individual or stakeholder to call on an agency to take a particular action .

this report briefly discusses the origin of the apa petition mechanism , outlines the mechanism's requirements for agencies , provides information from various outside sources about what may make an effective petition , discusses potential benefits to agencies and the public , and , finally , identifies some examples of statutory petition mechanisms that congress created in addition to the apa's .

the apa's petition mechanism essentially re - stated the right to petition the government established by the u.s. constitution , which can be traced as far back as the magna carta and declaration of independence .

section 553 ( e ) of the apa states , "each agency shall give an interested person the right to petition for the issuance , amendment , or repeal of a rule. .

such petitions are sometimes referred to as 553 ( e ) petitions , petitions for rulemaking , petitions for reconsideration , administrative petitions , or citizens' petitions .

although section 553 ( e ) is only one sentence in length and provides very little detail , other sections of the apa contain some additional requirements for agencies with regard to receiving , considering , and responding to matters presented to them , including rulemaking petitions .

those requirements are discussed below .

notably , however , agencies have a great deal of discretion in determining the specifics of their procedures for receiving , considering , and responding to petitions .

rulemaking petitions have several potential benefits , such as that they can provide additional , low - cost opportunities for public participation in federal rulemaking .

the subsections below identify and discuss several potential benefits of rulemaking petitions .

however , as discussed in the last subsection below , responding to rulemaking petitions could potentially require agencies to allocate resources they would otherwise use elsewhere .

nonetheless , considering and responding to rulemaking petitions can be time - and resource - intensive for agencies .

in 2013 , the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) published a proposed rule to amend its procedures for receiving and considering petitions .

in the document , the agency cited an increase in the number of rulemaking petitions it had received recently , stating that this "presented a significant resource challenge to the nrc. .

such allocation of resources could cause delays in other activities at an agency , such as issuing other regulations .

the use of resources to respond to a petition varies widely depending on the nature and content of the petition , however .

the effectiveness of , and timing of response to , a petition for rulemaking likely depends on many factors , including the quality and nature of the arguments presented , the policy preferences of the agency and the administration , any statutory requirements or constraints the agency faces , the evidence available to the agency and its ability to justify taking any particular action , and whatever preferences the agency and administration may have for prioritization of resources at the agency .

many of these factors are outside of the control of a petitioner , but there are certain steps a petitioner might take to make a stronger case to the agency .

some outside groups have offered advice to the public for how to petition agencies more effectively .

for example , the center for effective government suggested that a petition for rulemaking should include information such as an explanation of the proposed action ; the language the petitioner would like to propose for a new or amended rule or eliminate from a rule ; information and arguments that support the petitioner's proposed action , including relevant technical and scientific data ; specific facts or circumstances that support the proposed action ; and relevant legal information about any specific laws or statutory provisions that is relevant to the petition and the rule in question .

individual agencies may provide guidance , or even requirements , for petitioners on their websites or in their regulations .

for example , some of the suggestions provided by the center for effective government above are from the federal aviation administration's ( faa ) regulations and guidance , which are on its website .

similarly , the nrc has regulations and detailed information on its website on how to submit petitions , as well as information tracking petitions that have been submitted to it , including visual information on the number and status of the petitions that have been submitted .

as noted above , however , acus found in 2014 that few agencies had established official procedures for receiving , considering , and responding to petitions .

as such , guidance may not necessarily be available for any particular agency's expectations or requirements .

in such circumstances , general guidelines , such as those referred to above from the center for effective government , may be useful .

in addition to the apa petition mechanism , congress has enacted various criteria for specific agencies' decisionmaking processes .

generally , these additional statutory mechanisms appear to build upon the 553 ( e ) petition mechanism .

a comprehensive list of all such provisions is beyond the scope of this report , but some examples include the following: the fixing america's surface transportation act required fmcsa to publish on a publicly accessible website a summary of all petitions for regulatory action submitted to fmcsa ; "prioritize the petitions submitted based on the likelihood of safety improvements resulting from the regulatory action requested ; " respond to each petition within 180 days of posting the summary ; prioritize responses to petitions consistent with a petition's potential to reduce crashes , improve enforcement , and reduce unnecessary burdens ; and keep an updated inventory of the petitions on its website .

the endangered species act states , "to the maximum extent practicable , within 90 days after receiving the petition of an interested person under section 553 ( e ) of title 5 , to add a species to , or to remove a species from , either of the lists published under subsection ( c ) , the secretary [of the interior] shall make a finding as to whether the petition presents substantial scientific or commercial information indicating that the petitioned action may be warranted .

if such a petition is found to present such information , the secretary shall promptly commence a review of the status of the species concerned .

the secretary shall promptly publish each finding made under this subparagraph in the federal register. .

the food , drug , and cosmetic act contains requirements for the secretary of health and human services and for individuals petitioning the agency for a regulation on food additives .

the statute lists information the petitions shall include , such as detailed scientific information about the additive and "full reports of investigations made with respect to the safety for use of such additive , including full information as to the methods and controls used in conducting such investigations. .

it also requires a petition to respond to requests from the secretary for additional information and further requires the secretary to publish notice of the regulation proposed by the petitioner .

