s ince the u.s. small business administration's ( sba's ) creation in 1953 , the sba disaster loan program has provided low - interest disaster loans to businesses to help them repair , rebuild , and recover from federally declared disasters .

sba business disaster loans fall into two categories: ( 1 ) economic injury disaster loans ( eidl ) , and ( 2 ) business physical disaster loans .

eidls provide up to $2 million for working capital to help small businesses meet financial obligations and operating expenses that could have been met had the disaster not occurred .

loan amounts for eidls are based on actual economic injury and financial needs , regardless of whether the business suffered any property damage .

business physical disaster loans provide up to $2 million to businesses of all sizes to repair or replace damaged physical property , including machinery , equipment , fixtures , inventory , and leasehold improvements that are not covered by insurance .

in addition to repairing and replacing damaged physical property , a portion of the loans can also be applied toward mitigation measures , including grading or contouring land , installing sewer backflow valves , relocating or elevating utilities or mechanical equipment , building retaining walls , and building safe rooms or similar structures designed to protect occupants from natural disasters .

the limits on post - disaster mitigation loans are the lesser of either the measure or 20% of the verified loss .

an important aspect of the sba disaster loan program is that a business must already be damaged and be located in a federally declared disaster area to apply a portion of its disaster loan toward mitigation measures .

as will be discussed in this report , congress experimented with business pre - disaster mitigation ( pdm ) through a pilot program operated by the sba from fy2000 to fy2006 .

providing mitigation assistance to businesses after a disaster is arguably consistent with the mitigation policies of other federal programs .

for example , the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) provides both pre - disaster and post - disaster mitigation grants to states and localities , but post - disaster mitigation grants are substantially larger than pre - disaster grants .

for example , from fy2014 to fy2018 , $3.35 billion was spent on post - disaster mitigation grants through fema's hazard mitigation grant program ( hmgp ) and fire management assistance grants ( fmags ) .

in contrast , during the same period , $430 million was spent on fema's pre - disaster mitigation ( pdm ) program ( see figure 1 ) .

figure 1 .

fema pre - disaster mitigation funding and post - disaster mitigationâ fundingfy2014-fy2018source: data obtained from fema , data feeds , https: / / www.fema.gov / data - feeds .

notes: pdm denotes fema's pre - disaster mitigation program .

hmgp denotes fema's hazard mitigation grant program .

fma denotes fire management assistance provided by fema's fire management assistance grants .

funding for pre - disaster mitigation , however , may increase with the enactment of the disaster recovery reform act of 2018 ( drra , division d of p.l .

115-254 ) .

section 1234 of drra authorized the national public infrastructure pre - disaster mitigation fund ( npipdm ) , which allows the president to set aside 6% from the disaster relief f und ( drf ) with respect to each declared major disaster under the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( stafford act , p.l .

93-288 , as amended ; 42 u.s.c .

â§â§5121 et seq. ) .

this 6% "set aside" is the aggregate amount funded by the following sections of the stafford act: 403 ( essential assistance ) ; 406 ( repair , restoration , and replacement of damaged facilities ) ; 407 ( debris removal ) ; 408 ( federal assistance to individuals and households ) ; 410 ( unemployment assistance ) ; 416 ( crisis counseling assistance and training ) ; and 428 ( public assistance program alternative procedures ) .

although post - disaster and pre - disaster mitigation are not mutually exclusive , there are reasons why one may be favored over the other .

the following section provides the underlying rationale for the two approaches to mitigation .

over the years , scholars , researchers , and policymakers have debated whether mitigation is more effective before or after an incident .

the following sections list the rationales for each approach .

based on findings similar to the one issued by the national institute of building sciences , congress in 1999 passed p.l .

106-24 which amended the small business act to include a pre - disaster mitigation ( pdm ) pilot program .

the program authorized sba to make low - interest ( 4% or less ) fixed - rate loans of no more than $50,000 per year to small businesses to implement mitigation measures designed to protect small businesses from future disaster - related damage .

section 1 ( a ) of p.l .

106-24 authorized the sba during fiscal years 2000 through 2004 , to establish a predisaster mitigation program to make such loans ( either directly or in cooperation with banks or other lending institutions through agreements to participate on an immediate or deferred ( guaranteed ) basis ) , as the administrator may determine to be necessary or appropriate , to enable small businesses to use mitigation techniques in support of a formal mitigation program established by the federal emergency management agency , except that no loan or guarantee may be extended to a small business under this subparagraph unless the administration finds that the small business is otherwise unable to obtain credit for the purposes described in this subparagraph .

the sba pdm pilot program was developed in support of "project impact," a new fema mitigation program that emphasized disaster prevention rather than solely relying on response and recovery activities .

similarly , sba pdm loans were intended to lessen or prevent future damages to businesses .

according to the house report on h.r .

818 ( the companion bill to s. 388 , which became p.l .

106-24 ) the cost of disaster assistance has risen over the past several years due to increases in construction and other costs .

by implementing a program to help small businesses use techniques that would lessen damage in the event of natural disasters the possibility exists to save millions of dollars in potential losses .

the report also stated that the administrator of the small business administration , testified concerning the sba's request for $934 million dollars in disaster loans for anticipated damage in the coming year .

she also discussed fema and sba's current efforts at mitigation and stated that fema estimates a $2 saving for every $1 spent on mitigation .

the administrator expressed strong support for h.r .

818 .

section 1 ( c ) of p.l .

106-24 required the sba administrator to submit a report to congress on the effectiveness of the pilot program .

the report required information and analysis on the areas served under the pilot program ; the number and dollar value of loans made under the pilot program ; the estimated savings to the federal government resulting from the pilot program ; and other relevant information as the administrator determines to be appropriate for evaluating the pilot program .

congress initially authorized appropriations of $15 million each fiscal year to carry out the pdm pilot program for fy2000 through fy2004 .

congress later extended the program until the end of fy2006 and authorized an additional $15 million for the program in fy2005 and $15 million in fy2006 .

since its expiration at the end of fy2006 , many members have discussed the possibility of reauthorizing the pdm pilot program .

for nearly a century , congress has contemplated how to help businesses repair and rebuild after a disaster and protect their investments from future incidents .

though businesses can use a portion of their sba disaster loans for mitigation measures , critics might question why only damaged businesses are eligible for disaster loans .

the sba's pdm pilot program addressed this criticism , but the program had few participants .

as described in this report , the lack of participation could have been a result of its alignment with fema programs related to delays in the implementation of fema's project impact , eligibility limitations , and the number of businesses that were aware that the program was available .

if congress were to reauthorize the sba pdm pilot program , among the policy options available are decoupling the pdm loan program from fema programs and requiring enhanced advertising and outreach efforts .

another option would be to restructure business physical disaster loans so that a greater portion of the loan can be used for mitigation .

finally , congress could examine methods that would help businesses develop business continuity and disaster response plans .

businesses may be more receptive to pre - disaster mitigation loans as a result of the large - scale disasters that have occurred since 2005 .

prior to hurricane katrina , the salience of disaster issues generally , and mitigation specifically , may have been on the periphery of business concerns .

while there were some large - scale disasters , the scope of those disasters tended to be regional rather than national .

furthermore , the focus of emergency management during that time was arguably more oriented toward terrorism concerns resulting from the 9 / 11 attacks .

consequently , the need to mitigate against future disasters may have been just one concern coequal with other , competing concerns .

the policy environment may have changed as a result of hurricanes katrina , harvey , irma , maria , and michael .

these disasters , in addition to increasing concerns about the impact of climate change on the frequency and severity of disasters , may make businesses more amenable to the idea of pre - disaster mitigation loans to protect their investment from future disasters .

project impact p.l .

104-204 established a mitigation program ( which fema named project impact ) to help communities make mitigation investments prior to disasters to reduce their vulnerability to future disasters .

the program was based on a "whole of community" approach involving all sectors of the nation .

according to the house report on the bill: the conferees agree that up to $5,000,000 of the amount provided for pre - disaster mitigation is available immediately to fund up to seven pilot projects approved by the director of fema .

prior to the expenditure of the remaining funds for any specific pre - disaster mitigation program or project , the conferees direct that the appropriate level of funding be used by the agency to conduct a formal needs - based analysis and cost / benefit study of all of the various mitigation alternatives .

the results of these analyses and studies , along with any relevant information learned from the aforementioned seven pilot projects , shall be incorporated into a comprehensive , long - term national pre - disaster mitigation plan .

the plan should be developed , independently peer - reviewed , and submitted to the committees on appropriations not later than march 31 , 1998 .

fema is directed to involve in this planning effort participants which shall include , but are not limited to , representatives of fema and other federal agencies , state and local governments , industry , universities , professional societies , the national academy of sciences , the partnership for natural disaster reduction , and [centers for protection against natural disasters] cpand .

the conferees intend that none of the remaining funds provided herein be obligated until the plan has been completed and submitted as outlined above .

the conferees note that this approach is intended to be the foundation for providing the best and most cost - effective solution to reduce the tremendous human and financial costs associated with natural disasters .

project impact was designed to serve as a model for promoting mainstream emergency management and mitigation practices into every community in america .

the program asked communities to identify risks and establish plans to reduce those risks .

it also asked communities to establish partnerships with community stakeholders , including the business sector .

primary tenets of project impact mitigation is a local issue that is best addressed through local partnerships involving the government , business , and citizens ; the participation of the private sector is essential because disasters threaten the economic and commercial growth of communities ; and mitigation consists of long - term efforts and requires long - investments .

methodology members of the community , including elected officials , local , state , and federal disaster personnel , business representatives , environmental groups , and citizens , joined together to form a disaster resistant community planning committee that ( 1 ) examined risks hazards and identified vulnerabilities to them ; ( 2 ) prioritized risk reduction actions based on the hazard identification and vulnerability assessment ; and ( 3 ) communicated its findings and mitigation plan to other community leaders and residents .

project impact grants project impact grants were largely used to fund planning and outreach activities .

the project impact grants could be used to fund costs associated with logistics and meetings , staff support , and travel to meetings with the community or to fema project impact meetings ; training including costs to train state officials supporting project impact and to develop training packages for state and local officials ; travel of local community officials to other communities , state meetings , or national conferences at state request to share project impact information ; state costs in information development and dissemination to support project impact ; and expert , short - term technical assistance support to project impact communities .

according to a government accountability office ( gao ) report , state and local officials said that project impact has been successful in increasing awareness of and community support for mitigation efforts due to its funding of these types of activities .

the same gao report stated during fiscal years 1997 through 2001 , project impact provided a total of $77 million to communities within every state and certain u.s. territories .

unlike the hmgp , the amount of project impact funding available to communities within a state was not predicated upon the occurrence of a disaster ; in fact , the program was structured so that under its funding formula , communities in every state participated in the program .

by 2001 , there were nearly 250 communities participating in the program , with project impact communities receiving grants between $60,000 and $1,000,000 .

appendix iii lists project impact grants by year and community .

while states selected which communities received project impact grants , communities were responsible for selecting the mitigation measures to fund with these grants .

similar to the hmgp , however , communities were required to provide 25 percent of the costs for the mitigation measures .

the george w. bush administration eliminated project impact from the fy2002 budget and fema rebranded project impact as the pre - disaster mitigation ( pdm ) program .

the pdm program retained some of project impact's themes , but placed the responsibility on the governor of each state to suggest up to five communities to be considered for pre - disaster mitigation assistance .

while the governor nominated potential grantees , fema made the final selections .

in addition , under the statute , fema had the discretion under "extraordinary circumstances" to award a grant to a local government that had not been recommended by a governor .

sba pdm pilot loan program loan application sba published notices in the federal register announcing the availability of pre - disaster mitigation loans in 2003 .

the notice designated a 30-day application filing period with specific opening dates and filing deadlines , as well as the locations for obtaining and filing applications .

in additional to the federal register notification , sba coordinated with fema to issue press releases to inform potential applicants of the loan program .

businesses were required to submit a pre - disaster mitigation small business loan application to sba during the filing period .

applications had to include a written statement from the state or local coordinator confirming that the mitigation project was ( 1 ) located in a project impact community , and ( 2 ) in accordance with the specific priorities and goals of the community participating in the pre - disaster mitigation community .

the completed application served as the loan request .

loans were provided on a first - come , first - served basis until sba allocated all program funds .

if sba declined a loan request , sba notified the business in writing with the rationale for the denial .

sba also advised the business of the procedures to request reconsideration of the decision .

loan terms the sba pdm pilot program provided businesses up to $50,000 per fiscal year to finance mitigation measures to protect commercial property , leasehold improvements , or contents from disaster - related damages that could occur in the future .

mitigation loans could also be used to relocate the business .

interest rates for the loans had a statutory ceiling set at 4% per annum .

loan eligibility businesses applying for sba pdm loans had to meet certain criteria to be eligible for mitigation loans .

two , in particular , were designed to tie the sba pdm pilot program to fema programs .

first , as already noted , the business had to be located in a participating project impact community ; and , second , if the mitigation measures were designed specifically to protect against flooding , the business had to be located in a special flood hazard area ( sfha ) .

additional criteria for loan eligibility required that the business and its affiliates lack the financial resources to fund the mitigation measures without undue hardship ; the business be a small business as defined by sba regulations ; the business be in operation in the same location for at least one year ; and the mitigation loan had to be used for the protection of a building leased primarily for commercial rather than residential purposes , if the business leased out real property .

businesses were not eligible for the sba pdm loan program if the business: was primarily engaged in political or lobbying activities ; derived more than one - third of its revenues from legal gambling activities ; or owners were incarcerated , on parole , or on probation .

