this report describes and analyzes annual appropriations for the department of homeland security ( dhs ) for fy2020 .

it compares the enacted fy2019 appropriations for dhs , the donald j. trump administration's fy2020 budget request , and the appropriations measures developed and ultimately enacted in response to it .

this report identifies additional informational resources , reports , and products on dhs appropriations that provide context for the discussion .

a list of congressional research service ( crs ) policy experts with whom congressional clients may consult on specific topics may be found in crs report r42638 , appropriations: crs experts .

the suite of crs reports on homeland security appropriations tracks legislative action and congressional issues related to dhs appropriations , with particular attention paid to discretionary funding amounts .

these reports do not provide in - depth analysis of specific issues related to mandatory funding—such as retirement pay—nor do they systematically follow other legislation related to the authorizing or amending of dhs programs , activities , or fee revenues .

discussion of appropriations legislation involves a variety of specialized budgetary concepts .

the appendix to this report explains several of these concepts , including budget authority , obligations , outlays , discretionary and mandatory spending , offsetting collections , allocations , and adjustments to the discretionary spending caps under the budget control act ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) .

a more complete discussion of those terms and the appropriations process in general can be found in crs report r42388 , the congressional appropriations process: an introduction , coordinated by james v. saturno , and the government accountability office's a glossary of terms used in the federal budget process .

this section provides an overview of the legislative process thus far for appropriations for the department of homeland security for fy2020 , from the administration's initial request , through enactment of annual appropriations in division d of p.l .

116-93 .

generally , the homeland security appropriations bill includes all annual appropriations provided for dhs , allocating resources to every departmental component .

discretionary appropriations provide roughly two - thirds to three - fourths of the annual funding for dhs operations , depending how one accounts for disaster relief spending and funding for oco .

the remainder of the budget is a mix of fee revenues , trust funds , and mandatory spending .

annual appropriations measures for dhs typically have been organized into five titles .

the first four are thematic groupings of components , while the fifth provides general direction to the department , and sometimes includes provisions providing additional budget authority .

for additional perspectives on fy2020 dhs appropriations , see the following: crs report r45972 , comparing dhs component funding , fy2020: in brief ; crs report r44604 , trends in the timing and size of dhs appropriations: in brief ; and crs report r44052 , dhs budget v. dhs appropriations: fact sheet .

congressional clients also may wish to consult crs's experts directly .

table 11 lists crs analysts and specialists who have expertise in policy areas linked to dhs appropriations .

budget authority , obligations , and outlays federal government spending involves a multistep process that begins with the enactment of budget authority by congress .

federal agencies then obligate funds from enacted budget authority to pay for their activities .

finally , payments are made to liquidate those obligations ; the actual payment amounts are reflected in the budget as outlays .

budget authority is established through appropriations acts or direct spending legislation and determines the amounts that are available for federal agencies to spend .

the antideficiency act prohibits federal agencies from obligating more funds than the budget authority enacted by congress .

budget authority also may be indefinite in amount , as when congress enacts appropriations providing "such sums as may be necessary" to complete a project or purpose .

budget authority may be available on a one - year , multiyear , or no - year basis .

one - year budget authority is available for obligation only during a specific fiscal year ; any unobligated funds at the end of that year are no longer available for spending .

multiyear budget authority specifies a range of time during which funds may be obligated for spending , and no - year budget authority is available for obligation for an indefinite period of time .

obligations are incurred when federal agencies employ personnel , enter into contracts , receive services , and engage in similar transactions in a given fiscal year—which create a legal requirement for the government to pay .

outlays are the funds that are actually spent during the fiscal year .

because multiyear and no - year budget authorities may be obligated over a number of years , outlays do not always match the budget authority enacted in a given year .

additionally , budget authority may be obligated in one fiscal year but spent in a future fiscal year , especially with certain contracts .

in sum , budget authority allows federal agencies to incur obligations and authorizes payments , or outlays , to be made from the treasury .

discretionary funded agencies and programs , and appropriated entitlement programs , are funded each year in appropriations acts .

discretionary and mandatory spending gross budget authority , or the total funds available for spending by a federal agency , may be composed of discretionary and mandatory spending .

discretionary spending is not mandated by existing law and is thus appropriated yearly by congress through appropriations acts .

the budget enforcement act of 1990 defines discretionary appropriations as budget authority provided in annual appropriations acts and the outlays derived from that authority , but it excludes appropriations for entitlements .

mandatory spending , also known as direct spending , consists of budget authority and resulting outlays provided in laws other than appropriations acts and is typically not appropriated each year .

some mandatory entitlement programs , however , must be appropriated each year and are included in appropriations acts .

within dhs , coast guard retirement pay is an example of appropriated mandatory spending .

offsetting collections offsetting funds are collected by the federal government , either from government accounts or the public , as part of a business - type transaction such as collection of a fee .

these funds are not considered federal revenue .

instead , they are counted as negative outlays .

dhs net discretionary budget authority , or the total funds appropriated by congress each year , is composed of discretionary spending minus any fee or fund collections that offset discretionary spending .

some collections offset a portion of an agency's discretionary budget authority .

other collections offset an agency's mandatory spending .

these mandatory spending elements are typically entitlement programs under which individuals , businesses , or units of government that meet the requirements or qualifications established by law are entitled to receive certain payments if they establish eligibility .

the dhs budget features two mandatory entitlement programs: the secret service and the coast guard retired pay accounts ( pensions ) .

some entitlements are funded by permanent appropriations , and others are funded by annual appropriations .

secret service retirement pay is a permanent appropriation and , as such , is not annually appropriated .

in contrast , coast guard retirement pay is annually appropriated .

in addition to these entitlements , the dhs budget contains offsetting trust and public enterprise funds .

these funds are not appropriated by congress .

they are available for obligation and included in the president's budget to calculate the gross budget authority .

302 ( a ) and 302 ( b ) allocations in general practice , the maximum budget authority for annual appropriations ( including dhs ) is determined through a two - stage congressional budget process .

in the first stage , congress sets overall spending totals in the annual concurrent resolution on the budget .

subsequently , these totals are allocated among the congressional committees , usually through the statement of managers for the conference report on the budget resolution .

these amounts are known as the 302 ( a ) allocations .

they include discretionary totals available to the committees on appropriations for enactment in annual appropriations bills through the subcommittees responsible for the development of the bills .

in the second stage of the process , the appropriations committees allocate the 302 ( a ) discretionary funds among their subcommittees for each of the appropriations bills .

these amounts are known as the 302 ( b ) allocations .

these allocations must add up to no more than the 302 ( a ) discretionary allocation and form the basis for enforcing budget discipline , since any bill reported with a total above the ceiling is subject to a point of order .

the 302 ( b ) allocations may be adjusted during the year by the respective appropriations committee issuing a report delineating the revised suballocations as the various appropriations bills progress toward final enactment .

table a - 1 shows comparable figures for the 302 ( b ) allocation for fy2020 , based on the adjusted net discretionary budget authority included in division a of p.l .

116-6 , the president's request for fy2020 , and the house and senate subcommittee allocations for the homeland security appropriations bill for fy2020 .

a series of amendments were offered and adopted in the house full committee markup of the fy2020 dhs appropriations bill that , according to cbo , put the bill $3.066 billion over its 302 ( b ) discretionary allocation .

this scoring was later revised to $1.9 billion .

these provisions were not included in the final fy2020 dhs annual appropriations act .

the budget control act , discretionary spending caps , and adjustments the budget control act established enforceable discretionary limits , or caps , for defense and nondefense spending for each fiscal year from fy2012 through fy2021 .

subsequent legislation , including the bipartisan budget acts of 2013 , 2015 , 2018 , and 2019 , amended those caps .

most of the budget for dhs is considered nondefense spending .

in addition , the budget control act allows for adjustments that would raise the statutory caps to cover funding for overseas contingency operations / global war on terror , emergency spending , and , to a limited extent , disaster relief and appropriations for continuing disability reviews and control of health care fraud and abuse .

three of the four justifications outlined in the budget control act for adjusting the caps on discretionary budget authority have played a role in dhs's appropriations process .

two of these—emergency spending and overseas contingency operations / global war on terror—are not limited .

the third justification—disaster relief—is limited .

under the budget control act , the allowable adjustment for disaster relief was determined by the office of management and budget ( omb ) , using the following formula until fy2019: limit on disaster relief cap adjustment for the fiscal year = rolling average of the disaster relief spending over the last ten fiscal years ( throwing out the high and low years ) + the unused amount of the potential adjustment for disaster relief from the previous fiscal year .

the bipartisan budget act of 2018 amended the above formula , increasing the allowable size of the adjustment by adding 5% of the amount of emergency - designated funding for major disasters under the stafford act , calculated by omb as $6.296 billion .

the act also extended the availability of unused adjustment capacity indefinitely , rather than having it only carry over for one year .

in august 2019 , omb released a sequestration preview report for fy2020 that provided a preview estimate of the allowable adjustment for fy2020 of $17.5 billion —the second - largest allowable adjustment for disaster relief in the history of the mechanism .

that estimate is the sum of: the 10-year average , dropping the high and low years ( $7.9 billion ) ; 5% of the emergency - designated stafford act spending since 2012 ( $6.6 billion ) ; and carryover from the previous year ( $3.0 billion ) .

the final allowable adjustment for fy2020 may still differ from this estimate .

