election security is one of the most prominent policy challenges facing congress .

a november 2019 warning from the heads of several federal agencies illustrates the interdisciplinary and ongoing nature of the threat to american elections .

according to the joint statement , in the 2020 election cycle , "russia , china , iran , and other foreign malicious actors all will seek to interfere in the voting process or influence voter perceptions .

adversaries may try to accomplish their goals through a variety of means , including social media campaigns , directing disinformation operations or conducting disruptive or destructive cyber - attacks on state and local infrastructure. .

these are just the latest challenges in securing american elections .

traditionally , election administration emphasizes policy goals such as ensuring that all eligible voters , and only eligible voters , may register and cast ballots ; that those ballots are counted properly ; and that the voting public views that process as legitimate and transparent .

preserving election continuity is a chief concern .

election officials therefore have long prepared contingency plans that address various risks , such as equipment malfunctions , power outages , and natural disasters .

these traditional concerns remain , but have taken on new complexity amid foreign interference in u.s. elections .

in addition to managing traditional security concerns about infrastructure and administrative processes ( eg , counting ballots ) , mitigating external threats to the accuracy of information voters receive , particularly from foreign sources , is a potential challenge for political campaigns , election administrators , and the public .

addressing any one of these topics might involve multiple areas of public policy or law .

doing so also can involve complex practical challenges about which levels of government , or agencies , are best equipped or most appropriate to respond .

how those entities can or should interact with political campaigns , the private sector , and voters , are also ongoing questions .

technical complexity in some areas , such as cybersecurity , and the federal structure of shared national , state or territorial , and local responsibility for administering federal elections make election security even more challenging .

election security in general appears to be a shared policy goal , but debate exists in congress about which policy issues and options to pursue .

debate over the scope of the federal government's role in election security shapes much of that debate .

state , territorial , and local governments are responsible for most aspects of election administration , including security .

this report provides congressional readers with an overview that includes how campaign and election security has developed as a policy field ; recent legislative activity , especially bills that have advanced beyond introduction ; federal statutes and agencies that appear to be most relevant for campaign and election security ; state , territorial , or local roles in administering elections , and federal support for those functions ; and highlights of recent policy debates , and potential future questions for congressional consideration .

this report discusses federal agencies , statutes , and policies designed to prevent or respond to deliberate domestic or foreign security threats to campaigns , elections , or voting .

concepts discussed in the report also have implications for some unintentional threats , such as natural disasters or other emergencies that could affect campaigns , elections , or voting .

legislation cited in the report contains specific references to campaign and election security .

this includes bill text that uses variations of terms such as campaign , election , or vote near variations of the terms interference or security .

some readers might view areas addressed herein as more or less directly related to campaign or election security , and alternative methodologies could yield other bills or policy topics for consideration .

the report does not include detailed attention to more traditional aspects of campaign finance , election administration , or voting , particularly voter mobilization .

for example , the report discusses help america vote act provisions that authorize funding states may use to help secure elections , but not provisions that authorize funding for the election assistance commission generally .

similarly , the report briefly discusses voting rights act provisions that prohibit voter intimidation , but it does not discuss other federal statutes enacted to make registration and voting easier .

in addition , the report briefly notes lobbying statutes that might be relevant for regulating certain corporate or foreign activity related to u.s. election interference , but it does not substantially address lobbying as a policy area .

the report emphasizes domestic implications of campaign and election security .

this includes attention to protections for u.s. campaigns and elections from the effects of foreign disinformation and misinformation efforts .

the appendix at the end of this report includes sanctions or immigration legislation that specifically references interference in u.s. elections , and which has advanced beyond introduction during the 116 th congress .

however , foreign policy implications of such interference , or a discussion of offensive operations and tactics that the united states might or might not use against foreign adversaries , are otherwise beyond the scope of this report .

because of the still - developing and complex policy challenges surrounding campaign and election security , other areas of law , policy , or practice might also be relevant but are not addressed here .

the report references other crs products that contain additional discussion of several such topics .

the report does not provide legal or constitutional analysis .

it also does not attempt to catalog all alleged or established instances of campaign and election interference or security concerns , or to independently evaluate allegations .

highlights of recent legislative activity include the following .

additional discussion appears throughout the report .

the 115 th congress ( 2017-2019 ) appropriated $380 million for fy2018 for improvements to the administration of federal elections , including upgrades to election technology and security .

the 116 th congress ( 2019-2021 ) appropriated $425 million for fy2020 in the consolidated appropriations bill ( h.r .

1158 ; p.l .

116-93 ) enacted in december 2019 .

the " funding for states after the 2016 election cycle " section of this report contains additional detail .

the 116 th congress enacted s. 1790 ( p.l .

116-92 ) , the fy2020 national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) , in december 2019 .

the legislation contains several provisions related to campaign and election security .

table 1 below lists bills that have passed at least one chamber .

the appendix in this report briefly summarizes 116 th congress legislation containing campaign and election security provisions that has advanced beyond introduction .

in addition , during the 116 th congress , committees in both chambers have held hearings on these and related campaign and election security topics .

the committee on house administration and senate committee on rules and administration exercise primary jurisdiction over federal elections .

several other committees oversee related areas , such as intelligence or voting rights issues .

another crs product contains additional discussion of committee roles in federal campaigns and elections generally .

foreign interference is only the highest - profile and latest campaign and election security policy challenge .

physical security , to protect voters , ballots , and vote counts , has been an ongoing concern .

specifically , in modern history , the federal government's first role in securing elections was primarily about access and voting rights .

in 1965 , congress enacted the voting rights act ( vra ) , which protects voters against race - or color - based discrimination in registration , redistricting , and voting .

more explicitly related to security , the vra prohibits intimidation , threats , or coercion in voting .

congress primarily tasked the u.s. department of justice ( doj ) with enforcing the statute and related criminal provisions .

federal law enforcement agencies , especially the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , also support states and localities—which retain primary responsibility for election administration in the united states—in investigating election crimes and providing physical security at the polls .

the federal role in election administration expanded after the disputed 2000 presidential election .

in response , congress authorized federal funding for the states , the district of columbia , and territories to make improvements to the administration of federal elections .

it also created the election assistance commission ( eac ) to administer those funds .

congress charged the agency with overseeing a voluntary voting system testing and certification program , and providing states and localities with voluntary election administration guidance , research , and best practices .

these developments notwithstanding , securing campaigns and elections historically was not a major policy topic at the federal level , as most security matters were reserved for state - or local - level policy .

the policy environment changed dramatically during the 2016 election cycle , when media reports and subsequent congressional and federal - agency investigations documented russian government interference with that year's u.s. presidential election .

according to special counsel robert mueller's report , these interference efforts targeted private technology firms that provide election - related software and hardware ; state and local government entities ; and a major political party and nominee .

the investigations did not find that this activity was a determinative factor in the election outcome .

however , the possibility of such activity , and of additional efforts to affect political attitudes or participation , remains .

in july 2018 remarks at the hudson institute , then - director of national intelligence ( dni ) dan coats , a former senator , said that the intelligence community ( ic ) reported "aggressive attempts to manipulate social media and to spread propaganda focused on hot - button issues that are intended to exacerbate socio - political divisions" in elections .

to the extent that those efforts affect campaigns—including campaign security , or the information voters receive from campaigns—campaign finance policy and law could be relevant .

the federal election campaign act ( feca ) originated in the 1970s amid concerns about limiting domestic political corruption .

the act also contains a wide - ranging prohibition on foreign - national involvement in federal , state , or local u.s. elections .

these provisions , and disclosure and disclaimer requirements for all "persons" who raise or spend funds to influence federal elections , are key elements of regulating both domestic and foreign efforts to affect political fundraising , spending , and advertising .

political committees ( campaigns , parties , and political action committees [pacs] ) are responsible for their own security measures , although , as noted elsewhere in this report , federal agencies ( or private - sector entities ) provide assistance in some cases .

today , election security is one of the most rapidly evolving policy issues facing congress and the federal government .

both chambers have passed legislation on the topic during the 116 th congress .

multiple house and senate committees have held investigative and oversight hearings .

congress and the obama and trump administrations have tasked federal agencies with new responsibilities for supporting states and thwarting future possible interference .

the intelligence community has warned that countering foreign interference in u.s. elections "will require a whole - of - society approach , including support from the private sector and the active engagement of an informed public. .

the u.s. constitution and federal statutes regulate the division of governmental responsibility for elections .

no existing statute is devoted specifically to election security , although , as discussed below , some statutes address aspects of the topic .

most broadly , the constitution's elections clause assigns states with setting the "times , places and manner" for house and senate elections , and also permits congress to "at any time … make or alter such regulations. .

as discussed in the " state and local role in election security " section of this report , the federal government thus plays a largely supporting role in election administration generally , and in election security specifically .

two election - specific statutes can be particularly important for campaign and election security .

relevant legislation typically proposes amending one or both .

first , the help america vote act ( hava , 2002 ) is the only federal statute devoted to assisting states with election administration .

congress relied on hava to establish the election assistance commission , provide for a voluntary federal voting system testing and certification program , and authorize federal funding states could use to help secure their elections .

second , feca's disclaimer and disclosure provisions , and the prohibition on foreign national fundraising or spending in u.s. elections , can be particularly relevant for concerns about foreign interference in u.s. elections .

several other statutes could be relevant in specific cases .

table 2 below provides a brief summary .

no single federal agency has responsibility for providing election or campaign security .

only two federal agencies—the election assistance commission ( eac ) and the federal election commission ( fec ) —are devoted entirely to campaigns and elections .

the eac administers congressionally appropriated federal funding , oversees a voluntary voting system testing and certification program , and provides voluntary election administration guidance , research , and best practices .

the fec is responsible for administration and civil enforcement of feca .

other departments and agencies , primarily with responsibilities for other areas of public policy , support campaign and election security in specific cases .

some agency roles developed from a january 2017 "critical infrastructure" designation .

additional detail appears below .

additional information about agency roles appears below , and in the " coordination by and among selected federal agencies " section of this report .

federal election law takes a mostly voluntary approach to election security .

congress has set some security requirements for federal elections , such as directing election officials to provide a certain level of technological security for their hava - mandated computerized voter registration lists .

most election security standards are set at the state or local levels .

some examples of the voluntary election security guidance the federal government provides are the research , best practices , and technical assistance described in the " selected federal agencies " section of this report .

hava also charges the eac—with assistance from the agency's advisory bodies and nist—with developing voluntary voting system guidelines ( vvsg ) , accrediting laboratories to test voting systems to the vvsg , and certifying systems as meeting the vvsg .

the proposed update to the vvsg that was in development as of this writing ( vvsg 2.0 ) includes some security - related principles and guidelines , such as ensuring that voting systems are auditable , limiting and logging access to voting systems , and preventing or detecting unauthorized physical access to voting system hardware .

participation in the federal voting system testing and certification program is voluntary under federal law .

the testing and certification program covers the "voting system" as defined by hava , which does not include some components of the election system , such as voter registration databases and election night reporting systems .

changes to one part of a voting system , such as updating software to patch security vulnerabilities , might require recertification of the system under the policies in effect as of this writing , and updates to the vvsg require approval by a three - vote majority of the eac's commissioners .

congress has responded to the threats that emerged during the 2016 election cycle , discussed above , in part with funding .

since the 2016 elections , it has provided funding for helping secure election systems both to states , territories , and the district of columbia ( dc ) , and to federal agencies .

some threats to u.s. elections—including both intentional interference efforts and the unintended threats posed by errors and natural disasters—involve the state and local systems used to administer elections .

other election security threats involve efforts to spread disinformation about elections or the integrity of the electoral process .

states and localities may play a role in countering both types of threat .

first , states and localities take the lead on defending their election systems .

as noted previously , states and localities have primary responsibility for administering elections in the united states .

the federal government has provided some funding and technical support to help them secure the systems they use to run elections , but states and localities have primary responsibility for ensuring that their systems are physically and technologically secure .

that includes primary responsibility for funding election system security measures .

securing election systems may involve capital expenditures , such as replacing voting machines , that exceed funding provided by congress .

it may also involve ongoing costs—from identifying and addressing emerging security threats to renewing software licenses , paying election security staff , and conducting post - election audits—that extend beyond the period for which federal funding is available .

such expenses are covered , if they are covered , by states and localities .

state and local responsibility for election system security also includes primary responsibility for making and implementing most decisions about how to secure election systems .

federal law sets some general standards for the administration of elections , such as the voter registration list digitization requirement noted in the " federal election security guidance " section of this report .

states and localities decide—within the broad parameters set by such general standards—which election equipment and procedures to use and how to mitigate risks to them .

they choose , for example , whether to use electronic devices to capture or count votes ; whether , when , and how to conduct post - election audits ; whether and how to set security standards for election equipment vendors ; whether to have in - house security staff in local jurisdictions or rely on state or vendor it support ; which cybersecurity tools and procedures to use ; whether and how to train election officials and poll workers on election security ; how to secure election materials between elections and ensure a secure physical chain of custody on election day ; and what cyber and physical security standards to set for election equipment .

second , states and localities can help combat disinformation or misinformation about elections or the integrity of the electoral process .

they can , for example , use official websites and social media accounts to share accurate information about elections or counter false information ; and help educate the public about the steps they take to safeguard the electoral process .

states also can work through their professional associations—using initiatives such as a public education campaign launched by the national association of secretaries of state ( nass ) in november 2019—to help direct voters to trustworthy sources of election information .

these efforts might occur as part of or in parallel with responses to disinformation or misinformation by the federal government or private entities like social media companies .

states might partner with social media companies to remove posts containing election disinformation , for example , or adopt disclosure requirements that supplement or override the companies' policies on digital political advertising .

 table 4 below briefly summarizes selected policy issues and options that have shaped recent policy debates in congress .

in addition , the appendix at the end of this report briefly summarizes legislation primarily devoted to campaign and election security that has advanced beyond introduction during the 116 th congress .

the table reflects recent policy debates , but is not intended to be exhaustive .

some observers might consider other issues not reflected here to be relevant for campaign and election security .

campaign and election security are developing fields that cross policy and disciplinary boundaries .

this complexity is reflected in the various statutes , agencies , and congressional committees that share responsibility for policymaking and administrative matters relevant for security u.s. campaigns and elections .

questions such as those that follow reflect themes discussed throughout this report .

these and other questions could help congressional readers decide whether they want to maintain the status quo , appropriate funds , or pursue oversight or legislation .

federal r ole .

a key question for congress is whether , where , and how it chooses to be involved in campaign and election security .

most broadly , this potentially includes how to define this rapidly developing policy area , and in so doing , considering which issues are most appropriately addressed at the federal level versus at the state or local levels .

this report has emphasized the federal role because those topics are most relevant for congress .

as the report also explains , states , localities , and territories are responsible for making many of their own election security decisions—just as political campaigns , parties , and pacs are responsible for their own security .

therefore , there are important debates about what campaign and election security includes that the federal government can influence , but that are primarily addressed below the federal level , in the private sector , or both .

examples include , but are not limited to , how election security might affect voter access , and vice versa ; whether states require voter identification at the polls and whether or to what extent alleged vote fraud exists ; how much and on what jurisdictions choose to spend available funds ; and whether states , localities , or political campaigns and parties have sufficient resources to secure their elections or organizations .

communication .

does congress want to encourage or require additional information sharing about campaign and election security matters between the federal government and nonfederal elections agencies ? .

similarly , do state , territorial , and local elections officials feel that they have or need clear points of contact within federal agencies , and do they know which agencies to contact in various circumstances ? .

if it determines that the status quo is inadequate , does congress want to encourage or require different reporting protocols , agency outreach , etc. ? .

coordination .

various agencies have reported to congress that they have improved coordination among themselves , particularly through working groups or task forces .

less clear , at least from publicly available information , is specifically how such coordination works and whether current coordinating mechanisms are sufficient or whether agencies need additional resources or mechanisms to improve coordination .

if it determines that the status quo is inadequate , does congress want to exercise oversight in this area , provide additional information - sharing authorities , funding , etc. , or does it consider current coordination authorities and mechanisms sufficient ? .

sectors .

much of the federal government's attention to campaign and election security appears to emphasize outreach to election administrators in states , territories , and localities .

with respect to the private sector ( such as political campaigns and equipment manufacturers ) , is federal agency support sufficient ? .

to what extent are information - sharing practices among federal agencies and the private sector ( or voters ) similar to or different from those that shape communication between federal agencies and state , territorial , or local governments ? .

if it determines that the status quo is inadequate , does congress want to encourage or require additional federal agency support for nongovernmental entities in campaign and election security , or reporting requirements for those entities to the federal government ? .

voters .

some federal public education campaigns , such as those to counter disinformation in elections , are aimed at individual voters .

overall , however , much of the federal role in campaign and election security emphasizes communication among government agencies or , in some cases , the private sector .

if it determines that the status quo is inadequate , does congress want to task federal agencies—and if so , which ones—with additional responsibility for educating voters about campaign and election security ; to provide funding for nongovernmental organizations to do so , etc. ? .

the scope of potential campaign and election security threats , and the federal government's role in responding to those threats , has changed substantially in less than five years .

the foreign interference revealed during the 2016 cycle—and widely reported to be an ongoing threat—has renewed congressional attention to campaign and election security and raised new questions .

whatever congress determines about whether these or other questions are relevant for its consideration of campaign and election security policy , the issue is likely to remain prominent for the foreseeable future .

