many u.s. officials and members of congress consider estonia , latvia , and lithuania , often referred to collectively as the baltic states , to be valued u.s. allies and among the most pro - u.s. countries in europe .

strong ties between the united states and the baltic states have deep historical roots .

lithuania , latvia , and estonia gained their independence in 1918 , after the collapse of the russian empire .

in 1940 , they were forcibly incorporated into the soviet union , but the united states never recognized their annexation .

the united states strongly supported the restoration of the three countries' independence in 1991 , and it was a leading advocate of their accession to nato and the european union ( eu ) in 2004 .

the united states and the baltic states work closely together in their respective bilateral relationships and within nato , as well as in the context of u.s. - eu relations .

the u.s. - baltic partnership encompasses diplomatic cooperation in pursuit of shared foreign policy objectives , extensive cooperation on security and defense , and a mutually beneficial economic relationship .

the united states provides considerable security assistance to the baltic states , including financing assistance and defense sales , intended to strengthen their military capabilities .

since 2014 , u.s. focus on the baltic region has increased , driven by concerns about potential threats posed by russia .

developments related to russia and the implications for u.s. policy and nato likely will have continuing relevance for congress .

estonia , latvia , and lithuania are central interlocutors and partners in examining and responding to these challenges .

as indicated by annual security assistance appropriations , as well as resolutions and bills adopted or introduced in recent years , congress supports the maintenance of close relations and security cooperation with the baltic states .

the house baltic caucus , a bipartisan group of 70 members of the house of representatives , and the senate baltic freedom caucus , a bipartisan group of 11 senators , seek to maintain and strengthen the u.s. - baltic relationship and engage in issues of mutual interest .

although outside observers typically view estonia , latvia , and lithuania as a group , citizens of the three countries tend to point out that alongside the three countries' many similarities are notable differences in national history , language , and culture .

cooperation and convergence among the baltic states remains the central trend , but each country has its own unique domestic political dynamics and the viewpoints and priorities of the three countries are not always completely aligned .

estonia , latvia , and lithuania stand out as the leaders of democracy among post - soviet states and are the only post - soviet states that have joined nato and the eu .

since the restoration of their independence nearly 30 years ago , the three countries' governments have tended to consist of multiparty coalitions , which have maintained broadly pro - market , pro - u.s. / nato , and pro - eu orientations .

the 2008-2009 global economic crisis hit the baltic states especially hard ; each of the three countries experienced an economic contraction of more than 14% in 2009 .

the social costs of the recession and the resulting budget austerity included increased poverty rates and income inequality and considerable emigration to wealthier parts of the eu .

the baltic economies have since rebounded , however , benefitting from strong domestic consumption , external demand for exports , and investment growth ( including from eu funding ) : estonia's gross domestic product ( gdp ) grew by 5.8% in 2017 and 4.8% in 2018 .

it is forecast to grow by 3.2% in 2019 and 2.9% in 2020 .

unemployment declined from 16.7% in 2010 to 5.4% in 2018 .

latvia's gdp grew by 4.6% in 2017 and 4.8% in 2018 ; it is forecast to grow by 2.8% in 2019 and 2.8% in 2020 .

unemployment declined from 19.5% in 2010 to 7.4% in 2018 .

lithuania's gdp grew by 4.1% in 2017 and 3.5% in 2018 ; it is forecast to grow by 3.4% in 2019 and 2.7% in 2020 .

unemployment declined from 17.8% in 2010 to 6.1% in 2018 .

despite the crisis and aftermath , each of the baltic states fulfilled a primary economic goal when each adopted the euro as its currency ( estonia in 2011 , latvia in 2014 , and lithuania in 2015 ) .

the public finances of the baltic states remain well within guidelines set by the eu ( which require member states to have an annual budget deficit of less than 3% of gdp and maintain government debt below 60% of gdp ) .

both estonia and latvia recorded a budget deficit below 1% of gdp in 2018 , and lithuania had a small budget surplus .

gross government debt in 2018 was approximately 8.3% of gdp for estonia ( making it the eu's least - indebted member state ) , 35.9% of gdp for latvia , and 34.2% of gdp for lithuania .

according to a study by the european commission , foreign direct investment ( fdi ) in the baltic states remains below precrisis levels .

with considerable investment in the financial services sector , sweden is the largest foreign investor in the region , followed by finland and the netherlands .

estonia has been the most successful of the three baltic countries in attracting fdi , with fdi equivalent to approximately 100% of gross value added in 2015 , compared to approximately 63% for latvia and 40% for lithuania .

the u.s. state department describes estonia , latvia , and lithuania as strong , effective , reliable , and valued allies that have helped to promote security , stability , democracy , and prosperity in europe and beyond .

many citizens of the baltic states remain grateful to the united states for consistently supporting their independence throughout the cold war and playing a key role in promoting the restoration of independence in 1991 .

most policymakers in the baltic states tend to see their countries' relationship with the united states as the ultimate guarantor of their security against pressure or possible threats from russia .

all three baltic states joined nato and the eu in 2004 with strong u.s. support .

in addition to maintaining a pro - nato and pro - eu orientation , the baltic states have sought to support u.s. foreign policy and security goals .

for example , they have worked closely with the united states in afghanistan , where the three baltic states have contributed troops to nato - led missions since 2002-2003 .

the three countries also have been partner countries in the global coalition to defeat the islamic state , providing personnel , training , weapons , and funding for efforts to counter the islamic state in iraq and syria since 2014 .

the trump administration and many members of congress have demonstrated support for strong u.s. relations with the baltic states .

in april 2018 , president donald trump hosted the presidents of the three baltic states for a quadrilateral u.s. - baltic summit intended to deepen security and defense cooperation and reaffirm the u.s. commitment to the region .

the presidential summit was followed by a u.s. - baltic business summit intended to expand commercial and economic ties .

during the 115 th congress , the senate adopted a resolution ( s.res .

432 ) congratulating estonia , latvia , and lithuania on the 100 th anniversary of their independence ; applauding the u.s. - baltic partnership ; commending the baltic states' commitment to nato , transatlantic security , democracy , and human rights ; and reiterating the senate's support for the european deterrence initiative ( edi ) as a means of enhancing baltic security ( on edi , see " u.s. european deterrence initiative ," below ) .

officials in the baltic region have noted with concern what they view as increasing signs of russian foreign policy assertiveness .

these signs include a buildup of russian forces in the region , large - scale military exercises , and incursions by russian military aircraft into baltic states' airspace .

unlike georgia and ukraine , the baltic states are members of nato , and many observers contend the alliance's article 5 collective defense guarantee limits potential russian aggression in the baltic region .

nevertheless , imposing various kinds of pressure on the baltic states enables russia to test nato solidarity and credibility .

defense experts assert that russian forces stationed near the baltic region , including surface ships , submarines , and advanced s - 400 air defense systems , could "allow [russia] to effectively close off the baltic sea and skies to nato reinforcements. .

according to a rand report based on a series of war games staged in 2014 and 2015 , a quick russian strike could reach the capitals of estonia and latvia in 36-60 hours .

in 2014 , a decade after joining nato and the eu , the baltic states continued to import 100% of their natural gas from russia .

this dependence raised concerns that russia could use energy as political and economic leverage against the baltic states , prompting them to diversify their supply sources and improve their integration with european natural gas networks .

in 2014 , a floating liquefied natural gas ( lng ) terminal became operational at the lithuanian port of klaipä—da .

the nearly 300-meter - long vessel , the independence , has the capacity to supply 100% of lithuania's natural gas needs and 90% of the total natural gas needs of the three baltic countries combined .

in 2014 , the lithuanian gas company litgas signed a five - year deal with norway's statoil ( now equinor ) to provide 540 million cubic meters of gas to the facility annually .

gazprom subsequently agreed to cut the price lithuania pays for natural gas .

the united states began exporting lng to lithuania in 2017 .

currently , lithuania imports nearly 58% of its natural gas from russia , accounting for approximately 19% of its primary energy consumption .

although estonia and latvia continue to import all of their natural gas from russia , natural gas accounts for a relatively low share of the countries' overall energy supplies .

oil shale accounts for about 85% of estonia's domestic energy supply , whereas natural gas accounts for less than 6% .

russian natural gas accounts for approximately 24% of latvia's primary energy consumption ; hydropower is latvia's largest source of energy .

in addition to lithuania's lng facility , numerous initiatives aim to reduce regional energy dependence on russia through supply diversification and increased interconnectivity .

a pipeline from poland to lithuania , linking the natural gas networks of the baltic states to the rest of the eu , is expected to be completed in 2021 .

the baltic connector pipeline linking the gas infrastructures of estonia and finland is expected to become operational in 2020 .

poland opened an lng terminal in 2015 , and finland opened one in 2019 .

as a remnant of the soviet era , the baltic states' power grids remain connected and synchronized with those of russia ( including kaliningrad ) and belarus ; a control center in moscow regulates frequency and manages reserve capacity for the baltic states' electricity supply .

two strategic projects to integrate the region's power grid into the wider european electricity market became operational in 2016: the litpol link connecting lithuania with poland and the 450-kilometer undersea nordbalt cable connecting lithuania with sweden .

previously , two connections between estonia and finland were the only infrastructure linking the region's electric grid to the rest of europe .

in 2018 , the governments of estonia , latvia , and lithuania reached an agreement with the european commission on plans to synchronize their electricity grids with the rest of europe by 2025 .

many u.s. officials and members of congress regard european energy security as a u.s. interest .

in particular , there has been concern in the united states that russian energy dominance could affect the ability to present a united transatlantic position when it comes to other issues related to russia .

successive u.s .

administrations have encouraged eu member states to reduce energy dependence on russia through diversification of supply .

they also have supported european steps to develop alternative sources and increase energy efficiency .

in the 116 th congress , related bills include the european energy security and diversification act of 2019 ( house - passed h.r .

1616 and s. 704 ) , the protect european energy security act ( h.r .

2023 ) , and the energy security cooperation with allied partners in europe act of 2019 ( s. 1830 ) .

the baltic states are likely to remain strong u.s. allies and important u.s. security partners in europe .

analysts believe close cooperation between the united states and the baltic states will continue for the foreseeable future in areas such as efforts to deter potential russian aggression , the future of nato , energy security , and economic issues .

the baltic states likely will continue to look to the united states for leadership on foreign policy and security issues .

during the 116 th congress , the activities and funding level of the edi , bilateral security cooperation with the baltic states , and the regional presence and activities of nato forces may remain of interest to members of congress .

efforts to bolster the capabilities of the baltic states' armed forces , including through defense sales and the provision of u.s. security assistance , also may be of congressional interest .

the baltic states likely will be of continuing importance in the area of european energy security .

in addition , members of congress may wish to remain informed about potential security threats to the baltic states posed by russia , including conventional military concerns and hybrid threats , such as disinformation campaigns and cyberattacks .

members of congress may have an interest in assessing how the baltic states , as well as other nato and eu member states , can develop capabilities to counter such hybrid threats .

