the higher education act of 1965 ( hea ; p.l .

89-329 , as amended ) authorizes programs and activities to provide support to individuals who are pursuing postsecondary education and to institutions of higher education ( ihes ) .

the hea was last comprehensively reauthorized by the higher education opportunity act of 2008 ( heoa ; p.l .

110-315 ) .

the heoa extended the authorization of appropriation of funds for most hea programs through fy2014 , while the general education provisions act ( gepa ) provided an extension of that authority for an additional year ( through fy2015 ) .

many hea programs have continued beyond fy2015 with funding provided under a variety of appropriations measures and continuing resolutions .

during the 116 th congress , the house committee on education and labor marked up and ordered to be reported the college affordability act ( caa ; h.r .

4674 ) .

the bill would provide for the comprehensive reauthorization of most hea programs , create a number of new postsecondary education programs , and address certain issues related to higher education but separate from the hea .

in general , for programs with discretionary funding h.r .

4674 would authorize the appropriation of funds in specific , as opposed to indefinite , amounts for each year in which funding would be authorized to be provided .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates that the enactment of h.r .

4674 would increase mandatory spending outlays by approximately $161 billion in the 5-year period from fy2020 to fy2024 and by about $332 billion in the 10-year period from fy2020 to fy2029 period .

in the 10-year estimate , about half the mandatory spending increase would result from changes to the federal student loans programs and about a quarter of the increase would result from changes to the pell grant program .

cbo further estimates that the enactment of h.r .

4674 would increase discretionary spending outlays by about $149 billion in the 5-year period from fy2020 to fy2024 .

this largely reflects the extension of periods of authorized appropriations for existing programs .

cbo did not make a 10-year estimate for discretionary spending .

this report focuses on the key themes in h.r .

4674 and describes major changes proposed in the bill that are representative of those themes .

it aims to provide a general understanding of the primary proposals of h.r .

4674 .

the report does not aim to provide a comprehensive analysis of the bill nor of technical changes that would be made by it .

h.r .

4674 , as ordered to be reported on october 31 , 2019 , would provide for the comprehensive reauthorization of the hea , amending numerous programs and activities that make up a large portion of the federal effort to support postsecondary education .

taken collectively , the changes that would be made by h.r .

4674 reflect several key themes: ( 1 ) expanding the availability of financial aid to postsecondary students ; ( 2 ) implementing borrower - focused student loan reforms ; ( 3 ) modifying institutional accountability requirements for receipt of federal funds ; ( 4 ) revising public accountability , transparency , and consumer information requirements ; ( 5 ) expanding student services for specific populations ; ( 6 ) expanding federal assistance to provide support to ihes ; and ( 7 ) creating new grant programs for states and institutions to reduce students' postsecondary costs .

each of these themes is discussed in the text that follows .

title iv of the hea authorizes a group of federal student aid programs that provide aid to eligible individual students through grant and loan programs and work - study assistance .

h.r .

4674 would expand aid availability in a number of ways , with considerable emphasis placed on increasing funding made available through grant programs .

some provisions in h.r .

4674 would increase aid availability by expanding eligibility .

title iv of the hea specifies provisions for the operation of three federal student loan programs: the william d. ford federal direct loan ( direct loan ) program , the federal family education loan ( ffel ) program , and the federal perkins loan program .

currently , however , new loans are authorized to be made only through the direct loan program .

the authority to make new loans through the ffel program expired june 30 , 2010 , and the authority to make new loans through the federal perkins loan program expired september 30 , 2017 .

while h.r .

4674 would make a variety of student loan reforms that apply to both the ffel and direct loan programs , the discussion herein will focus on the direct loan program , as it is the primary federal student loan program currently in operation , is the only program currently making new loans to students and their families , and would be the primary student loan program in operation under the hea as amended by the caa .

the direct loan program is authorized under hea , title iv , part d , and is the largest federal program that makes available financial assistance to support students' postsecondary educational pursuits .

the direct loan program is a federal credit program for which permanent indefinite mandatory appropriations are provided for loan subsidy costs , and annual discretionary appropriations are provided for administrative costs .

direct loans are made to students and their families using funds borrowed by the department of education ( ed ) from the u.s. treasury .

the ihe a student attends originates and disburses direct loans , while federal contractors hired by ed perform loan servicing and collection functions .

several types of loans are made available through the program: direct subsidized loans to undergraduate students , direct unsubsidized loans to undergraduate students and graduate students , direct plus loans to graduate and professional students and the parents of undergraduate dependent students , and direct consolidation loans , which enable individuals who have previously borrowed federal student loans to combine them into a single new loan .

loan terms and conditions ( eg , interest rates , borrowing limits ) are specified in statute and may vary depending on the type of loan borrowed .

ed estimates that in fy2020 , 15.9 million new loans totaling $100.2 billion will be made through the direct loan program .

in addition , ed estimates that 755,000 direct consolidation loans totaling $46.4 billion will be made to existing borrowers of federal student loans .

as of the end of the third quarter of fy2019 , $1.2 trillion in principal and interest on direct loan program loans , borrowed by or on behalf of 34.3 million individuals , remained outstanding .

h.r .

4674 would make a variety of borrower - focused reforms to the direct loan program .

in general , many of these reforms are aimed at easing a borrower's student loan burden by amending loan terms and conditions ( including loan repayment and forgiveness options ) to be more generous once an individual has entered repayment on his or her loan , modifying and streamlining student loan administrative procedures , and expanding the availability of student loan refinancing options .

currently , the hea provides for institutional accountability measures through many of its provisions .

some measures address educational accountability , which relates to institutions providing a quality education ( eg , accreditation requirements ) .

other measures address fiscal accountability , which relates to institutional financial health and whether institutions are good stewards of federal student aid funds .

in addition , some laws outside of the hea seek to hold institutions accountable in other areas .

these include , but are not limited to , title ix of the education amendments of 1972 ( title ix ) , which conditions receipt of federal funds on an institution ( or other entity ) ensuring it does not discriminate on the basis of sex in educational programs or activities .

h.r .

4674 would address educational and fiscal accountability requirements , as well as title ix requirements .

the changes discussed below , along with other provisions of h.r .

4674 , signal a congressional interest in strengthening accountability requirements across all types of ihes and their educational programs , in general , while focusing on greater accountability in the title iv programs , and for proprietary ihes in particular .

the hea establishes a set of measures related to public accountability , transparency , and consumer information .

in general , these provisions are intended to provide information to consumers to enable them to make informed college - going and financial decisions .

currently , the hea addresses issues related to college affordability and the collection and dissemination of consumer information to students and the public by requiring ed , among other things , to administer the college navigator website , through which certain consumer information about ihes is made publicly available , and by requiring ihes to make net price calculators , a primary consumer information tool authorized under the hea , available on their websites .

net price calculators allow prospective students to obtain individual estimates of the net price of an ihe , taking into account the financial aid they might be likely to receive .

the hea currently prohibits the creation of a new postsecondary student unit record system ( surs ) , which could be used to track individual students' financing of their schooling , participation in and completion of academic programs , and post - program outcomes over time .

the surs ban was established in the interest of protecting student privacy and limits the granularity and quality of data available on the outcomes of ihes' students .

in addition , the hea currently requires that certain direct loan borrowers undergo loan entrance counseling prior to loan disbursement , and that certain borrowers undergo exit counseling after dropping below half - time enrollment .

both of these requirements are intended to help ensure that borrowers are aware of their loan terms and conditions and of the potential consequences of borrowing a student loan .

h.r .

4674 would amend the hea to take a more expansive approach to public accountability , transparency , and consumer information requirements .

many of these changes represent congressional interest in providing consumers with additional and more - nuanced information , potentially helping them make more - informed college - going and student loan borrowing decisions .

perhaps most notably , h.r .

4674 would repeal the current prohibition on the creation of a new surs and require ed to develop a postsecondary student - level data system to use in evaluating a variety of metrics such as student enrollment , progression , completion , and post - collegiate outcomes ( eg , earnings , employment rates , and loan repayment rates ) .

summary aggregate information from this system would be made publicly available .

h.r .

4674 would also amend provisions relating to net price calculators by requiring ihes to provide more - detailed information regarding their costs of attendance and estimated aid that may be available to individual students .

the bill would make changes to the information ihes are required to provide to individuals before and after receipt of federal student aid .

for instance , h.r .

4674 would require ed to develop a standardized financial aid offer letter to be used by ihes , which would enable students to compare financial aid offers from multiple ihes .

it would also require all borrowers to receive counseling in each year that they receive a title iv student loan to assist them in understanding the terms and conditions of the loan and the potential consequences of accepting such aid .

in addition to federal student aid , which provides direct financial assistance to individual students that can be applied toward their cost of attendance , the hea provides additional academic and personal supports to certain student populations .

these supports are typically administered through grants to ihes or other qualified entities .

h.r .

4674 would create a number of new programs to support students , and would extend a number of existing programs .

the hea authorizes programs intended to provide grants and other financial support to ihes that serve high concentrations of minority and / or needy students to help strengthen the ihes' academic , administrative , and financial capabilities .

typically , these institutions are called minority serving institutions ( msis ) .

among the msi programs , the hea authorizes separate grant programs for distinct types of msis , including the following: american indian tribally controlled colleges and universities , alaska native and native - hawaiian - serving institutions , predominantly black institutions , native american - serving , nontribal institutions , predominantly black institutions , asian american and native american pacific islander - serving institutions , historically black colleges and universities , and hispanic serving institutions .

many of these msi programs have been funded through annual discretionary and mandatory appropriations .

as of when h.r .

4674 was ordered to be reported , mandatory appropriations , authorized under hea section 371 , for several of these programs had expired at the end of fy2019 .

in fy2019 , these mandatory appropriations totaled $239 million .

h.r .

4674 would permanently authorize mandatory appropriations under hea section 371 at a total of $300 million annually .

it would also extend and increase the authorization of discretionary appropriations for each of the msi programs through fy2026 .

in addition , h.r .

4674 would reauthorize discretionary and mandatory appropriations for several msi programs that have not received appropriations in several years , such as the endowment challenge grant program , and would create several new grant programs to support msis , each supported with discretionary appropriations .

h.r .

4674 would also amend and reauthorize through fy2026 a statute outside of the hea—the tribally controlled colleges and universities assistance act of 1978—which authorizes discretionary appropriations for grants to tribally controlled colleges and universities .

h.r .

4674 would create a new hea , title iv , part j .

the programs authorized in this part would provide grants to states , indian tribes , and ihes , with the primary focus of eliminating or reducing tuition and fees at community colleges and other postsecondary institutions .

h.r .

4674 would authorize new grants to states to support community colleges in waiving tuition and fees for eligible students .

qualified indian tribes would also be eligible .

the program would define an eligible student as a student who attends a community college on a not less than half - time basis , either qualifies for in - state resident community college tuition or would qualify for in - state community college tuition but for his or her immigration status , and meets certain other criteria .

a student would not need to meet financial criteria to qualify as an eligible student .

h.r .

4674 would provide permanent mandatory appropriations beginning in fy2021 .

the funding level would incrementally increase from $1,569,700,000 in fy2021 to $16,296,080,000 in fy2030 .

mandatory appropriations would be provided at the fy2030 level in succeeding years .

funds would be allocated to states via a formula .

the bill would direct ed to develop a formula based on each participating state's share of eligible students and other factors .

each participating state would be eligible to receive , on a per eligible student basis , an amount equal to at least 75% of the national average resident community college tuition and fees .

states would be required to provide , on a per eligible student basis , a nonfederal share equal to 25% of the national average resident community college tuition and fees .

as a condition of receiving a grant under this program , a state would be required to waive tuition and fees for eligible students attending community colleges within the state .

an eligible student would be allowed to use other financial aid for which he or she qualifies , such as pell grants , for other components of the cost of attendance , such as housing and transportation .

to prevent state and local disinvestment in community colleges , h.r .

4674 would require that funds under this grant supplement and not supplant other federal , state , and local funds .

the program would include maintenance of effort requirements that would require participating states to provide financial support equal to or greater than the average amount provided in the three preceding years for public higher education ; operational expenses for public , four - year colleges ; and need - based financial aid .

h.r .

4674 would create three new programs that would provide grants to each of ( 1 ) historically black colleges and universities ( hbcus ) , ( 2 ) tribally controlled colleges and universities ( tccus ) , and ( 3 ) minority - serving institutions ( msis ) to "waive or significantly reduce tuition and fees for eligible students … for not more than the first 60 credits an eligible student enrolls at the participating institution. .

grants would be available to four - year institutions of each type and would not require a nonfederal match .

an institution's grant would equal the actual cost of tuition and fees at the institution ( not to exceed the national average tuition and fees at a public four - year ihe ) , multiplied by the number of eligible students enrolled at the institution .

eligible institutions would be hbcus , tccus , and msis that have a student body of at least 35% low - income students and meet other criteria related to student services and supports .

eligible students would include new enrollees or transfers from a community college .

h.r .

4674 would provide permanent mandatory funding beginning in fy2021 .

the funding level would incrementally increase from $63,250,000 in fy2021 to $1,626,040,000 in fy2030 .

mandatory appropriations would be provided at the fy2030 level in succeeding years .

h.r .

4674 would authorize discretionary appropriations for such sums as necessary in fy2021 and each succeeding fiscal year to support additional new grant programs .

first , the bill would create a new series of formula grants to states to provide grants to individual students with unmet financial need .

these grants would initially be available to pell grant recipients at public ihes .

once all eligible pell grant recipients received grants , the aid would be extended to other students at public ihes .

ed would also be authorized , under certain circumstances , to carry out a similar grant program for students at private nonprofit ihes .

the bill would authorize another grant program for states to award grants to participating four - year ihes to waive resident tuition and fees in cases where all eligible students have received the above grants for unmet need .

both sets of programs would generally have a federal share of 75% and a nonfederal share of 25% .

