national internet regimes , as defined by individual countries' domestic policies and rules , are growing more divergent , a trend that has significant implications for international trade and the future growth of u.s. and global digital economies .

the evolving digital economy increases productivity and drives growth in the overall economy , but may be threatened by differences in national rules and potential fracturing of the global internet .

congress has an interest in ensuring the u.s. digital economy thrives and shapes the global rules and norms for digital trade .

as internet technology expanded from its origins in the military and defense sector into the commercial arena in the 1990s , consumers and firms began to conduct transactions in an online environment that lacked clear rules and guidelines .

some u.s. firms took advantage of the open global commons and thrived , quickly expanding their offerings and entering foreign markets .

in many foreign markets , u.s. - based google dominates search and e - mail , facebook is the number one social network , and amazon is the first stop for online shopping .

however , in certain other markets , some of which are important for the united states , trade barriers limit or block those same websites .

while national rules - setting may focus on domestic priorities , policies that affect digitization in any one country's economy can have consequences beyond its borders .

the internet is a global "network of networks," and the state of a country's digital economy can have global ramifications , such as affecting the security and efficacy of connected networks .

differences in the internet governance and data policies of the united states and some major trading partners , such as people's republic of china ( prc or china ) and the european union ( eu ) , are creating a growing set of trade barriers for u.s. firms seeking to do business abroad .

trade barriers include , for example , rules and regulations governing foreign investment , market and network access , e - commerce , and data collection and usage .

the united states generally advocates a free and open internet , using standard - setting forums and other means of international cooperation to ensure non - discriminatory market access , advance common emerging technology standards , promote collaborative open - source architecture , and influence the internet regimes of trading partners balanced with other public policy objectives , including national security .

trade agreement negotiations present an opportunity to remove trade barriers and establish common trade rules and disciplines to achieve u.s. negotiating objectives .

across the globe , u.s. and other bilateral and plurilateral agreements have created a plethora of overlapping and often inconsistent rules between various trading partners .

the lack of multilateral rules on digital trade is a key focus of u.s. trade policy .

ongoing e - commerce negotiations at the world trade organization ( wto ) provide a significant opportunity to establish enforceable multilateral rules that align with u.s. policy priorities and help bridge growing differences in national rules and trade treatments .

however , such negotiations face inherent challenges , including possibly divergent , and even conflicting , positions .

congress has a strong interest in the rise of the varying internet regimes and their current and potential impact on u.s. digital trade and the economy .

through legislation and oversight , congress can directly and indirectly shape u.s. internet policy and official positions in trade negotiations and international standard - setting forums .

congress pro - actively established u.s. digital trade negotiating objectives for trade agreements and has supported provisions in free trade agreements ( ftas ) to address the lack of multilateral digital trade rules and market opening commitments , most recently in the u.s. - japan trade agreement and the u.s. - mexico - canada agreement ( usmca ) .

congress can also influence u.s. positions in the ongoing wto negotiations .

this report will compare some aspects of various national internet regimes and then examine the ongoing wto e - commerce negotiations and certain international forums that present an opportunity to establish global rules and technology standards and to minimize or prevent potential problems created by diverging systems .

given the critical and growing role of the internet to the u.s. economy , congress has a policy and legislative interest in the current divergence in national internet regimes and its impact on digital trade , future trade negotiations , standards - setting , and other major u.s. policy objectives .

key issues for congress include: examining the u.s. position in the ongoing wto plurilateral e - commerce negotiations .

congress may explore the value of digital trade provisions in potential new bilateral trade negotiations .

exploring china's digital authoritarianism and its impact on the digital economy and global rules .

this could include the effect on u.s. firms doing business in china , as well as the effect on other countries' internet regimes , including identifying which countries or sectors are emulating china's digital rules or technical standards .

congress previously held hearings on the threat to free speech and security aspects posed by prc internet sovereignty .

examining efforts by the united states to counter china's digital policies .

for example , investments by the new u.s. international development finance corporation ( dfc ) could focus on telecommunications and internet infrastructure and policy .

some analysts have suggested that congress establish a digital development fund dedicated to shaping global norms and developing countries' internet regimes .

a bipartisan bill ( h.r .

1359 ) directs executive branch agencies to partner with domestic and foreign partners to "encourage the efforts of developing countries to improve and secure mobile and fixed access to the internet in order to catalyze innovation , spur economic growth and job creation , … promote free speech , democracy , and good governance… and the multi - stakeholder approach to internet governance. .

understanding the potential long - term impact of the splintering internet on the u.s. economy .

without agreement on the underlying rules or convergence on international norms , the risk of a fractured global internet increases .

congressional oversight could examine the value , both economic and political , of u.s. leadership and u.s. norms governing the global internet .

congress could consider asking the u.s. itc to investigate the economic impact of this fracturing on u.s. businesses and consumers .

congress could analyze the different approaches and commitments related to internet governance contained in eu or chinese ftas , and how they differ from u.s. agreements and objectives .

more immediately , congress could examine the economic impact of the recent technology trade restrictions in china and other countries on u.s. companies .

overseeing ongoing efforts to establish global standards and rules through u.s. participation in sdos , international forums , and recent and ongoing trade negotiations .

for example , congress could hold hearings on u.s. government and private sector involvement in standard - setting and china's increasing role in international standards discussions .

congress could probe executive branch agencies about specific u.s. objectives and engagement in ongoing negotiations related to internet governance and examine if the united states needs a clear strategy for outreach to international partners to build consensus on issues in advance of formal meetings and conferences .

similarly , congress may consider promoting hosting of some standards meetings and international discussions so that more u.s. stakeholders could participate and provide direct feedback .

