i n october 2018 , the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) officially notified the congress , under trade promotion authority ( tpa ) , of the trump administration's plans to enter into formal trade negotiations with the european union ( eu ) .

this action followed a july 2018 u.s. - eu joint statement by president trump and then - european commission ( ec ) president juncker announcing that they would work toward a trade agreement to reduce tariffs and other trade barriers , address unfair trading practices , and increase u.s. exports of soybeans and certain other products .

previously , in 2016 , u.s. - eu negotiations as part of the transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) stalled after 15 rounds under the obama administration .

the outlook for new u.s. - eu talks remains uncertain .

there continues to be disagreement about the scope of the negotiations , particularly the eu's intent to exclude agriculture from the talks on the basis that it "is a sensitivity for the eu side. .

eu sensitivities stem in part from commercial and cultural practices that are often embodied in eu laws and regulations and vary from those of the united states .

for food and agricultural products , such differences include regulatory and administrative differences between the united states and the eu on issues related to food safety and public health—or sanitary and phytosanitary ( sps ) measures , and technical barriers to trade ( tbts ) .

other differences include product naming schemes for some types of food and agricultural products subject to protections involving geographical indications ( gis ) .

addressing food and agricultural issues in the negotiations remains important to u.s. exporters given the sizable and growing u.s. trade deficit with the eu in agricultural products .

renewed trade talks also come amid heightened u.s. - eu trade frictions .

in march 2018 , president trump announced 25% steel and 10% aluminum tariffs on most u.s. trading partners , including the eu , after a section 232 investigation determined that these imports threaten u.s. national security .

in response , the eu began applying retaliatory tariffs of 25% on certain u.s. exports to the eu .

additionally , as part of the boeing - airbus subsidy dispute , in october 2019 the united states began imposing additional , world trade organization ( wto ) - sanctioned tariffs on $7.5 billion worth of certain u.s. imports from the eu .

this report provides an overview of u.s. - eu trade in agriculture and background information on selected u.s. - eu agricultural trade issues concerning a potential trade liberalization agreement between the united states and the eu .

following a review of u.s. - eu agricultural trade trends , this report describes recent agricultural trade trends and tariff actions affecting certain u.s. - eu traded food and agricultural goods .

it then describes potential issues in u.s. - eu trade agreement negotiations involving food and agricultural trade .

figure 1 shows a timeline of selected events .

figure 1 .

selected timeline of events related to u.s. - eu agricultural tradesource: crs .

actions related to the u.s. - eu trade agreement negotiations are shown in red.note: ustr = u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) .

wto = world trade organization .

eu27 includes the current 27 eu member states , excluding the united kingdom ( uk ) .

eu28 includes the uk .

following are trade data and statistics for the current 27 eu member states ( eu27 ) .

unless otherwise noted , these figures exclude the united kingdom ( uk ) , which formally exited the eu in january 2020 .

moving forward , u.s. trade negotiations with the eu are expected to exclude the uk , which may enter into trade discussions with the united states separately .

trade data presented here are compiled from u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) trade statistics for "agricultural and related products. .

as defined by usda , this product grouping includes agricultural products ( including bulk and intermediate products and also consumer - oriented products ) and agricultural - related products ( including fish and shellfish products , distilled spirits , forest products , and ethanol and biodiesel blends ) .

additional information on the various data sources is discussed in the t ext box .

the united states and the eu are the world's largest trade and investment partners .

while food and agricultural trade between the united states and the eu27 accounts for less than 1% of the value of overall trade in total goods and services ( figure 2 ) , the eu27 remains a leading market for u.s. agricultural exports .

it accounted for about 8% of the value of all u.s. exports and ranked as the fifth - largest market for u.s. food and farm exports in 2019—after canada , mexico , china , and japan .

data depicted in figure 2 do not reflect trade in fish and seafood , distilled spirits , and bioenergy products .

during the past two decades , growth in u.s. agricultural exports to the eu has not kept pace with growth in trade to other u.s. markets .

u.s. agricultural imports from the eu27 currently exceed u.s. exports to the eu27 .

in 2019 , u.s. exports of agricultural and related products to the eu27 totaled $12.4 billion , while u.s. imports of agricultural and related products from the eu27 totaled $29.7 billion , resulting in a u.s. trade deficit of approximately $17.3 billion .

this reverses the u.s. agricultural trade surpluses with the eu27 during the early 1990s ( figure 3 ) .

leading u.s. agricultural exports to the eu27 were corn and soybeans , tree nuts , distilled spirits , fish products , wine and beer , planting seeds , and processed foods .

leading u.s. imports from the eu27 were wine and spirits , beer , drinking waters , olive oil , cheese , and processed foods .

while data shown in the graphic reflect total trade in "agricultural and related products," including agricultural products , fish and shellfish products , distilled spirits , and other agricultural related products , the trade picture may vary by product category ( as shown in table 1 ) .

trade data presented here do not include the uk , which is a major importer of u.s. agricultural products .

in 2019 , u.s. agricultural and related product exports to the uk totaled $2.8 billion , which roughly equaled the value of imports from the uk ( figure 4 ) .

the u.s. - eu trade negotiations come amid heightened u.s. - eu trade frictions .

in march 2018 , president trump announced 25% steel and 10% aluminum tariffs on most u.s. trading partners after a section 232 investigation determined that these imports threaten to impair u.s. national security .

the eu was not among the trading partners with whom the trump administration negotiated permanent exemptions from tariffs or alternative quota arrangements , and u.s. tariffs on u.s. imports from the eu went into effect in june 2018 .

the eu views the u.s. national security justification as groundless and the u.s. tariffs to be inconsistent with wto rules .

the eu has challenged the u.s. actions at the wto .

effective june 2018 , the eu began applying retaliatory tariffs of 25% on imports of u.s. whiskies , corn , rice , kidney beans , preserved and mixed vegetables , orange juice , cranberry juice , peanut butter , and tobacco products , along with selected non - agricultural products ( figure 5 ) .

this action includes the eu27 countries and the uk ( eu28 ) , as u.s. exports to the uk remain subject to the additional tariffs .

the value of u.s. agricultural exports to the eu28 targeted by these additional tariffs is estimated to have been approximately $1.2 billion in 2018 , or nearly 9% of total u.s. agricultural exports to the eu28 ( excluding nonagricultural products ) ( table 2 ) .

some analysts estimate that u.s. agricultural exports subject to tariff retaliation in 2018-2019 experienced a 33% decline in the eu28 market .

in october 2019 , u.s. - eu trade tensions escalated further when the united states imposed additional tariffs on $7.5 billion worth of certain u.s. imports from the eu , or about 1.5% of all u.s. imports from the eu28 in 2018 ( including the uk and nonagricultural products ) .

this action , authorized by wto dispute settlement procedures , followed a ustr investigation initiated in april 2019 under section 301 of the trade act of 1974 .

the ustr determined that the eu had denied u.s. rights under wto agreements .

specifically , ustr concluded that the eu and certain member states ( including the uk ) had not complied with a wto dispute settlement body ruling recommending the withdrawal of wto - inconsistent eu subsidies to airbus for the manufacture of large civil aircraft .

the list of products subject to additional tariffs stemming from the airbus subsidy dispute targets mainly the eu member states responsible for the illegal subsidies .

it includes agricultural products such as spirits and wine , cheese and dairy products , meat products , fish and seafood , fresh and prepared fruit products , coffee , and bakery goods .

agricultural imports account for about 56% of the total value of eu28 products subject to these additional tariffs .

as of february 2020 , tariff increases are limited to 25% on agricultural products , and they target primarily france , germany , uk , and spain ( figure 6 ) .

by agricultural product category , whiskies , liqueurs , and wine ( mainly from uk and france ) account for approximately 38% , and other food and agricultural products ( mainly from spain and france ) account for 19% ( table 3 ) .

in december 2019 , ustr began a review to determine if the list of imports subject to additional tariffs should be revised or tariff rates increased .

in february 2020 , ustr made some changes to the list of products affected by section 301 tariffs .

in terms of u.s. agricultural imports from the eu , the only change will be the removal of prune juice from the list , which will not be subject to additional 25% tariffs effective march 5 , 2020 .

u.s. - eu trade negotiations could be affected further if the eu retaliates and imposes tariffs on u.s. exports , in response to either these u.s. actions or an upcoming wto decision in the parallel eu dispute case against the united states .

later this year a wto arbitrator is expected to authorize the eu to seek remedies in the form of tariffs on u.s. exports to the eu , after the wto determined in early 2019 that the united states had also failed to abide by wto subsidies rules in supporting boeing .

in january 2019 , ustr announced its negotiating objectives for a u.s. - eu trade agreement , following a public comment period and a hearing involving several leading u.s. agricultural trade associations .

these objectives include agricultural policies—both market access and non - tariff measures such as tariff rate quotas ( trq ) administration and other regulatory issues .

among regulatory issues , key u.s. objectives include harmonizing regulatory processes and standards to facilitate trade , including sps standards , and establishing specific commitments for trade in products developed through agricultural biotechnologies .

the u.s. objectives also include addressing gis by protecting generic terms for common use .

u.s. agricultural interests generally support including agriculture in a u.s. - eu trade agreement .

the stated overarching goal for the u.s. side is addressing the u.s. trade deficit in agricultural products with the european union .

early on , the eu indicated that it was planning for a more limited negotiation that does not include agricultural products and policies .

the eu negotiating mandate , dated april 2019 , states that a key eu goal is "a trade agreement limited to the elimination of tariffs for industrial goods only , excluding agricultural products. .

several members of congress opposed the eu's decision to exclude agricultural policies in its negotiating mandate .

a letter to ustr from a bipartisan group of 114 house members states that "an agreement with the eu that does not address trade in agriculture would be , in our eyes , unacceptable. .

senate finance committee chairman chuck grassley reiterated , "bipartisan members of the senate and house … have voiced their objections to a deal without agriculture , making it unlikely that such a deal would pass congress. .

then , in january 2020 , public statements by u.s. and eu officials signaled the possibility that the u.s. - eu trade talks might include negotiation on sps and regulatory barriers to agricultural trade .

it is not clear , however , that both sides agree on which specific types of non - tariff trade barriers might actually be part of the u.s. - eu trade talks .

as reported in the press , statements by some usda officials have suggested that selected sps barriers as well as gis would need to be addressed by the trade talks .

meanwhile , other press reports indicate that some eu officials have downplayed the extent that certain non - tariff barriers—such as biotechnology product permits , approval of certain pathogen rinses for poultry , regulations on pesticides , or food standards—would be part of the talks ; instead , regulatory barriers might be lowered for certain "non - controversial" foods .

the united states continues to push for additional concessions from the eu .

more formal discussions are expected in the spring of 2020—in an effort to ease trade tensions regarding the imposition of retaliatory tariffs .

the eu has taken certain measures to avoid escalating agricultural trade tensions with the united states .

for example , it has expanded the u.s. - specific quota for eu imports of hormone - free beef , increased imports of u.s. soybeans as a source of biofuels , approved a number of long - pending genetically engineered products for food and feed uses , and proposed to lift a ban on certain pest - resistant american grapes in eu wine production , and other trade - related measures .

in a separate but indirectly related action , in august 2019 , ustr asked the u.s. international trade commission ( usitc ) to conduct an investigation examining sps barriers related to pesticide maximum residue levels ( mrls ) across all u.s. markets , including europe .

previously , during t - tip negotiations , both market access and non - tariff barriers were part of the u.s. negotiating objectives .

at that time , non - tariff barriers to agricultural trade—including sps and tbt measures , and gis—were among the agricultural issues actively debated .

in addition , regulatory coherence and cooperation was part of ustr's stated objectives .

some of the same issues that proved to be challenging during the t - tip talks may continue to challenge negotiators .

various studies at the time reported that removing tariff and non - tariff barriers in u.s. - eu trade would result in economic benefits to the u.s. and eu agricultural sectors .

another study by the european parliament acknowledged that gains from tariff cuts would be limited unless regulatory and administrative barriers were also addressed .

the u.s. - eu trade agreement negotiations present congress with the challenge of determining to what extent food and agriculture issues will be addressed in the trade talks , if at all .

although market access and tariff reductions may be off the table , addressing regulatory restrictions and other non - tariff barriers to u.s. agricultural trade are considered important for many u.s. producers .

some press reports indicate that certain non - tariff barriers and regulatory cooperation could become part of the new trade talks , while other press reports raise questions about the eu's willingness to address specific types of non - tariff barriers as part of the negotiation .

even if regulatory coherence and cooperation become part of the u.s. - eu trade talks , their resolution in a manner that benefits u.s. agricultural exporters is far from assured .

instead , some of the same non - tariff and regulatory barriers to u.s. trade that proved to be challenging during the t - tip negotiation could prove to be equally intractable today .

the uk's exit from the eu could also complicate future trade negotiations .

the uk is a close ally of the united states and has been one of its strongest advocates among the eu bloc .

in general , the regulatory framework and actions taken by the uk's food standards agency are more aligned with those in the united states .

now that the uk is no longer part of the eu , the eu trade gains for u.s. agriculture could be reduced while its agricultural trade deficit may become more pronounced , given a more favorable trade situation with the uk .

