senate rule xxiii lists , by position category , individuals who , other than senators , shall be permitted floor privileges in the senate chamber when the senate is in session .

as president of the senate , the vice president is afforded floor privileges , even when not expected to perform formal or ceremonial duties .

additional categories include former senators and other high - level officials and certain staff members conducting senate business in the chamber .

however , as amended in 2007 , the rule excludes individuals who would otherwise be allowed if they are registered lobbyists or acting as an agent of a foreign principal .

over its history , the senate has amended its floor privileges rule to add or modify the list of those granted access .

the senate has also agreed to resolutions and unanimous consent ( uc ) agreements that have further clarified the rule , established procedures regarding staff access , or allowed individuals not designated in the rule onto the floor .

this report discusses the current positional categories listed in rule xxiii , as well as the history of senate floor privileges , beginning with the first identified senate resolution regulating non - senator access to the chamber in 1798 .

additionally , relevant standing orders and biennial uc agreements are discussed in the report's "evolution of the rule" section .

the final section of the report offers guidance in obtaining temporary staff access under the sergeant at arms's floor pass system or by unanimous consent .

this report will be updated as necessary .

the sergeant at arms enforces the rules and regulations governing the senate chamber .

accordingly , the office of the sergeant at arms ( saa ) , including its doorkeepers , supervises and restricts staff access to the floor .

the saa ensures that non - chamber staff members will not access the floor during a senate session unless they are on the journal clerk's pre - notification list or are allowed under the terms of a unanimous consent request .

the saa also ensures that , barring a uc request , no more than two staff members from the same senator's office will be on the floor at the same time , as mandated in the recurring uc agreements agreed to at the start of each congress .

as approved by the committee on rules and administration , the "regulations controlling the admission of employees and senate committees to the senate floor" are meant to "permit closer supervision over employees admitted to the senate floor" without depriving any employees the privilege of the floor if they are "entitled thereto under rule xxiii. .

in view of these regulations , the senate doorkeepers provide senate staff members with the following instructions regarding floor access .

senate office managers and other staff are issued credentials that allow them to submit , using the saa transaact web portal , a list of staff members to be granted senate floor privileges .

the submitted staff members should be eligible for floor access pursuant to clause 1 of rule xxiii .

that is , they must be senate committee staff members or working in the office of a senator and on the payroll of the senate or joint committee staff members and on the payroll of the senate or the house of representatives .

should the senate or joint committee office experience any personnel changes affecting its list of eligible individuals , the credentialed staff member should submit those changes to the saa via transaact .

while senate offices may pre - submit the names of multiple staff members , the number of staff members from the same office allowed on the floor at one time is limited .

the saa restricts access to those individuals who are in temporary possession of floor passes provided by the credentials desk .

every committee of the senate , as well as joint committees , are allotted six cards ( floor passes ) to be used when the committee has jurisdiction over pending legislation .

four cards may be used as needed without a time limit .

two cards are given with a 15-minute time limit , allowing staff members to perform brief official duties , such as assisting with poster boards and other visual displays .

each senator and the vice president is allotted two cards .

the senate cards are issued to regular full - time senate staff members working in a senator's office .

they are to be used while the staff member is performing official duties relating to a particular bill or matter under consideration .

one card is not time limited , while the other card has a 15-minute limit .

the time - limited cards allow staff members to speak briefly to a senator or transport materials to the floor .

during a senate session and 30 minutes prior , an eligible staff member may sign in and obtain a pass at the credentials desk , located between the senate reception room and the senate chamber .

the desk attendant checks the staff member's official senate id badge and verifies that the staff member's name has been pre - submitted via the transaact system .

 ( unlisted staff members are advised to contact their offices and request to be added to the database. ) .

the desk attendant also notes in the daily roster—now an electronic database—the staff member's name , office , and official business to be performed and the card number issued to the employee .

following the sign - in procedures , staff members granted floor access are to display both their senate id badges and the floor passes to the doorkeeper at the entrance of the chamber .

when their duties are completed , they are to exit the chamber and return the floor passes to the attendant at the credentials desk .

if a senator's office allotment has been met , any additional employees seeking floor access are to wait in the senate lobby until one of the office employees returns from the floor .

according to the senate doorkeepers' "guidelines regarding floor privileges," the sergeant at arms may also "rotate staff on and off the floor to eliminate congestion. .

additionally , the saa may restrict access due to restrictions imposed under the terms of a uc agreement or a senate resolution .

 ( see , for example , the clinton impeachment uc agreement. ) .

staff members who wish to observe , but not assist in , senate proceedings are advised to do so from the senate galleries .

staff members are to remain on the floor "only as long as necessary for the transaction" of the staff members' official business .

during the time spent on the floor , they "shall in no way encroach upon the areas and privileges reserved for senators only. .

most floor passes permit staff members to use one designated door to access the chamber .

however , each committee is given two full - floor passes , one for a majority staff member and one for a minority staff member , allowing those in possession to enter and exit the chamber throughout the day and through any door .

at the start of roll - call votes , the sergeant at arms closes the floor for entry , except for those staff members granted access via unanimous consent or committee staff members "associated with the issue involved. .

in addition to the pre - notification procedures outlined above , senators may use uc requests to provide access to staff members .

uc requests may be used when an eligible staff member is needed on the floor but is not currently in the transaact database .

additionally , senators may seek uc approval to enable floor access for more than two staff members at one time or to provide access to an assistant who is not on the senate payroll , such as a legislative fellow or intern .

senators may also obtain uc agreements to provide temporary floor privileges to other individuals .

floor - privilege uc agreements usually include a time limitation , such as for the duration of the day , session , or congress .

if the senator is requesting the assistance of more than two staff members , the uc request will likely include the reason why the maximum number should be temporarily increased .

the following are examples of uc request language that might be used to enable individuals to access the floor aside from the pre - notification floor pass procedure .

senator: mr. [or madam] president , i ask unanimous consent that my defense fellow , [named individual] , be given floor privileges for the remainder of the first session of the 116 th congress .

senator: mr. [or madam] president , as manager of the pending bill , i require the assistance of more than two staff members on the floor today .

i ask unanimous consent that the following staff members , [named individuals] , be afforded the privilege of the floor during debate and all votes on the [named bill] .

