when congress considers legislation , it takes into account the proposal's potential budgetary effects .

this helps members to weigh the legislation's merits , and to consider whether it complies with the budgetary rules that congress has created for itself .

while information on the potential budgetary effects of legislation may come from numerous sources , the authority to determine whether legislation complies with congressional budgetary rules is given to the house and senate budget committees .

in this capacity , the budget committees generally rely on estimates provided by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) and the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) .

as described in the following section , cost estimates provided by cbo and jct are guided by certain requirements that congress has articulated in different forms .

these requirements are not completely prescriptive , however , and as a result both cbo and jct adopt practices and conventions that guide the creation of cost estimates .

generally , cbo and jct estimates include projections of the budgetary effects that would result from a proposed policy and incorporate anticipated individual behavioral responses to the policy .

the estimates , however , do not typically include the macroeconomic effects—effects on the overall size of the economy—of those individual behavioral responses .

congress has sometimes required that jct and cbo provide estimates that incorporate such macroeconomic effects .

these estimates are often referred to as dynamic estimates or dynamic scores .

this report provides information on the authorities and requirements under which cost estimates are prepared , as well as a summary of the debate surrounding dynamic cost estimates , and previous rules and requirements related to dynamic estimates .

currently , no congressional rules explicitly require dynamic estimates , and congress may examine what rules changes , if any , are needed in the area of dynamic estimates .

this report , therefore , includes information on options for the creation of dynamic scoring rules , and general considerations for congress related to dynamic estimates .

cost estimates provided by cbo and jct are guided , in part , by certain requirements that have been articulated by congress in different forms , as described below .

generally , cbo and jct estimates include projections of the budgetary effects that would result from proposed policy changes , and incorporate anticipated individual behavioral responses to the policy .

the estimates , however , do not typically include the macroeconomic effects of those individual behavioral responses ( such as changes in labor supply and the capital stock ) that would alter gdp .

for example , if an increase in the corporate tax rate caused corporations to use more debt , conventional estimates would take into account the loss of revenue since the returns from debt are taxed more lightly than the returns from equity , and this loss in revenue would offset the revenue gain calculated by multiplying the change in the tax rate by corporate income .

the conventional estimate would not , however , take into account the lost revenue from a reduction in income if the rate increase caused a decline in investment , which affects production .

these estimates without macroeconomic effects are sometimes imprecisely referred to as "static," but are referred to in this report as conventional estimates because they take into account many behavioral responses .

in contrast , a dynamic score aims to account for legislation's macroeconomic effect , by incorporating changes to ( 1 ) aggregate demand for goods and services to increase output in an underemployed economy and / or ( 2 ) aggregate supply of goods and services ( supply - side effects ) to increase potential output .

for example , dynamic scoring can include fiscal stimulus effects that increase aggregate demand .

these effects occur when the economy is underemployed ( for example , during and after a recession ) , and increased spending either by the government or from taxpayers after a tax cut can expand the economy through multiplier effects and cause output to move closer to potential output .

these effects are referred to subsequently as demand - side effects .

supply - side effects occur if potential output is altered due to changes in investment or savings that increase the capital stock , labor supply , or productivity .

the crowding - out ( or - in ) effect occurs when an increase ( or decrease ) in the deficit reduces ( or increases ) funds available for private investment and hence reduces ( or increases ) the capital stock .

currently , no house or senate rules explicitly require the preparation or use of dynamic estimates , and congress may choose to examine what rules changes , if any , are needed in the area of dynamic estimates .

while committees and members continue to have the ability to request that cbo or jct provide dynamic estimates for certain policies or legislative proposals , at some point congress may choose to reinstitute explicit rules related to such dynamic estimates .

these requirements could be articulated as formal direction from the committees of jurisdiction or leadership to jct and cbo .

alternatively , as was done previously , these requirements might be included in chamber rules or in budget resolutions , or might be included in a standing order or in statute .

if congress were to reinstitute explicit rules related to dynamic estimates , it may choose to consider many facets of such potential rules: will there be a threshold for the creation of such estimates ? .

should the proposal also allow the legislation to be designated as "major" by either majority or minority committee and / or chamber leadership ? .

should cbo and jct provide dynamic estimates only for "major proposals," such as those that have a large estimated budgetary impact ? .

if so , what will be the threshold for major ? .

past rules have used a measure equal to 0.25% of gdp .

would the effect on gdp be measured by the entire legislation , or would it be triggered by an individual provision or group of provisions ( such as revenue raisers or revenue losers in a tax bill ) that met the threshold ? .

the latter approach would capture revenue - neutral legislation that nevertheless made significant changes that could affect gdp .

should rules for dynamic estimates apply to spending as well as revenue proposals since both have the potential to cause notable macroeconomic effects ? .

and if the rule applies to spending , will it apply to discretionary spending that varies from the baseline as well as direct / mandatory spending ? .

what information should be included in such estimates ? .

practices prior to 2015 provided insight into how sensitive the results were to choice of model and parameters .

the jct has also continued to present information on the parameters of its models that lead to behavioral responses .

the justification for assigning model weights might also be addressed in more detail .

should dynamic estimates be used only for informational purposes , or also for enforcement purposes ? .

dynamic estimates allow congress to weigh the merits of the legislation—should they also be used to determine whether the legislation complies with the budgetary rules that congress has created for itself ? .

should additional resources be provided to cbo and jct so that they might develop greater capacity for providing dynamic estimates ? .

