every year the senate routinely considers whether to give its advice and consent to hundreds of nominations submitted by the president .

from start to finish , the confirmation process can be a lengthy one , even for relatively noncontroversial nominees .

each nomination is typically referred to one or more committees having subject matter jurisdiction over the position .

committees may bear a significant workload in examining nominees—often including questionnaires , optional public hearings , and individual meetings with senators—to determine whether to report a nomination to the full senate .

once a committee has reported a nomination or been discharged from its further consideration , the senate may take up a nomination for deliberation , though a cloture process may be required to ensure a final vote to confirm .

as part of an effort to streamline the nominations process during the 112 th congress ( 2011-2012 ) , a standing order of the senate , s.res .

116 , created a new designation of certain nominations as "privileged. .

these so - called privileged nominations are subject to special procedures that may save the time of committees in processing these appointments .

in total , there are 285 positions to which nominations are privileged , the majority of which are part - time appointments to oversight boards and advisory commissions , but they also include full - time chief financial officers and certain assistant secretaries to cabinet - level agencies .

a full list of privileged nominations , organized by their committees of jurisdiction , can be found in appendix .

this report first examines , in detail , the special procedures under which privileged nominations are processed , as well as the action by which a senator may have a privileged nomination referred to its committee of jurisdiction .

it then provides a brief legislative history of s.res .

116 and subsequent legislation that has created additional privileged nominations .

finally , this report includes data on and a discussion of senators' requests to refer privileged nominations to committee .

figure a - 1 contains an example of the "privileged nominations" section of the senate's executive calendar .

the senate has considered 467 privileged nominations since s.res .

116 was agreed to on june 29 , 2011 .

of those 467 , 22 ( 4.7% ) have been referred to committee at the request of a senator .

this rate of referral suggests that senators are generally deferential to the expedited committee consideration of privileged nominations .

table 1 provides data on these 22 instances of requested referrals .

each entry contains identifying information about the nomination , including the congress when the nomination was submitted , the name of the nominee , the position to which he or she was nominated , and the final disposition of the nomination by the senate .

table entries also note the committee of jurisdiction for each nomination and a column indicating whether the senator requesting referral was a member and / or leader of that committee at the time he or she made the request .

as previously discussed , under the provisions of s.res .

116 , any senator has the right to request that a privileged nomination be referred to its committee of jurisdiction .

the vast majority of these requests have been by a senator on the nomination's committee of jurisdiction .

of the 22 instances where a privileged nomination has been referred , 20 have been made by a senator from the committee of jurisdiction .

furthermore , 14 of those 20 requests were made by either the chair or ranking member of the committee of jurisdiction .

