many indo - pacific nations have responded to china's growing willingness to exert its influence in the region and globally —as well as to the perception that the united states' commitment to the region may be weakening .

in part those actions have fostered developing new strategies to strengthen their geopolitical position independent of the united states .

regional states have been concerned about numerous chinese actions , including its extensive military modernization , its more assertive pursuit of maritime territorial claims and efforts to control international or disputed waters , placement of military assets on artificial islands it has created in the south china sea , efforts to suppress international criticism or pushback through coercive diplomatic or economic measures , and its expanding global presence , including its military base at djibouti .

economic dynamics may also be playing a role in governments' policymaking , as economic interdependence between china and virtually all its neighbors remains very strong , and the belt and road initiative ( bri ) may further deepen trade and investment links between china and regional states .

that increased economic interdependence , coupled with china's increasing assertiveness and willingness to use economic levers for political reasons , may be heightening indo - pacific nations' strategic mistrust of beijing .

other shifts affecting the geostrategic balance in the region include the rise of north korea as a nuclear power , japan's nascent reacquisition of power projection capabilities , and the introduction of new military technologies ( eg , drones , anti - ship missiles ) that appear to challenge traditional elements of military power , which could potentially erode u.s. ( and other large military powers' ) traditional military advantages .

indo - pacific nations recently appear to be accelerating the adoption of hedging strategies , at least in part because of the trump administration's perceived retreat from the united states' traditional role as guarantor of the liberal international order .

understanding these strategies may be important for congress as it addresses u.s. diplomatic , security , and economic interests in the region and exerts oversight over the trump administration's policies towards u.s. allies and partners .

the trump administration has sent conflicting signals about its posture in asia .

the administration's 2018 national defense strategy emphasizes the need to "strengthen alliances and attract new partners. .

in addressing the need to "expand indo - pacific alliances and partnerships" the document states , "we will strengthen our alliances and partnerships in the indo - pacific to a networked security architecture capable of deterring aggression , maintaining stability , and ensuring free access to common domains … to preserve the free and open international system. .

similarly , the department of defense indo - pacific strategy report: preparedness , partnerships , and promoting a networked region of june 2019 calls for a "more robust constellation of allies and partners. .

in an address to the u.s .

naval academy in august 2019 , secretary of defense mark esper described the indo - pacific as "our priority theater" and stated … allies and partners want us to lead … but to do that we must also be present in the region.… not everywhere , but we have to be in the key locations .

this means looking at how we expand our basing locations , investing more time and resources into certain regions we haven't been to in the past .

counter to these statements' emphasis on allies and partners , however , the trump administration has appeared to some less - engaged on regional issues , sending lower - level officials to key regional summits , withdrawing from the proposed trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) trade agreement , and canceling joint exercises with south korea .

in addition , president trump has openly questioned the value many of the united states' alliance relationships , particularly with japan and south korea .

as a result , some observers note that u.s. allies and partners also may be increasingly concerned over aligning too closely with the united states at a time when the united states' commitment to the region is questioned , even as many in the region hope that the united states continues to play a dominant or balancing role in asia .

for many in asia , the strategic picture has been complicated further by the trump administration's trade policies , which are sometimes perceived as asking partners to choose between the united states and china—both critical trade and investment relationships that have been crucial to their economic successes over the past few decades .

in response to these developments , some allies and partners are expanding their defense budgets , embarking on major arms purchases , and looking to create new defense and security networks to strengthen their collective ability to maintain their independence from chinese influence .

within this evolving context , regional states are adjusting their strategic calculations .

a number of trends appear to be emerging across the indo - pacific: several regional states have sought to develop new intra - asian security partnerships to augment and broaden existing relationships .

japan , australia , and india are among the most active in this regard ; numerous asian states have adopted an "indo - pacific" conception of the region , strategically linking the indian and pacific ocean regions .

however , the concept remains vague and not all states agree on what it means ; many regional states have increased defense spending , although spending as a percentage of gdp has been relatively steady , and some have adopted more outward - looking defense strategies .

congress has sought to address questions about whether these developments present the united states with challenges and / or opportunities to promote u.s. interests in the indo - pacific , and to assess the efficacy of the trump administration's strategy towards the region .

some members of congress have also sought to demonstrate congress's commitment to maintaining and expanding both alliance and other relationships in the indo - pacific .

in december 2018 , for instance , the 115 th congress passed , and president trump signed into law , the asia reassurance initiative act of 2018 ( aria ; p.l .

115-409 ) , which provides a broad statement of u.s. policy for the indo - pacific region and establishes a set of reporting requirements for the executive branch regarding u.s. policy in the region .

aria emphasizes the need to "expand security and defense cooperation with allies and partners" and to "sustain a strong military presence in the indo - pacific region. .

it states that "without strong leadership from the united states , the international system , fundamentally rooted in the rule of law , may wither... .

it is imperative that the united states continue to play a leading role in the indo - pacific. .

in addition to numerous pieces of legislation aimed at addressing challenges associated with china , the 116 th congress has also introduced numerous pieces of legislation that seek to emphasize u.s. commitment to the region , including to u.s alliances and partnerships , and to guide u.s. policy .

relevant legislation includes: s. 2547 —indo - pacific cooperation act of 2019 ; s.res .

183 —reaffirming the vital role of the united states - japan alliance in promoting peace , stability , and prosperity in the indo - pacific region and beyond , and for other purposes ; h.res .

349—reaffirming the vital role of the united states - japan alliance in promoting peace , stability , and prosperity in the indo - pacific region and beyond ; s.res .

67 —expressing the sense of the senate on the importance and vitality of the united states alliances with japan and the republic of korea , and our trilateral cooperation in the pursuit of shared interests ; h.res .

127—expressing the sense of the house of representatives on the importance and vitality of the united states alliances with japan and the republic of korea , and our trilateral cooperation in the pursuit of shared interests ; s. 985 —allied burden sharing report act of 2019 ; h.r .

2047 —allied burden sharing report act of 2019 ; and h.r .

2123 —united states - india enhanced cooperation act of 2019 .

in recent years , some european countries , particularly france and the united kingdom ( uk ) , have deepened their strategic posture in the indo - pacific .

although both countries remain relatively modest powers in the region , a growing french and british presence can support u.s. interests .

through their strategic relations , arms sales , and military - to - military relationships , france and the uk have the ability to strengthen the defense capabilities of regional states and help shape the regional balance of power .

in recent years , france and the uk are networking with like - minded indo - pacific nations to bolster regional stability and help preserve the norms of the international system .

these efforts reinforce the united states' goal of maintaining regional stability by strengthening a collective deterrent to challenges to international security norms .

such challenges include china's construction and militarization of several artificial islands in the south china sea , its increasingly aggressive behavior in asserting its maritime claims , and the extension of pla navy patrols into the indian ocean .

additionally , some european countries have dispatched naval vessels to the east china sea to help enforce united nations security council resolutions against north korea , providing opportunities for cooperation with the united states and other u.s. partners on other issues , such as the south china sea .

the 10 members of the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) , southeast asia's primary multilateral grouping , see a range of challenges resulting from the region's evolving strategic dynamics .

many southeast asian observers are unsettled by the prospect of extended strategic and economic rivalry between the united states in china , and the effect it would have on stability and economic growth in the region .

new formulations of an indo - pacific region have raised concern for some in asean , as they could lead to new diplomatic and security architectures that may weaken asean's role in regional discussions or may not include all asean's members .

asean as a grouping is constrained by its members' widely diverging views of their strategic and economic interests , and by the group's commitment to decision - making via consensus .

however , asean's individual members have responded to new regional dynamics in various ways .

many have expanded defense spending to deepen their own capabilities and hedge against uncertainties including those caused by china's rise .

some , particularly indonesia , have rhetorically adopted indo - pacific visions of the region , but these have not markedly changed substantive strategic postures .

in july 2019 , asean's leaders agreed to a five - page statement called the asean outlook on the indo - pacific .

some observers noted that asean's statement was likely driven by other "indo - pacific" plans from the united states , japan , and india , and by the group's desire not to be sidelined in the development of new ideas of asian regionalism .

asean has long seen itself at the center of asia's multilateral diplomacy—a concept the group's members refer to as "asean centrality. .

founded in part as a forum for dialogue that would prevent intra - regional conflict and help protect member states from great power influence , it has not traditionally taken a major security role , but rather has seen itself as a diplomatic hub that convenes other powers to discuss security and economic issues .

over the past few decades , east asia's regional institutions have almost all centered around asean as a "neutral" convening power .

u.s. administration officials have sought to reassure asean of its continued importance in the indo - pacific formulation .

"asean is literally at the center of the indo - pacific," secretary of state mike pompeo said in july 2018 , "and it plays a central role in the indo - pacific vision that america is presenting. .

the indo - pacific outlook statement sought to define a role for asean in shaping indo - pacific diplomatic , security , and economic arrangements .

it welcomed the linkage of the asia - pacific and indian ocean regions , and stated that "it is in the interest of asean to lead the shaping of their economic and security architecture… .

this outlook is not aimed at creating new mechanisms or replacing existing ones ; rather it is an outlook intended to enhance asean's community building process and to strengthen and give new momentum for existing asean - led mechanisms. .

the statement did envision a role for asean to "develop , where appropriate , cooperation with other regional and sub - regional mechanisms in the asia - pacific and indian ocean regions on specific areas of common interests. .

the statement listed four areas of cooperation for the nations of the indo - pacific: maritime cooperation ; efforts to improve connectivity ; efforts to meet the 2030 u.n .

agenda for sustainable development ; and economic cooperation in areas such as trade facilitation , the digital economy , small and medium sized enterprises , and addressing climate change and disaster risk reduction and management .

asean convenes and administratively supports a number of regional forums that include other governments , including the united states , such as the 27-member asean regional forum ( arf ) , the 16 member east asia summit ( eas ) , numerous "asean+1" dialogues between the group and its partners , as well as several other multilateral groupings .

while many of the region's pressing security challenges , such as north korea's nuclear proliferation , china - taiwan tensions , or india - pakistan rivalries , do not directly involve asean's members , they argue that their ability to convene other powers in diplomacy is a core asean role .

that said , asean has moved into a more active security role in recent years .

the asean defense ministers meeting - plus ( admm+ ) is a regional security forum that includes asean's 10 members and the eight asean partners—the united states , china , japan , south korea , australia , new zealand , india , and russia .

with u.s. backing , it has become more active in recent years , hosting multilateral dialogues and exercises in areas such as humanitarian assistance / disaster relief and maritime rescue .

in 2018 , asean conducted a multilateral naval exercise with china , and in september 2019 , it did so with the united states—moves that analysts called a strong signal of the group's desire to avoid working too closely to one military or the other .

asean's members have long sought to navigate changes in the regional security environment in ways that protect their own individual and collective interests , while avoiding being either dominated by external powers or drawn into external conflicts .

in recent years , many observers believe china has sought to drive wedges between asean's members based on their diverse interests—particularly the extensive investment by chinese firms in smaller countries such as cambodia and laos—and has had some success due to the group's insistence in governing by consensus .

since 2013 , asean has been engaged in negotiations with china to develop a code of conduct for parties in the south china sea , but it has generally rejected suggestions such as beijing's proposal that parties pledge not to conduct military exercises with "outside" countries .

based on the above , it appears that a key development in the strategic landscape of the indo - pacific is that u.s. allies and partners are developing closer strategic relations across the region as a way of hedging against the rise of china and the potential that the united states will either be less willing or less able to be strategically engaged .

given this , a key question for congress is how the united states should respond to this emerging dynamic .

do these emerging intra - asian strategic relationships support u.s. strategic objectives across the indo - pacific and if so , to what extent , and in what ways , should to the united states support them ? .

some analysts question whether the trump administration's skepticism of allies is affecting , or may affect , u.s. ability to work with japan , south korea , and australia in developing new security arrangements .

in particular , trump administration requests for large increases in allies' monetary contributions to basing cost has raised significant concerns about what future alliance arrangements may look like .

similarly , some question whether the administration's lack of interest in multilateral trade agreements such as the tpp may affect perceptions of regional allies and partners about broader u.s. commitment to the region .

these raise questions congress may consider , including: what are the united states' key interests in the region and have they changed over time ? .

what role does cooperation with u.s. allies play in ensuring u.s. interests are promoted as the region's new security architecture develops ? .

what is the proper mix of diplomatic , economic , defense , foreign assistance , and soft power that should be used in such an effort ? .

some political developments in the region may also play a role in how congress addresses these questions .

in the philippines and thailand , both u.s. treaty allies , political developments have led to what many observers describe as a decline in democratic institutions .

in india , a partner and important participant in indo - pacific arrangements , many are concerned about increasing intolerance and human rights abused against religious minorities .

these developments raise questions such as: what role should congress play in helping the trump administration , and future administrations , articulate u.s. strategy to the region and to what extent should american values , as well as u.s. interests , inform such an approach ? .

congress has consistently played an important role in guiding and helping set u.s. policy in asia .

as noted above , the asia reassurance initiative act of 2018 ( aria ; p.l .

115-409 ) , states: "without strong leadership from the united states , the international system , fundamentally rooted in the rule of law , may wither... .

it is imperative that the united states continue to play a leading role in the indo - pacific. .

congress may assess how growing military spending and new security arrangements affect that goal .

