economic growth ( the percentage change in real gross domestic product [gdp] ) is a core measure of economic progress and well - being .

over time , the rates of job growth and average income growth closely track economic growth .

a notable feature of the current economic expansion , which started in june 2009 and is now the longest expansion on record , has been its relatively modest economic growth rate .

whereas growth has averaged 4.3% in the previous 10 economic expansions , it has averaged 2.3% in this expansion .

some analysts thought a turning point had been achieved when growth accelerated to 3.1% from the third quarter of 2017 through the third quarter of 2018 .

this was the second - fastest period of sustained growth achieved in this expansion , second only to the 3.8% growth achieved from the second quarter of 2014 through the second quarter of 2015 .

however , in both of those cases , growth slowed in the following quarters .

it has averaged 2.1% over the next four quarters , from the fourth quarter of 2018 to the present—nearly identical to the growth rate in this expansion before the third quarter of 2017 .

growth is volatile , difficult to measure , and revised several times after it is initially released .

nevertheless , the pace of activity appears to have noticeably slowed .

growth in three of the past four quarters was 2.1% or lower , and private forecasters expect this slower pace to continue in the fourth quarter of 2019 and through 2020 .

the slower growth has been widespread throughout the country .

the only regions not affected by the slowdown were the southwest , rocky mountains , and new england .

although economic growth has slowed recently , it has not been negative or close to zero in any quarter since the fourth quarter of 2015 .

 ( the lowest growth rate since then was 1.1% in the fourth quarter of 2018. ) .

thus , the recent story so far is one of a transition to a soft landing ( a more moderate rate of growth ) , not a recession or cessation of growth .

in fact , for reasons discussed in this report , it is more likely that the fast - growth period was the aberration .

economic growth is only one measure of economic performance , and not all measures move in lockstep over short periods of time .

the recent slowdown in economic growth was much more pronounced than the slowdown in employment growth—monthly job growth was only slightly lower ( 191,000 ) from october 2018 to november 2019 than from july 2017 to september 2018 ( 203,000 ) .

the average monthly job growth rate from october 2010 to the present has been 199,000 .

in other words , to date , the economic growth slowdown has not made employers significantly less willing to take on additional workers .

although it is not unusual for economic growth to rise and fall within an expansion , it is nevertheless potentially useful for congress to consider the reasons why growth rose from the third quarter of 2017 through the third quarter of 2018 ( hereinafter , the faster - growth period ) and declined since the fourth quarter of 2018 ( hereinafter , the slower - growth period ) when considering policy options to address growth going forward .

these periods are chosen because quarterly growth rates are closely clustered together within those two periods .

this report analyzes the most commonly discussed reasons .

 table 1 breaks gdp down into its component parts to highlight where the growth slowdown has been concentrated .

comparing the faster - growth period from the third quarter of 2017 to the third quarter of 2018 with the slower - growth period from the fourth quarter of 2018 to the third quarter of 2019 , the slowdown has been concentrated in fixed business investment spending ( specifically , private structures and equipment ) and exports .

investment spending on structures , which include office buildings , factories , and power and communication infrastructure , fell from a growth rate of 3.7% in the former period to a 6.5% contraction in the latter period .

the decline in structures has been widespread , but has been particularly notable in the category of mining exploration , shafts , and wells—a category of spending that is highly sensitive to commodity prices .

the slowdown in equipment spending has been most notable in transportation equipment .

other components of gdp have not grown rapidly recently , but nevertheless do not explain the slowdown .

growth in personal consumption spending ( specifically , services ) has slowed , but by less than overall growth has slowed .

residential investment ( new house construction ) shrank by about 1% in both periods , having no effect on the overall difference between the two .

growth in government purchases was a little higher—thereby boosting growth—in the latter period .

import growth was lower in the latter period , which , in national accounting , increased growth .

although growth fluctuates considerably from quarter to quarter , economists believe that the economy can grow no faster than its internal speed limit—called the potential or trend growth rate —over longer periods of time .

over shorter periods of time , the primary determinant of growth is the business cycle .

the business cycle refers to the repeated pattern of recessions ( contractions in economic activity ) followed by ( longer ) expansions , which are then followed by another recession , and so on .

average growth over an entire business cycle of normal length would be expected to be close to the potential growth rate .

after recessions , in which output has fallen considerably , there is scope for a period of rapid catch - up growth that brings unused labor and capital resources back into use .

the current economic expansion is already the longest recorded expansion in u.s. history , so at this point it would not be expected that the economy could grow faster than its potential growth rate for a sustained period because there is no scope for catch - up growth—the economy's labor and capital inputs are close to fully employed .

in these conditions , growth may temporarily exceed trend growth , but it would be expected to return to trend growth fairly quickly .

at this point , the main debates are what the trend growth rate is and whether it can be raised through structural policy changes .

growth can rise or fall over a period of time for cyclical or structural reasons .

cyclical contributions to growth are mainly demand driven—they are a function of how fast spending in the economy is growing .

the government can temporarily influence spending through fiscal and monetary policy .

cyclical effects can have a large influence on growth over a few quarters , but are , by their nature , temporary .

structural contributions to trend growth are mainly supply driven—they are a function of how quickly the labor force ( both its quantity and quality ) , the capital stock , and productivity ( i.e. , how much output can be generated with a given set of inputs ) are growing .

the reason average growth has been low over the course of the expansion is because all three have grown at a slower pace compared to the 1950 to 2007 average , according to the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , as seen in figure 1 .

the labor force has grown more slowly because of the decline in labor force participation and the aging of the workforce , as the baby boomers have begun to transition to retirement .

after stripping out cyclical factors , cbo projects that the labor force grew by 1.4% annually from 1950 to 2018 , but will grow by 0.4% annually over the next 10 years—close to the 0.6% growth rate recorded from 2008 to 2018 .

average productivity growth declined by more than one - half and investment growth fell by more than one - third in the 2008-2018 period compared to 1950-2007 .

the reasons for the slowdown in the growth of investment and productivity are less clear and more debated .

the recent faster - growth period was comparable to cbo's estimate of the trend growth rate from 1974 to 2001 .

if the faster - growth period was driven by an increase in trend growth , it could potentially continue indefinitely .

cbo and other economic forecasters do not view this growth acceleration as having been driven by a structural acceleration in trend growth , however .

cbo expects some improvement in productivity growth over the next 10 years , but projects that overall trend growth will continue to be held back by low growth in the labor force and capital stock .

if cbo is correct , the current growth slowdown was inevitable at some point , as it represented growth reverting to trend .

the next section describes some of the major economic developments since 2017 that might have boosted growth temporarily above trend , and some subsequent developments that may have contributed to the slowdown .

several explanations have been offered as to why growth accelerated beginning in 2017 , including fiscal stimulus , regulatory relief , favorable financial conditions , and higher consumer and business confidence .

although these explanations seem to match the growth acceleration well , they have more trouble explaining why growth subsequently slowed , and they do not always match the exact timing of the acceleration .

several explanations have been offered for why growth decelerated beginning in 2018 .

the factors discussed below in more detail are a fading of fiscal stimulus , monetary policy tightening , trade policy uncertainty , and a slowdown in global growth .

the timing of these factors does not match the timing of the slowdown precisely , which points to the possibility that a return to the trend growth rate was inevitable .

the factors discussed below are not comprehensive ; other factors that have likely contributed to slower growth in at least one quarter since the fourth quarter of 2018 include the fy2018 government shutdown , the rise in oil prices in 2018 ( they have since declined ) , problems that slowed boeing's production of the 737 max airplane , and the gm - united auto workers strike .

however , these factors are not discussed at length because they were one - off occurrences that were temporary in nature and may have limited implications for policy going forward .

the consensus forecast is for the economy to continue growing at its recent moderate pace in the coming quarters .

however , the current economic expansion is already the longest recorded expansion in u.s. history , so it is natural to wonder if the recent slowdown will turn into a recession in the near term .

as noted above , the slowdown has returned the growth rate to the average for the overall expansion .

a return to trend means growth has less room to decline in the future before it turns negative , which has been a feature of all previous recessions .

some recessions are caused by external shocks to the economy—idiosyncratic changes that reduce output , such as a spike in energy prices .

any given shock is less likely to result in negative growth if the economy is growing rapidly when the shock occurs than if it is growing slowly .

however , a return to trend growth could counterintuitively make it less likely that the economy enters a recession because there is less of a risk that the economy will overheat .

some recessions are caused by the economy growing unsustainably quickly when it is already at full employment , which leads to higher inflation and , ultimately , a corrective crash in economic activity .

by contrast , absent external shocks , growth at the trend rate could theoretically continue indefinitely .

for this reason , fiscal and monetary stimulus may have helped prevent growth from slowing further in 2018 , but additional stimulus to attempt to increase growth above trend could potentially be counterproductive .

it is unusual for fiscal and monetary policy to still be easy ( i.e. , for the budget deficit to be high and interest rates to be low ) , as they are now , when the economy has already returned to full employment .

furthermore , growth during this expansion has been strong only during periods in which fiscal policy has been more stimulative .

this raises questions about whether growth could remain sufficiently strong if fiscal and monetary stimulus were withdrawn—a problem that has not arisen in previous expansions since after the great depression , but one that many advanced economies have grappled with in this expansion .

if growth were to slow further , the stimulus available to counteract it may be limited .

as a result of fiscal and monetary policy remaining stimulative throughout the long economic expansion , policymakers have less headroom to respond to a future downturn .

in the case of monetary policy , short - term interest rates are already relatively close to zero , limiting how much additional stimulus the fed can provide through its conventional tool of cutting short - term rates .

the fed may find that this tool is quickly exhausted in the next recession , in which case it could be required to turn to unconventional tools such as large - scale asset purchases ( popularly known as quantitative easing ) or negative interest rates to fight the recession .

in the case of fiscal policy , the publicly held federal debt is the highest it has been as a share of gdp since world war ii and is projected to continue to increase under current policy .

the budget deficit is already larger than its historical average as a share of gdp and will automatically increase in a recession with no change in policy because of the budget's automatic stabilizers .

unprecedentedly high debt may make policymakers feel constrained to provide enough additional fiscal stimulus to counteract the recession .

or high debt may cause debt holders to refuse to finance enough stimulus , particularly because of the reliance on foreigners to finance the federal debt .

foreigners have held 40% - 50% of the publicly held debt in recent decades .

there are competing schools of thought on the best way to address this limited fiscal and monetary headroom .

one school of thought argues for fiscal and monetary policy to be tightened now ( by reducing deficits and raising interest rates , respectively ) to gain additional headroom to be used in the next recession , and make it less likely that the economy will overheat at full employment .

this strategy would be successful as long as the economy could withstand the withdrawal of stimulus and continue growing at a moderate pace .

the other school of thought believes that fiscal and monetary stimulus should be used aggressively in response to any slowdown to avert a recession since the limited headroom would make a recession more likely to be deep and prolonged .

this school of thought has been cited by fed chairman jerome powell as a justification for the fed's decision to reduce interest rates three times in 2019 .

but this strategy could backfire if the economy nevertheless enters a recession at some point when headroom is still highly limited .

monetary and fiscal policy primarily influence short - term growth .

other policies can influence the long - term trend growth rate , but more indirectly , slowly , and imprecisely .

long - term growth is determined by growth in the labor force , changes in the quality of the labor force , growth in the capital stock , and productivity growth .

multiple policy areas influence each of those factors .

for example , education and training influence the quality of the labor force ; infrastructure spending contributes directly to the capital stock ; health policy influences hours worked ; and trade and technology policies influence productivity growth .

