on march 18 , 2020 , the american civil liberties union ( aclu ) sent a letter to attorney general william barr and bureau of prisons ( bop ) director michael carvajal asking them to release federal prisoners who might be at risk of serious illness due to coronavirus disease 2019 ( covid - 19 ) infection and to reduce the intake of new prisoners to reduce overcrowding .

the aclu called on bop to utilize authorities granted to it , such as compassionate release and home confinement for elderly offenders , to reduce the number of at - risk prisoners in the federal prison system .

the aclu also asked the department of justice ( doj ) to direct the u.s .

marshals service ( usms ) to release from custody any individuals who are at risk of serious illness related to covid - 19 , such as those who are elderly and / or have chronic health conditions .

multiple members of congress have additionally urged doj and its bop to take steps "to reduce the incarcerated population and guard against potential exposure to coronavirus," and legislation has been introduced that would require the release of some prisoners during a national emergency relating to a communicable disease .

bop data indicate that covid - 19 has become widespread in the federal prison system .

as of april 22 , 2020 , bop reported that 566 federal prisoners and 342 bop staff members in 47 prisons and 16 residential reentry centers had tested positive for covid - 19 and 24 prisoners have died from the disease ( no bop staff have died ) .

prior to these positive tests , bop released a covid - 19 action plan .

the action plan , discussed below , largely focuses on restricting access to federal prisons and limiting the movement of prisoners .

in addition , the attorney general has issued three memoranda outlining how doj will use the legal authorities available to address the covid - 19 pandemic .

two of the memoranda direct bop to use available authorities to place more prisoners on home confinement and the other memorandum provides directives for prosecutors when deciding whether to seek pretrial detention for federal defendants .

this report provides information on doj's response to the threat of covid - 19 as it pertains to federal prisons and the authorities that may permit the release of some federal prisoners because of the pandemic .

the report starts with a brief overview of why the prison environment is conducive to the spread of covid - 19 and the federal prisoners who might be at risk of serious complications if they contract the virus .

next , the report provides an overview of bop's covid - 19 action plan .

the report then turns to a discussion of current authorities that could allow for some federal prisoners to be released and directives from the attorney general on how doj is to use those authorities to respond to the covid - 19 pandemic .

the report concludes with a review of legislation introduced in the house and the senate that would alter the operation of some of those authorities .

usms is responsible for initially confining people who have been arrested and charged for a federal offense and are not granted pre - trial release .

usms does not operate any of its own jails .

rather , prisoners in usms custody are housed in a combination of bop - operated facilities , as well as state , local , and private facilities .

while most facilities operated by bop are prisons that hold people who have been convicted of federal offenses and sentenced to a period of incarceration , bop operates a series of facilities that largely function in a manner similar to local jails ( i.e. , they hold people who have not been convicted and are awaiting the resolution of their case or people who have been convicted but are awaiting transfer to a prison where they will serve their sentence ) .

these facilities—referred to as metropolitan detention centers , metropolitan correctional centers , or federal detention centers—are generally located in metropolitan areas and can hold prisoners of any security designation ( i.e. , high , medium , low , or minimum ) .

the majority of prisoners in usms custody are housed in state and local facilities ; data from usms indicate that in fy2019 , approximately 16% of usms prisoners were housed in bop - operated facilities .

usms says it "relies on state and local jails as well as bureau of prisons detention facilities to provide medical care inside the facilities. .

therefore , defendants in the custody of usms would be subject to any plan that the facility they are housed in implements to prevent the spread of covid - 19 .

for example , a usms prisoner held in bop - operated facility would be subject to bop's covid - 19 action plan , outlined below , while a prisoner held in a local jail would be subject to any steps that facility takes to prevent the spread of covid - 19 in its facility .

if a defendant is convicted of or pleads guilty to a federal offense , usms is to turn the prisoner over to the custody of bop , which is responsible for confining the prisoner until completion of his or her sentence .

bop is to assign prisoners to one of its facilities based on a series of factors , including the level of security and supervision the prisoner requires , the level of security and staff supervision the facility is able to provide , and the prisoner's program needs ( i.e. , sex offender , substance abuse treatment , educational / vocational training , individual counseling , group counseling , or medical / mental health treatment ) .

according to the vera institute of justice , "it is not a matter of if , but when , coronavirus shows up in courts , jails , detention centers , prisons , and other places where the work of the criminal and immigration systems occur. .

while prisons may appear to be closed environments , because prisoners cannot leave and return to the facility on their own volition , there are opportunities for the disease to be introduced into any prison .

covid - 19 could be introduced by the prison's staff , who could be exposed when they are not at the prison and subsequently introduce it to the facility when they come to work .

covid - 19 could also be transmitted to a prisoner though face - to - face visits with family , friends , or attorneys .

also , while prisoners cannot freely leave the facility , they do travel outside it for things such as court appearances or medical appointments .

the introduction of covid - 19 into a prison raises the concern that the nature of the prison environment can facilitate its spread .

prisons typically hold hundreds of prisoners who live in close proximity to one another .

in some facilities , prisoners might live in dormitory - style housing where many share the same space .

even if prisoners are housed in individual cells , they typically share the same ventilation system with prisoners in other cells .

there are also concerns about hygiene .

prisoners might not have regular access to soap and water to wash their hands , and hand sanitizer can be considered contraband because it contains alcohol .

these concerns are especially acute for prison systems that are operating over capacity .

there are also concerns about whether prisoners will have access to adequate medical care if a prison's staff is hit hard by the disease .

if covid - 19 were to spread among prison staff resulting in wide spread quarantines , there could be fewer medical staff to deliver care or fewer correctional staff available to transport critically ill prisoners to outside medical facilities .

also , prison infirmaries tend to have fewer medical resources , such as isolation beds , compared to hospitals .

however , one expert at the national commission on correctional health care believes that the prisons are prepared to handle potential covid - 19 infections because prisons have experience with preventing the spread of communicable diseases .

as of april 16 , 2020 , bop has approximately 172,300 prisoners under its jurisdiction , who are held in a combination of bop - operated facilities ( 122 in total ) , privately operated prisons , residential reentry centers ( rrcs ; i.e. , halfway houses ) , and state prisons .

while the federal prison population decreased by approximately 42,000 prisoners ( 19% ) from fy2013 to fy2019 , the federal prison system operated at 12% over its rated capacity in fy2019 .

according to usms , in fy2019 they received approximately 248,900 prisoners and their average daily detention population was approximately 61,500 prisoners .

while bop does not publish data on the number of prisoners that have health conditions that might make them more susceptible to serious complications if they were to contract covid - 19 , as of april 18 , 2020 , approximately 10,200 prisoners ( 6% of all prisoners ) under bop's jurisdiction were age 61 or older .

bop also notes , "the average age of offenders in bop - managed facilities is 41 years and average length of sentence is 128 months .

the average age of offenders in bop facilities has increased by 8 percent over the past decade .

approximately 45 percent of offenders have multiple chronic conditions that , despite management with medications and other therapeutic interventions , will progress and may result in serious complications. .

usms does not publish data on the age or health issues of prisoners in their custody .

bop's covid - 19 action plan was announced on march 13 , 2020 .

bop has modified its action plan as the situation in the federal prison system has dictated .

on march 19 , 2020 , bop clarified that while there are restrictions on the movement of prisoners between facilities , bop will transfer prisoners if necessary to properly manage the prison population , subject to certain conditions .

on march 31 , 2020 , bop announced that effective april 1 , 2020 , all prisoners would be placed on lockdown , meaning that they may not leave their assigned cell unless it is to attend programs or services offered as a part of normal operating procedures , such as educational programs or mental health treatment .

on april 14 , 2020 , bop announced that its action plan , which was initially set to expire on april 12 , 2020 , would be extended until may 18 , 2020 .

bop's action plan includes the following measures: sus pending social visits .

bop has suspended social visits for prisoners .

to allow prisoners to maintain social ties while social visits are suspended , bop is allowing prisoners to have 500 minutes per month ( compared to the usual 300 minutes ) of telephone time .

suspe nding attorney .

like social visits , bop is suspending visits from attorneys , though bop is to allow visits from attorneys on a case - by - case basis .

prisoners are to still be allowed to have confidential phone calls with their attorneys , which do not count against the 500 minutes per month limit .

limiting movement of prisoners .

bop is suspending transferring prisoners between facilities , with the exception of transfers for forensic studies , writs , interstate agreements on detainers , medical or mental health treatment , and transfers to pre - release custody .

bop will continue to accept new prisoners , though bop is working with usms to limit the number of prisoners transferred from jail facilities to bop's custody .

prisoners who are moved from one facility to another must have been in bop's custody for at least 14 days .

prisoners are also to be screened for covid - 19 symptoms ( eg , fever , cough , shortness of breath ) before being transferred , and those who present symptoms or have a temperature greater than 100.4 degrees are not to be transferred and instead are to be placed in isolation .

limiting official travel .

bop is suspending official staff travel , with the exception of relocation .

suspending tours .

bop is suspending prison tours , though it can grant exceptions on a case - by - case basis .

reducing staff training .

bop is suspending all staff training , with the exception of basic staff training for new employees at the federal law enforcement training center .

limiting contractor access to prisons .

bop is only allowing access for contractors who are providing essential services or those who provide maintenance on essential systems .

essential services include medical or mental health care , religious services , and critical infrastructure repairs .

limiting volunteer access to prisons .

bop is suspending visits to prisons from volunteers , though it can grant some exceptions on a case - by - case basis .

alternative means of communication ( eg , telephone calls ) will be provided to prisoners who want to speak privately with a religious volunteer .

it is not clear if telephone calls with volunteers count against a prisoner's 500 minutes per month limit .

screening employees .

bop is instituting advanced health screenings of employees at prisons in areas with "sustained community transmission" as determined by the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) .

advanced health screening involves self - reporting of possible exposure to covid - 19 and temperature checks .

volunteers , contractors , attorneys , and tour participants who are granted access to a prison are subject to the same screening procedures .

screening prisoners .

bop maintains an infectious disease management program as a matter of course , but in response to the covid - 19 pandemic bop has instituted practices specific to mitigating the spread of the disease in its facilities .

all new arrivals to the prison are to be screened for covid - 19 exposure risk factors and symptoms , asymptomatic prisoners with noted exposure risk factors are quarantined , and symptomatic prisoners with noted exposure risk factors are to be isolated and tested for covid - 19 .

modifications to operations .

bop is making modifications to its operations , if the facility's population and physical layout make modifications feasible , to allow for social distancing and to limit group gatherings .

for example , prisons might stagger meal and recreation times .

usms has not released a covid - 19 prevention plan , but as discussed above , usms does not operate its own jail system and prisoners are subject to any plans developed and implemented by the facility in which they are housed .

however , if a prisoner develops complications from covid - 19 that could not be adequately treated in the facility in which he or she is housed , usms would assume the cost of transporting the prisoner to a local medical facility and covering the cost of the medical care provided .

doj lacks the authority to grant early release to prisoners for the specific purpose of mitigating the transmission of a communicable disease .

however , there are authorities that may provide avenues for some federal prisoners to be released in response to the covid - 19 pandemic .

these authorities include statutory provisions allowing ( 1 ) federal courts to reopen pretrial detention hearings or permit temporary release of prisoners under certain circumstances , ( 2 ) for federal prisoners to be released before completing their sentences , and ( 3 ) for federal prisoners to be placed in the community to serve the final portion of their sentences .

additionally , the president retains constitutional authority to grant clemency for federal offenses , which can include commuting a prisoner's sentence to time served .

as of april 6 , 2020 , attorney general william barr has issued three memoranda that provide direction on doj's response to the covid - 19 pandemic .

two of the memoranda were to bop , and they outlined how bop should use its home confinement authorities to reduce the spread of covid - 19 in federal prisons .

the other memorandum was to all components of doj , including all u.s. attorney's offices , and it provides guidance regarding when prosecutors should seek pretrial detention for federal defendants in light of the risks some people might face if they were jailed pending adjudication of their cases .

as described previously , congress has passed legislation in response to the covid - 19 pandemic that modifies one of the authorities addressed in this report—release to home confinement under 18 u.s.c .

section 3624 ( c ) ( 2 ) .

however , at least one bill has been introduced that would appear to further facilitate the release of some federal prisoners in the context of a national emergency related to a communicable disease .

introduced legislation would appear to further supplement some of the authorities discussed above .

s. 3579 and h.r .

6400 would require that certain federal prisoners in the custody of bop or usms—those who are pregnant , age 50 or older , have certain underlying medical conditions , or have 12 months or less to serve—immediately be placed in community supervision when a "national emergency relating to a communicable disease" has been declared and for 60 days after it has expired .

in making such placements , the directors of bop and usms would be obligated to "take into account and prioritize" placements enabling "adequate social distancing," with home confinement given as one example .

individuals falling into qualifying categories would be excepted from placement in community supervision under the bills , however , if the director of bop or director of usms determines by clear and convincing evidence that they are "likely to pose a specific and substantial risk of causing bodily injury or using violent force against the person of another. .

it thus appears that s. 3579 and h.r .

6400 would enhance current authorities that permit the release of federal prisoners in response to covid - 19 .

specifically , under both bills some federal criminal defendants in pretrial detention would be eligible for immediate release to community supervision ( assuming they meet the health or other criteria ) without the need to file individual petitions seeking the reopening of their detention hearing based on new information or asserting a "compelling reason" for temporary release .

and those detained solely because they were previously determined to be a flight risk would appear to qualify for relief under both bills , as the bills' only exception for those eligible for relief are detainees that are determined to pose a risk of causing bodily injury or using violent force against another .

additionally , for those currently serving federal sentences in bop facilities , s. 3579 and h.r .

6400 would appear to establish another alternative for release to community confinement in the context of the covid - 19 pandemic beyond 18 u.s.c .

section 3624 ( c ) and 34 u.s.c .

section 60541 ( g ) , as bop would be required to release a prisoner over 50 years old , with a covered health condition , or who is within 12 months of release from incarceration unless the exception applied .

