the child nutrition programs ( listed in table 1 ) support meals and snacks served to children in schools , child care , summer programs , and other institutional settings in all 50 states , the district of columbia , and the u.s. territories .

the programs are administered by the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda's ) food and nutrition service ( fns ) , which provides federal aid to state agencies ( often state departments of education ) for distribution to school districts and other participating institutions .

in general , the largest subsidies are provided for free and reduced - price meals served to eligible children .

the institutional nature of child nutrition programs distinguishes them from other federal nutrition assistance programs , such as the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) and the special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children ( wic ) , which provide benefits directly to households .

wic is typically reauthorized with the child nutrition programs but is not considered a child nutrition program and is not discussed in this report .

the federal child nutrition programs date back to the national school lunch act of 1946 , which created nslp .

the act formalized federal support for school lunches following early federal aid beginning in the 1930s .

other child nutrition programs were added in the decades to follow as policymakers expanded feeding programs beyond the school setting .

the child nutrition act of 1966 formalized smp and created sbp as a pilot program .

soon after , a program for child care and summer meals was piloted in 1968 and separated into the child care food program ( now cacfp ) and sfsp in 1975 .

more recently , ffvp was piloted in 2002 and expanded to all states in 2008 .

 ( see the appendix for a brief legislative history of child nutrition programs. ) .

historically , the child nutrition programs have been aimed at both improving children's nutrition and supporting u.s. agriculture , with the dual missions "to safeguard the health and well - being of the nation's children and to encourage the domestic consumption of nutritious agricultural commodities and other food. .

the child nutrition programs are currently authorized under the richard b. russell national school lunch act ( nsla ) and the child nutrition act of 1966 .

section 32 of the act of august 24 , 1935 , also provides a portion of child nutrition funding .

congressional jurisdiction over the underlying three laws has typically been exercised by the senate agriculture , nutrition , and forestry committee , the house education and labor committee , and , to a limited extent ( relating to section 32 ) , the house agriculture committee .

congress periodically amends the child nutrition programs' authorizing laws and reauthorizes expiring authorities .

the child nutrition programs were most recently reauthorized by the healthy , hunger - free kids act of 2010 ( hhfka , p.l .

111-296 ) .

some of the authorities created or extended in the hhfka expired on september 30 , 2015 ; however , these expirations have had a minimal impact on program operations .

the 114 th congress began but did not complete a 2016 child nutrition reauthorization , and there was no significant reauthorization activity in the 115 th congress .

in the 116 th congress , leadership on the committees of jurisdiction have announced plans to work on child nutrition reauthorization .

this report starts with an overview of child nutrition programs' funding and then provides detail on each program , including a discussion of how the programs are administered at the federal , state , and local levels ; eligibility rules for institutions and participants ; nutritional and other program requirements ; and recent policy changes .

the national school lunch program ( nslp ) and school breakfast program ( sbp ) ( the "school meals programs" ) provide federal support for meals served in approximately 94,300 public and private elementary and secondary schools nationwide in fy2019 .

they also support meals in a smaller number of residential child care institutions .

schools receive federal aid in the form of cash reimbursements for every meal they serve that meets federal nutritional requirements ( limited to one breakfast and lunch per child daily ) .

the largest subsidies are provided for free and reduced - price meals served to eligible students based on income eligibility and categorical eligibility rules .

schools also receive a certain amount of commodity assistance per lunch served ( discussed previously ) .

schools participating in nslp have the option of providing afterschool snacks through the program , and schools participating in nslp or sbp have the option of providing summer meals and snacks through the seamless summer option ( discussed in the " after - school meals and snacks " and " seamless summer option " sections ) .

schools are not required by federal law to participate in nslp or sbp ; however , some states require schools to have a school lunch and / or breakfast program , and some states require schools to do so through nslp and / or sbp .

some states also provide state funding for the school meals programs .

approximately 91% of public schools participate in nslp .

schools that do not participate in the federal school meals programs may still operate locally funded meal programs .

the healthy , hunger - free kids act of 2010 ( hhfka ; p.l .

111-296 ) made several changes to the school meals programs .

among those changes was a requirement that usda update the nutrition standards for school meals and create new nutritional requirements for foods sold in nslp and sbp schools within a certain timeframe .

the law also created the community eligibility provision , through which eligible schools can provide free meals to all students .

these changes are discussed further within this section .

nslp and sbp are two separate programs , and schools can choose to operate one and not the other .

the programs are discussed together in this report because they share many of the same requirements .

differences between the programs are noted where applicable .

figure 1 displays average daily participation in nslp and sbp in participating schools .

participation in sbp tends to be lower for several reasons , including the traditionally required early arrival by students in order to receive a meal before school starts .

cacfp provides federal reimbursements for meals and snacks served in nearly 156,500 child care centers , day care homes , and adult day care centers nationwide in fy2019 ( see table 7 for participation by type of institution ) .

in these settings , reimbursements are limited to meals and snacks served to children ages 12 and under , children of any age with disabilities , and chronically disabled and elderly adults .

cacfp also supports free meals and snacks for children ages 18 and under in emergency shelters and afterschool programs in low - income areas ( discussed in the " after - school meals and snacks " section ) .

in general , cacfp provides cash reimbursements for up to two meals and one snack or one meal and two snacks per participant daily ( a meal may be a breakfast , lunch , or supper ) .

a smaller share of federal aid takes the form of commodity assistance or cash in lieu of commodities and funds for administrative costs ( discussed previously ) .

the eligibility and funding rules of cacfp differ for centers ( facilities or institutions ) and day care homes ( private homes ) .

day care homes must be overseen by sponsoring organizations , which handle the financial and administrative functions of the program for a number of local providers .

centers have the option of operating independently or under a sponsor .

both centers and day care homes must comply with government - established standards for other child care programs and meet federal cacfp nutrition standards .

the summer food service program ( sfsp ) and the seamless summer option provide federal reimbursements for summer meals .

sfsp is open to school food authorities , local public agencies , and private nonprofit organizations , while the seamless summer option is specifically for school food authorities , allowing them to continue operating under certain nslp / sbp requirements into the summer .

both programs require children to consume meals onsite ( known as the "congregate feeding" requirement ) .

in recent years , the federal government has tested alternatives to congregate feeding through the summer electronic benefits transfer for children ( summer ebt ) demonstration in select states .

the special milk program ( smp ) subsidized milk in approximately 3,000 schools , child care institutions , summer camps , and other institutions in fy2019 .

generally , schools and other participating institutions may not participate in another child nutrition meal service program along with smp .

however , schools may administer smp for pre - kindergartners and kindergartners who are in part - day sessions and do not have access to the school meals programs .

in smp , participating institutions provide milk to children for free and / or at a subsidized paid price .

institutions are reimbursed differently based on whether they decide to provide milk for free to all children , sell milk to all children , or combine these options ( providing free milk to eligible children and selling milk to other children ) ( see table 10 ) .

if institutions choose the combined option , they must establish eligibility rules for free milk .

usda updated the nutritional requirements for milk served in smp alongside changes to the cacfp nutrition standards .

the final rule , which took effect on october 1 , 2017 , required unflavored whole milk for one - year - olds , unflavored low - fat ( 1% ) or unflavored fat - free milk for children ages 2-5 , and unflavored low - fat ( 1% ) or flavored / unflavored fat - free milk for children ages six and older .

the regulations also allowed for reimbursement of non - dairy milk substitutes in cases of medical or special dietary needs .

in 2017 , usda changed the milk requirements for six - year - olds in smp alongside corresponding changes to milk in school meals programs and cacfp .

the change allowed the option of flavored low fat ( 1% ) milk for children ages six and older in smp for school year 2018-2019 forward .

cacfp and nslp both provide federal support for snacks and meals served during after - school programs .

the cacfp at - risk afterschool component provides reimbursement for up to one snack and one meal ( usually supper ) per child daily , whereas the nslp afterschool snack option provides reimbursement for snacks only .

reimbursement rates for cacfp at - risk afterschool meals / snacks and nslp afterschool snacks are the same as cacfp reimbursement rates ( listed in table 8 ) .

the fresh fruit and vegetable program ( ffvp ) provides formula grants to states to fund fresh fruit and vegetable snacks in selected elementary schools .

under a statutory formula , about half the funding is distributed equally to each state and the remainder is allocated by state population .

states must prioritize funding for schools with high proportions of students who are eligible for free or reduced - price meals .

schools must participate in nslp in order to receive a ffvp grant .

states set annual per - student grant amounts ( between $50 and $75 ) .

schools may provide fresh fruit and vegetable snacks to students at any time of day outside of the breakfast or lunch service .

schools offer snacks to all children in attendance ( regardless of family income ) .

as noted previously , ffvp's funding structure differs from the other child nutrition programs .

ffvp is funded by a mandatory transfer of funds from section 32 .

the authorizing law provided $150 million for school year 2011-2012 , which is adjusted annually for inflation .

in fy2019 , fns allocated approximately $171.5 million in ffvp funds to states .

ffvp has been amended over time by both farm bills and child nutrition reauthorization bills .

ffvp was created by the 2002 farm bill ( p.l .

107-171 ) as a pilot project .

the 2004 child nutrition reauthorization act ( p.l .

108-265 ) made the program permanent and provided funding for a limited number of states and indian reservations .

the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) expanded ffvp's mandatory funding through section 32 and enabled all states to participate in the program .

the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) essentially made no changes to ffvp but provided $5 million for a demonstration project to test offering frozen , canned , and dried fruits and vegetables in the program .

four states ( alaska , delaware , kansas , and maine ) participated in the pilot in school year 2014-2015 and an evaluation was published in 2017 .

federal child nutrition laws authorize and child nutrition funding supports several additional initiatives and activities , such as studies and evaluations , training and technical assistance , technology improvements , and food safety initiatives .

selected initiatives and activities are discussed below .

crs reports: crs in focus if10266 , an introduction to child nutrition reauthorization crs report r45486 , child nutrition programs: current issues crs report r42353 , domestic food assistance: summary of programs crs report r41354 , child nutrition and wic reauthorization: p.l .

111-296 ( summarizes the healthy , hunger - free kids act of 2010 ) crs report r44373 , tracking child nutrition reauthorization in the 114th congress: an overview crs report r45743 , usda domestic food assistance programs: fy2019 appropriations crs report rl34081 , farm and food support under usda's section 32 program crs report rl33299 , child nutrition and wic legislation in the 108th and 109th congresses ( summarizes the child nutrition and wic reauthorization act of 2004 ) other resources: usda fns website , https: / / www.fns.usda.gov / usda fns healthy , hunger - free kids act page , http: / / www.fns.usda.gov / school - meals / healthy - hunger - free - kids - act the fns page of the federal register , https: / / www.federalregister.gov / agencies / food - and - nutrition - service usda fns congressional budget justifications , https: / / www.obpa.usda.gov / explan_notes.htm .

the emergence of school lunches and the national school lunch program when the first federal aid for school lunches was provided in the 1930s , local school lunch programs were already operational in many cities and localities across the u.s .

many of these early lunch programs were started by charitable women's organizations at the turn of the century in an effort to feed hungry children .

over time , they transitioned to school boards and school districts .

these programs received a combination of private , local , and state funding .

the federal government became involved in school lunch programs during the great depression both as a way to feed hungry children and support the farm economy .

initially , federal aid was provided in the form of cafeteria equipment and labor .

in 1932 , the reconstruction finance corporation began providing loans to states and school districts to cover the cost of cafeteria space and equipment for school lunch programs .

in 1935 , the works progress administration , a new deal agency , began sponsoring women's employment in school lunchrooms .

federal food support for school lunches began that same year , when section 32 of the act of august 24 , 1935 ( p.l .

74-320 ) was enacted .

the act provided 30% of customs receipts to usda to purchase surplus commodities from farmers impacted by the depression .

these commodities were donated through various outlets for domestic consumption , including school lunch programs .

with commodity aid came the first federal regulations for school lunch programs .

usda required recipient organizations , through their agreements with state agencies , to operate school lunch programs on a nonprofit basis , maintain any existing local funding for school lunches , keep records of foods received , serve meals free to poor children , and ensure that such children would not be identified to their peers , among other requirements .

the availability of federal aid contributed to a rapid increase in the number of school lunch programs .

however , in 1943 , federal commodity aid declined as section 32 surplus commodities were diverted to feed u.s. armed forces in world war ii .

in addition , federal support for lunchroom labor disappeared with the elimination of the works progress administration .

in the midst of declining aid , congress provided the first cash assistance—$50 million in section 32 funds—for "a school milk and lunch program" in the 1944 department of agriculture appropriation act ( p.l .

78-129 ) .

the introduction of cash assistance marked a shift in the lunch program .

for the first time , schools could purchase their own foods in addition to receiving federally purchased commodities .

annual appropriations acts continued cash support for school lunches until 1946 , when the national school lunch act ( p.l .

79-396 ) was enacted .

signed into law on june 4 , 1946 , by president truman , the national school lunch act permanently authorized appropriations of "such sums as may be necessary" for the national school lunch program .

 ( the act would later be renamed the "richard b. russell national school lunch act," recognizing senator russell's role in the passage of the legislation and his earlier support for the school lunch program within new deal programs and during his tenure as the chairman of the agriculture appropriations subcommittee. ) .

the law required participating schools to serve lunches for free or at a reduced price to students who were deemed by local school authorities as unable to pay the full cost of a lunch .

funds were to be distributed to states based on the number of school - aged children in the state and the state's need , as measured by per - capita income , and states were to match federal funds dollar - for - dollar .

states were to distribute funding on a monthly basis to schools based on the number of meals served that met "minimum nutritional requirements prescribed by the secretary on the basis of tested , nutritional research" ( p.l .

79-396 ) .

cash assistance could not be used for cafeteria equipment , and separate funds were authorized for this purpose ( $10 million annually ) ; however , congress subsequently prohibited appropriations for equipment assistance from fy1948 to fy1967 .

nslp remained relatively unchanged from 1946 to 1960 .

however , during this timeframe , concerns emerged over the funding formula .

one concern was that the formula prioritized funding for schools with large numbers of school - aged children rather than actual participants in the program .

there was also concern that schools with high proportions of needy children received the same amount of aid as those with wealthier families , even though they had to serve a larger number of meals for free or at a reduced - price .

in 1962 , p.l .

87-823 changed the funding formula to be based on the number of school lunches served in the state in the preceding school year instead of the number of school - aged children .

the law also authorized additional "special assistance" for state - selected schools in poor economic areas ( however , special assistance was not funded until 1966 ) .

other notable changes to nslp occurred in the 1970s .

in 1970 , p.l .

91-248 extended special assistance to all schools participating in nslp .

the law also reduced the state matching requirement and established the first national eligibility guidelines for free and reduced - price meals at 100% of the federal poverty level ( later in the decade increased to 125% for free lunches and 195% for reduced - price lunches ) .

in 1971 , another significant change occurred with the enactment of p.l .

92-153 , which guaranteed states a certain level of federal cash assistance by specifying average per - meal reimbursement rates for free , reduced - price , and paid lunches .

the addition of other child nutrition programs in the 1960s , federal child nutrition efforts expanded beyond school lunches .

on october 11 , 1966 , the child nutrition act of 1966 ( p.l .

89-642 ) was enacted .

it formally authorized the special milk program ( smp ) and authorized the school breakfast program ( sbp ) as a pilot program .

the smp was based on predecessor usda school milk programs that had operated since the 1940s .

sbp was a newer concept that usda had piloted in the 1965-1966 school year .

in a house agriculture committee hearing on the child nutrition act , then - secretary of agriculture orville l. freeman testified that these proposals will permit us to begin a comprehensive effort to broaden child nutrition programs in this country .

they are based on what we have learned in 20 years of administration of the national school lunch act , and they reflect a careful assessment of gaps which now exist in the nutritional needs of children in this country .

the smp provided reimbursements for milk in schools , nonprofit child care centers , summer camps , and other nonprofit institutions .

at the time , schools and institutions could participate in both smp and nslp .

meanwhile , sbp was authorized for two fiscal years and required states to prioritize funds for "schools drawing attendance from areas in which poor economic conditions exist and to those schools to which a substantial proportion of the children enrolled must travel long distances daily" ( p.l .

89-642 ) .

 ( congress later expanded priority to include "schools in which there is a special need for improving the nutrition and dietary practices of children of working mothers and children from low - income families" ( p.l .

92-32 ) . ) .

the child nutrition act of 1966 also gave the secretary the authority to provide higher reimbursements to schools with "severe need. .

like nslp , the law specified that breakfasts "meet minimum nutritional requirements prescribed by the secretary on the basis of tested nutritional research," and be served for free or at a reduced price to children unable to pay the full price of a meal , as determined by local school authorities ( p.l .

89-642 ) .

in 1968 , child nutrition efforts were further expanded with the authorization of the special food service program for children ( sfspc ) , a pilot program to fund meals in summer and child care settings ( p.l .

90-302 ) .

sfspc provided the first federal assistance for summer meals for children and the first dedicated assistance for meals served in child care settings .

similar to sbp , sfspc was targeted to areas with poor economic conditions and a high number of working mothers .

in 1975 , the program was split into the separate child care food program ( ccfp ) and the summer food service program ( sfsp ) ( p.l .

94-105 ) .

ccfp was open to public and nonprofit institutions that met child care licensing or other official child care standards , while sfsp retained a focus on institutions in low - income areas .

meals were provided for free to all children at sfsp sites , whereas ccfp conducted free and reduced - price eligibility determinations like nslp .

recent history ( 1980 to 2010 ) the longstanding growth of child nutrition programs was contrasted with budget cuts in the early 1980s , which were part of larger efforts to reduce federal domestic spending .

the omnibus reconciliation act of 1980 ( p.l .

96-499 ) reduced fy1981 funding for child nutrition programs by approximately $400 million ( 9% ) of the child nutrition budget .

the law achieved savings by lowering reimbursement rates in the programs and eliminating commodity assistance for breakfast , among other changes .

larger spending cuts followed with the omnibus reconciliation act of 1981 , which made changes that collectively cut $1.4 billion ( 25% ) of the child nutrition budget ( title viii of p.l .

97-35 ) .

many of the policy changes made by the law remain in place today .

for example , the law restricted eligibility from 195% of poverty to 185% of poverty for reduced - price meals and set eligibility at 130% for free meals in the nslp , sbp , and ccfp .

it also raised allowable charges for reduced - price lunches from 20 cents to 40 cents and for reduced - price breakfasts from 10 cents to 30 cents .

in a major change to smp , the law excluded schools / institutions that participated in another child nutrition meals program from participating in smp—cutting smp's budget by 77 percent .

in ccfp , the law restricted participation from children ages 18 and under to children ages 12 and under , and reduced the maximum number of reimbursable meals from three meals and two snacks per child daily to two meals and one snack per child daily .

the law also eliminated equipment assistance for school meals .

child nutrition programs were subsequently excluded from budget deficit reduction measures in the late 1980s and 1990s , and new policies led to the expansion of the programs during this timeframe .

for example , amendments to the programs in these years authorized start - up grants for school breakfast programs , expanded ccfp to adult day care centers ( and renamed the child and adult care food program , or cacfp ) , and provided new funding for afterschool snacks through nslp and cacfp .

but what had potentially the longest - term impact on expansion was a policy change intended to reduce paperwork in the school meals programs: automatic ( categorical ) eligibility for free meals for children in food stamp ( now snap ) and aid to families with dependent children ( now tanf ) households , which was enacted in 1986—and direct certification of such children for free meals without household applications , which was enacted in 1989 .

other policies in the late 1980s and 1990s focused on improving program integrity .

the 1989 child nutrition reauthorization ( p.l .

101-147 ) required usda to create a standardized process through which states would review school food authorities' administration of nslp and sbp ( known as administrative reviews ) .

in cacfp , following usda office of the inspector general ( oig ) audits in the 1990s that found instances of abuse and mismanagement , the agricultural risk protection act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-224 ) made a number of changes aimed at improving program integrity in cacfp .

the act required cacfp sponsors to conduct more frequent and unannounced site visits of sponsored centers and homes , restricted nonprofit institutions' eligibility to those with tax - exempt status , and excluded institutions deemed ineligible to participate in any other public program based on violations of program requirements .

other legislation was aimed at improving program integrity in the school meals programs .

program integrity continued to be a focus in the 2004 child nutrition reauthorization ( p.l .

108-265 ) , which made changes to school food authorities' verification of household applications for free and reduced - price meals .

specifically , the law set a sample size of applications that schools must review , established a focus on "error - prone" applications ( applications near the income eligibility thresholds ) , and authorized direct ( automatic ) household application verification processes .

in addition , the law required states to conduct additional administrative reviews of school food authorities with a high level of administrative error or risk of error .

the 2004 child nutrition reauthorization also continued the expansion of free school meals to new categories of children .

specifically , the law extended categorical eligibility and direct certification for free school meals to homeless children , migrant children , and children served under the runaway and homeless youth act .

the most recent child nutrition reauthorization as of the date of this report was the healthy , hunger - free kids act of 2010 ( hhfka ; p.l .

111-296 ) .

the hhfka continued the expansion of school meals in a few ways .

it made foster children categorically eligible for free school meals , and allowed direct certification of such children .

it also included a pilot project for direct certification ( but not categorical eligibility ) of children in medicaid households for free and reduced - price meals based on an income test .

in addition , the hhfka created the community eligibility provision ( cep ) , through which eligible schools can provide free meals to all students .

as discussed in this report , the hhfka also made changes to nutritional requirements in the school meals programs and cacfp .

specifically , the law required usda to update the nutrition standards for school meals within a certain timeframe and align the standards with the dietary guidelines for americans ( per an existing statutory requirement ) .

the law also required usda to issue new nutrition standards regulating all foods sold on school campuses during the school day ( "competitive foods" ) .

 ( previous standards applied only to competitive foods sold during meal service. ) .

in addition , the hhfka required usda to update the nutrition standards for cacfp meals and snacks within a certain timeframe and align them with the dietary guidelines for americans .

usda and congress have made subsequent changes to the nutrition standards for school meals and cacfp meals and snacks , and the standards remain a source of debate in the programs .

