the u.s. government administers multiple international food assistance programs that aim to alleviate hunger and improve food security in other countries .

some of these programs provide emergency assistance to people affected by conflict or natural disaster .

other programs provide nonemergency assistance to address chronic poverty and hunger , such as by providing food to people during a seasonal food shortage or training communities on issues related to nutrition .

u.s. international food assistance programs originated in 1954 with the food for peace act ( p.l .

83-480 ) , also referred to as p.l .

480 .

historically , the united states has provided international food assistance primarily through in - kind aid , whereby u.s. commodities are shipped to countries in need .

congress typically funds in - kind food aid programs through the agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies appropriations act—known as the agriculture appropriations bill .

the agriculture appropriations bill funds the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) except for the forest service .

in 2010 , the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) began providing market - based assistance to supplement in - kind aid in emergency and nonemergency situations .

market - based assistance provides cash transfers , vouchers , or local and regional procurement ( lrp ) —food purchased in the country or region where it is to be distributed rather than purchased in the united states .

congress funds most market - based assistance through the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs ( sfops ) appropriations bill .

the sfops appropriations bill funds the u.s. department of state , usaid , and other non - defense foreign policy agencies .

for fy2020 , the further consolidated appropriations act , 2020 ( p.l .

116-94 ) provided approximately $4.091 billion for u.s. international food assistance programs .

this was an 11% decrease from the $4.581 billion provided in fy2019 .

division b of p.l .

116-94 provided $1.945 billion for international food assistance programs in agriculture appropriations , including $1.725 billion for the food for peace ( ffp ) title ii program and $220 million for the mcgovern - dole international food for education and child nutrition program .

division g of p.l .

116-94 provided an estimated $2.146 billion for international food assistance programs in sfops appropriations .

this included an estimated $2.066 billion for the emergency food security program ( efsp ) and $80 million for the community development fund ( cdf ) .

this report provides an overview of accounts in the agriculture and sfops appropriations bills that fund international food assistance programs .

it summarizes the trump administration's fy2020 budget request for international food assistance .

the report then details the international food assistance provisions in the fy2020 enacted agriculture and sfops appropriations bills—division b and division g of p.l .

116-94 , respectively .

congress funds most u.s. international food assistance programs through two annual appropriations bills—the agriculture appropriations bill and the sfops appropriations bill .

the following sections detail each account in the agriculture and sfops appropriations bills that funds international food assistance and the programs funded through these accounts .

table 1 lists each international food assistance account along with the respective appropriations bill , funded programs , primary delivery method , and implementing agency .

figure 1 depicts each u.s. international food assistance program by authorizing and appropriations committee jurisdiction and implementing agency .

for the third year in a row , the trump administration's fy2020 budget request proposed eliminating mcgovern - dole and ffp title ii .

however , unlike in the fy2018 and fy2019 requests—in which the president proposed shifting all funding for international food assistance to the ida account within the sfops appropriations bill—the president's fy2020 request proposed creating a new international humanitarian assistance ( iha ) account .

the proposed iha account would have consolidated four humanitarian assistance accounts—the ida , migration and refugee assistance , and emergency refugee and migration assistance accounts that are funded in sfops appropriations , along with ffp title ii within agriculture appropriations—into a single account within the sfops appropriations bill .

the fy2020 budget request also repeated past proposals to eliminate food for progress and merge the da account with the economic support fund ( esf ) , democracy fund ( df ) , and assistance for europe , eurasia , and central asia ( aeeca ) accounts to create a new economic support and development fund ( esdf ) within sfops appropriations .

congress did not adopt the administration's fy2020 proposals to eliminate ffp title ii , mcgovern - dole , or food for progress or create the new combined iha and esdf accounts .

the following section summarizes the administration's fy2020 budget requests for u.s. international food assistance programs in the agriculture and sfops appropriations bills .

the fy2020 agriculture appropriations act provided funding for u.s. international food assistance programs in the foreign assistance and related programs title ( title v ) .

this included funding for ffp title ii and mcgovern - dole .

the act also provided funding for administrative expenses to manage existing ffp title i loans that originated while the ffp title i program was active .

unlike in fy2019 , congress did not provide discretionary funding in fy2020 for the food for progress program .

the fy2020 sfops appropriations act provided funding for international food assistance programs in bilateral assistance ( title iii ) .

figure 2 shows funding trends for international food assistance programs for fy2015-fy2020 .

table 2 details appropriations for international food assistance programs for fy2018-fy2020 , including proposed funding levels in the fy2020 administration's request and house and senate agriculture and sfops appropriations bills .

in addition to providing funding , the agriculture and sfops appropriations bills may contain policy - related provisions that direct the executive branch how to spend certain funds .

provisions included in appropriations act text have the force of law but generally only for the duration of the fiscal year for which the act provides appropriations .

policy - related provisions generally do not amend the u.s. code .

table 3 compares select policy - related provisions pertaining to u.s. international food aid programs from the foreign assistance and related programs ( title v ) and general provisions ( title vii ) titles of the fy2019 and fy2020 agriculture appropriations acts .

there was no language from the sfops bills for a similar table .

the explanatory statement that accompanies the appropriations act , as well as the committee reports that accompany the house and senate committee - reported bills , can provide statements of support for certain programs or directions to federal agencies on how to spend certain funding provided in the appropriations bill .

while these documents generally do not have the force of law , they can express congressional intent .

the committee reports and explanatory statement may need to be read together to capture all of the congressional intent for a given fiscal year .

table 4 compares selected policy - related provisions pertaining to u.s. international food aid programs from the fy2019 and fy2020 house and senate committee reports and explanatory statement for the fy2020 agriculture appropriations act .

table 5 compares one selected policy - related provision pertaining to u.s. international food assistance programs from the fy2019 and fy2020 house and senate committee reports and explanatory statement for the fy2020 sfops appropriation .

