the congressional research service ( crs ) regularly receives requests about spending on programs and activities that target low - income individuals and families for benefits and services .

crs has produced a series of reports that identify these programs and provides their spending amounts and recent spending trends .

this current report provides an interim update of the federal spending for programs and activities identified in crs report r44574 , federal benefits and services for people with low income: overview of spending trends , fy2008-fy2015 , extending the spending analysis through fy2018 , the most recent year for which federal spending data were available as of january 2020 .

in fy2018 , the federal government spent $917.8 billion on benefits and services for people with low income .

this was an increase of 2.2% compared to fy2017 , which was less than the rate of economic growth ( 5.4% ) and nearly equal to the rate of inflation ( 2.3% ) during fy2018 .

while the programs in this report share the common feature of an explicit low - income focus , the individual programs are highly diverse in their purpose , design , and target population .

they were established at different times , in response to different policy challenges .

in terms of target population , the largest portion of low - income assistance goes to families with children with working parents and the disabled ( see crs in focus if10355 , need - tested benefit receipt by families and individuals ) .

 figure 1 shows the trend in federal spending in nominal terms on benefits and services for people with low income for fy2008 through fy2018 .

the early portion , fy2008 through fy2011 , represents a period of time where spending increased because of automatic or legislated responses to the recession of 2007 through 2009 .

the largest low - income assistance programs are entitlements , and their spending increased automatically as more people became eligible for their benefits as incomes fell due to the recession .

additionally , congress and the president responded to the recession with time - limited expansions or funding increases in some of these programs in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) .

total spending on these programs increased by 36% over this period .

federal spending on benefits and services for low - income people stabilized in fy2011 and fy2012 as arra expired and other spending increases associated with the recession abated .

however , from fy2012 through fy2018 , spending for these programs increased at a steady pace , stemming from increases in spending on health care for low - income people .

crs's series of reports on benefits and services for low - income people divides spending for the programs into eight categories: health care , cash aid , food aid , education , housing and development , social services , employment and training , and energy assistance .

table 1 shows federal spending for the programs by category for fy2008 through fy2018 .

the categories are sorted by the amount of their spending in fy2018 , with the largest ( health care ) first and the smallest ( energy aid ) last .

health care represents more than half of total spending for the programs in fy2018 and more than three times the amount of the next largest category , cash aid .

the two smallest categories are employment and training programs ( exclusive of education spending ) and energy assistance .

figure 2 breaks out total federal spending on benefits and services for people with low income into two groups: health programs and all other programs .

as shown in the figure , the increase in nominal spending in the earlier portion of the period ( affected by recession - related spending ) stemmed from increases in both health and other program spending .

however , since fy2012 the increase is attributable to higher spending on health care .

spending on all other programs ( collectively ) has decreased each year since fy2016 .

much of the increase in health spending is from the medicaid program , and since fy2014 reflects increases in spending due to the patient protection and affordable care act's ( aca , p.l .

111-148 as amended ) medicaid expansion .

the largest programs providing benefits and services to low - income people are mandatory spending programs .

these are programs where spending is controlled by the terms of their authorizing laws—such as entitlements either to individuals or states—rather than the annual appropriation process .

discretionary spending is generally determined through annual appropriations .

figure 3 shows federal spending in fy2018 on benefits and services for people with low income by category and budget classification ( mandatory , discretionary , or some programs have spending classified as both ) .

the largest categories ( health , cash aid , and food aid ) are dominated by mandatory spending .

housing is almost entirely discretionary spending , determined through annual appropriations .

education is split between discretionary spending and the pell grant program , which has both mandatory and discretionary components .

social services and employment and training have a mix of mandatory spending ( much of it coming from the broad - based temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant ) and discretionary funding .

energy assistance is entirely discretionary .

of the $917.8 billion spent by the federal government on benefits and services for people with low income in fy2018 , $741.2 billion ( 81% ) was spent on programs or activities receiving only mandatory funding and $139.7 billion ( 15% ) was spent on programs or activities receiving only discretionary funding .

the remaining $37.0 billion of spending occurred in programs receiving both mandatory and discretionary funding .

health care is a major source of mandatory spending: 94% of all health care spending discussed in this report was mandatory spending in fy2018 .

 table 2 shows spending for federal benefits and services to low - income persons by program for fy2008 to fy2018 .

the programs were classified into the eight categories of spending noted above , and are ranked within each category by fy2018 spending .

note that in many categories , spending is dominated by a few large programs .

for example , in fy2018 , medicaid accounted for 85% of health care spending , supplemental security income and two refundable tax credits for low - income workers ( the earned income tax credit and the refundable portion of the child tax credit ) accounted for 93% of all cash aid , supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) accounted for 67% of all food aid , and pell grants plus aid to school districts with large shares of disadvantaged children accounted for 81% of all education aid .

most programs had spending that was classified in a single category .

the exceptions are the broad - purpose tanf block grant and snap .

tanf is best known as a program that provides cash assistance to needy families with children .

tanf accounted for $5.2 billion in federal spending on cash aid in fy2018 , making it the fourth - largest cash program and representative of 4% of cash spending .

in contrast , tanf spending on social services made it the second - largest social services program ( behind only head start ) , and its employment and training expenditures made it the largest employment and training program .

snap spending was divided into its food assistance and its employment and training components .

snap was the largest food assistance program ( $63 billion in food assistance in fy2018 ) , but it also contributed $441 million in employment and training expenditures in fy2018 .

