poverty is an ongoing topic of interest for congress , in various capacities: as a factor to be considered when allocating funding for certain programs , as an eligibility criterion for some low - income assistance programs , and to gauge the well - being of individuals , families , or the economy as a whole .

the poverty rate fell to 11.8% in 2018 from 12.3% in 2017 .

in both years , the poverty rate was lower than the pre - recessionary level of 12.5% in 2007 .

however , since the end of the great recession in 2009 , the poverty rate remained elevated for approximately the first four years after the recession's end , and despite reductions in the poverty rate in recent years , it remains higher than its record - low of 11.1% in 1973 .

poverty's persistence alongside indicators of economic strength has led policymakers to continually examine the drivers of poverty—both economic and social—and the effectiveness of various policy responses .

as the conversations about poverty and public policy continue , it may be useful to consider the question: who are the people who are poor in the united states ? .

this report provides a snapshot of who was poor in 2018 by selected demographic , economic , and social characteristics .

the data presented here show that people in poverty are not a monolithic group , but rather a diverse collection of families and individuals at different stages of life , living in different circumstances .

special attention is paid in this report to the role of work in the lives of people who are poor .

income from work , or the lack thereof , is central to the economic fortunes not only of those considered "working - age," but also of children , who are generally dependent on working - age adults , and persons who are aged ( age 65 and older ) , who generally have prior experience in the workforce that shapes their economic well - being after they retire .

attention is also paid to living arrangements .

because poverty is measured at the family level , considerations such as whether someone lives alone , or whom someone lives and potentially shares resources with , influence economic well - being .

other factors that affect family well - being , and that influence individuals' attachment to and success in the labor market , are important for considering individuals' experiences of poverty but are beyond the scope of this report .

this snapshot looks at the composition of people in poverty—what groups comprise what share of the poverty population—rather than at poverty rates among different groups .

this provides a different perspective in viewing poverty .

a large population group such as non - hispanic whites might have relatively low poverty rates , but because of the group's size in the overall population it represents a relatively large share of the poverty population .

a small population , such as american indians and alaska natives , might have relatively high poverty rates , but because of the group's size it represents a relatively small share of the poverty population .

both perspectives on poverty are valid and relevant to public policy .

readers interested in an examination of poverty rates for different demographic groups—and trends in poverty over time—should see crs report r46000 , poverty in the united states in 2018: in brief , by joseph dalaker .

in 2018 , an estimated 38.1 million people had pre - tax money income below the poverty threshold .

as shown in figure 1 , people who were poor accounted for 11.8% of the total noninstitutionalized population .

the number and percentage of people in poverty reflect those whose family income fell short of the poverty threshold by any dollar amount .

of course , some people are poorer than others .

one area of policy focus has been on the very poor: those considered to be in "deep poverty. .

deep poverty is usually defined as having income below 50% of the poverty threshold .

in 2018 , an estimated 17.3 million persons , close to half of all people in poverty ( 45.3% ) , were counted as living in deep poverty .

the population of people living in poverty comprised individuals of all ages and sexes , and across all racial and ethnic groups .

poverty raises different public policy considerations for children , working - age adults , and aged adults .

children are not expected to support themselves economically—they are dependents of their parents or other adult caretakers who are assumed to fulfill that responsibility .

policies affecting the family income and poverty status of children generally apply to their parents or other adult caretakers .

working - age adults—aside from those who are severely disabled—are expected to work and to support themselves and their children , if they have any .

aged adults may retire from work and draw income from public or private benefits , which are based primarily on their past work .

the remainder of this report separately explores poverty among children , working - age adults , and aged adults .

though relevant policy considerations may differ among the three groups , the central role played by work as the primary means of economic support for individuals and families is highlighted .

that work could be one's own work , the work of the parents or other family members , or past work providing retirement income .

similarly , because poverty is a family - based measure and the ability to share resources is an important consideration in economic well - being , living arrangements are also explored .

this report presents basic information about the 38.1 million people in america who had income below the poverty line in 2018 .

although it is presumed that they are all subject to income constraints , these data illustrate that they are not a homogenous group .

for example , they are children , working - age adults , and aged adults ; full - time full - year workers , caretakers for family members , or outside the workforce for other or unknown reasons ; and living alone or in families .

as this report shows , certain groups are over - represented among those living in poverty relative to the total population .

these include , among others , women , minorities , children , and people living outside of families or alone .

the report also shows the central role of income from work in determining whether a group is over - represented among those living in poverty .

for children , this income is based on the work of their parents or other family members .

for working - age adults , it is their own work that generally determines their poverty status .

for aged adults , who are often retired from the workforce , it is primarily their past work or the work of those they live with that determines their status .

however , sometimes earnings from work are not enough to prevent poverty .

two - thirds of children living in poverty in 2018 were in families with at least one adult earning income during the year .

in 2018 , more than 7 out of 10 poor aged persons had some form of work - based income .

the complexity of circumstances that result in individuals experiencing poverty—both individual and systemic—are beyond the scope of this report .

however , those circumstances warrant further exploration when considering federal policy interventions designed to reduce the incidence , or ameliorate the effects of , poverty .

