taxpayers who elect to itemize their deductions may reduce their federal income tax liability by claiming a deduction for certain state and local taxes paid , often called the "salt deduction. .

the 2017 tax revision ( commonly referred to as the tax cuts and jobs act , tcja ; p.l .

115-97 ) established a temporary $10,000 limit , or "salt cap," on annual salt deduction claims .

by limiting the amount of the salt deduction , the salt cap increases the tax liability of certain taxpayers , which increases federal tax revenues relative to what otherwise would have been collected without a limitation in place .

the salt cap's effect on tax liability varies significantly with taxpayer income and with state and local tax rates .

a number of bills introduced in the 116 th congress would modify the salt cap , and federal regulatory efforts responding to related state and local government activity are ongoing .

this report discusses the salt cap's features , analyzes its potential impact , and summarizes recent legislation and regulatory action to modify the cap .

under current law , taxpayers itemizing deductions ( in lieu of claiming the standard deduction ) may reduce their taxable income by claiming the salt deduction for certain state and local taxes paid during the tax year .

the state and local taxes eligible for the salt deduction are income taxes , sales taxes ( claimed in lieu of income taxes ) , personal property taxes , and certain real property taxes not paid in the carrying on of a trade or business .

for taxpayers who would have itemized deductions without access to the salt deduction , it generates tax savings equal to the amount deducted multiplied by the taxpayer's marginal income tax rate .

for example , a taxpayer with $20,000 of eligible state and local taxes and a top marginal tax rate of 35% would save $7,000 from the salt deduction ( i.e. , $20,000*0.35 ) .

for taxpayers who would have claimed the standard deduction without access to the salt deduction , it generates tax savings equal to the difference between their tax liability if they had claimed the standard deduction and their total tax liability with itemized deductions ( inclusive of the salt deduction ) .

 ( throughout this report , the tax savings attributable to the salt deduction is also referred to as the benefit from the deduction. ) .

the tcja established a temporary salt cap for tax years 2018 through 2025 .

the salt cap is set at $10,000 for single taxpayers or married couples filing jointly and $5,000 for married taxpayers filing separately .

by limiting the salt deduction available to certain taxpayers , the salt cap decreases the tax savings associated with the deduction relative to prior law , thereby increasing federal revenues .

the tcja also changed a number of tax code features ( eg , standard deduction amounts , marginal tax rates ) that indirectly affect salt deduction eligibility and the value of the tax savings it generates .

the tcja roughly doubled the standard deduction and limited other itemized deductions .

the tcja also prohibited salt deduction claims on taxes paid on foreign real property for tax years 2018 through 2025 .

the salt cap , the increased value of the standard deduction , and other tax changes enacted by the tcja have reduced the number of taxpayers claiming the salt deduction and the total tax savings from those claims .

table 1 shows the most recent estimates of reductions in federal revenues attributable to the salt deduction for fy2017 , the last full year before enactment of p.l .

115-97 , and fy2019 through fy2023 .

revenue losses from the salt deduction in fy2017 ( $100.9 billion ) nearly equaled the total losses projected from fy2019 through fy2023 ( $117.2 billion ) .

the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) projects that 16.4 million taxpayers will claim a salt deduction for tax year 2019 , compared to 46.6 million taxpayers who the internal revenue service ( irs ) reported claiming the deduction in 2017 .

recent research has estimated the salt cap's effect on salt deduction claims independent of other tax changes enacted through the tcja .

a 2019 treasury inspector general report examined the salt cap's hypothetical effect had it been imposed in tax year 2017 , prior to the other tcja changes taking effect .

the report found that the cap would have reduced salt deduction benefits for 10.9 million taxpayers ( about 25% of all households claiming the deduction ) and reduced deduction amounts by $323 billion , or just over half of the actual amounts deducted in that year .

in june 2019 , jct estimated that holding all other portions of the tax code constant , repealing the salt cap for tax year 2018 would decrease fy2019 federal revenues by $77.4 billion .

this section explores features of localities and households that are likely to influence the distribution and intensity of salt cap effects on tax liability .

the recent enactment and implementation of the salt cap means that tax return data on its impact by state , locality , and income level are currently unavailable .

however , analyzing the salt deduction's distribution prior to the cap's imposition can provide insight into its likely impact .

the data indicate that the salt cap's effects will vary significantly across state and local jurisdictions and household income .

the state and local response to the salt cap's effect has varied across municipalities .

certain governments in states with relatively high mean salt deduction values ( see figure 1 ) have either enacted legislation that would appear to make tax changes to reduce the salt cap's effect on their taxpayers or taken legal action against the federal government .

recent federal and legal responses to some of these actions suggest these efforts will likely be unsuccessful .

state and local governments with relatively lower levels of salt cap exposure have taken little to no action .

following enactment of the tcja , several state governments made changes to their tax codes with the potential to lower their residents' salt cap exposure .

certain states enacted laws that provided taxpayers a credit against state taxes for charitable donations to state entities , which would then be eligible for the federal charitable deduction under section 170 of the internal revenue code .

the irs has since issued a final ruling limiting the availability of section 170 charitable deductions in such a way that would render the new charitable activity ineligible .

a legislative proposal that would overturn irs regulations , s.j.res .

50 , was rejected by the senate in october 2019 .

some states have tried to use a "pass - through work around" to reduce the salt cap's impact on some of their taxpayers with pass - through business income .

many types of businesses that do not pay corporate income taxes ( including s corporations and partnerships ) pass through income to their owners , who pay taxes on that income at the individual level .

the salt cap does not limit salt deductions associated with the carrying on of a trade or business .

hence , taxpayers whose salt tax payments are associated with pass - through business income may not be subject to the salt cap in the same manner as other individual income tax payments .

certain state governments have adjusted for this activity by enacting laws that levy or raise taxes on the pass - through business entity itself that are offset ( holding total tax rates constant ) by tax reductions or tax credits applied to individual income liability for pass - through business members subject to the tax increase .

the irs has not issued guidance on the viability of such legislation or its effect on salt cap exposure .

several states also took legal action related to the salt cap following enactment of the tcja , filing suit against the u.s. government in july 2018 and challenging the cap's constitutionality .

a september 2019 federal district court ruling upheld the salt cap's constitutionality , asserting that it did not unconstitutionally penalize certain jurisdictions .

legislation introduced in the 116 th congress would modify the salt cap , including proposals that would ( 1 ) repeal the salt cap entirely ; ( 2 ) increase the salt cap's value for all taxpayers ; ( 3 ) increase the salt cap's value for some taxpayers ; ( 4 ) make the salt cap permanent ; and ( 5 ) repeal irs regulations affecting salt cap liability .

table 4 displays legislation in the 116 th congress that would directly modify the salt cap .

