the 116 th congress is considering multiple proposed changes to u.s. mineral policy .

currently certain types of mineral production on federal lands provide the federal government and some states and industries with sources of revenue , while other production does not generate similar revenue .

proposed changes to federal mineral policy could impact these revenue streams , industries , and states in a variety of ways .

the north american industry classification system ( naics ) defines the term mining to "include ore extraction , quarrying , and beneficiating ( eg , crushing , screening , washing , sizing , concentrating , and flotation ) , customarily done at the mine site. .

mineral mining in the united states had a value added of $60.6 billion in 2018 , which was about 0.3% of total u.s. value added ( i.e. , gdp ) .

the value - added contribution to total economic output of minerals mined on federal lands is not known , as not all of the underlying data are recorded by the bureau of land management ( blm ) or reported by mine operators .

using available data , the u.s. department of the interior ( doi ) estimates that coal and solid minerals mined on federal lands supported $13.9 billion in value added , $24.2 billion in economic output , and 81,700 jobs in fy2018 .

this report offers an introduction to the framework created by federal statutes applicable to mining on federal lands .

it also highlights some topics in the mining sector that may be relevant to the issue of mining on federal lands for the 116 th congress , such as the availability of mineral production data ; royalties assessed on federal minerals ; federal land withdrawals ; and critical minerals on federal lands .

while the focus of this report is on mining on federal lands , some related topics and concepts are included within this focus .

the statutory framework applicable to mining on federal lands is a combination of mineral laws , land laws , and laws that impact mining directly or indirectly .

these combinations can be complex when discussing specific minerals and mineral topics , as the statutes applying to one situation may be different for another situation .

this introduction to the statutory framework is presented in four subsections: " laws establishing mineral categories ," " land laws applicable to mining ," " laws that apply to mining on federal and non - federal lands ," and " selected federal laws that may impact mining on federal lands . .

this section presents the statutory framework for mining on federal lands ; the section " processes related to mining on federal lands " presents more detail on the regulated processes to mine the different categories of minerals on federal lands .

the process to mine on federal lands generally begins with the interested person identifying the surface management agency ( or owner , if the land is split estate ) and the subsurface management agency , if different .

the surface management agency can assist with the process to determine whether the area targeted for mining has been previously claimed , leased , or withdrawn from the federal mineral estate .

this can occur when lands are designated as national parks , monuments , or military bases , among others .

the agency can also ensure that the targeted area and mineral estate are still under federal control , as changes can occur that would give control to private entities , state governments , or indian governments .

the managing agency can also indicate whether the targeted area is acquired land , for which , in most cases , mineral leasing applies .

further , the managing agency can indicate the required information and processes to explore and potentially mine in a given area ; such requirements can vary among agencies and within agency offices .

aside from special cases , the blm is the subsurface management agency for mining on federal lands .

additional considerations and regulations may apply to indian territories , which number more than 300 territories and cover more than 56 million acres .

indian tribes and persons retain the right to develop or allow others to develop mineral resources on their lands .

the blm may be invited to provide assistance , in which case "the blm's authorities and responsibilities include , but are not limited to , resource evaluation , approval of drilling permits , mining and reclamation , production plans , mineral appraisals , inspection and enforcement , and production verification. .

the subsequent steps in the process to open a new mine on federal lands depend on the type of mineral to be mined ( i.e. , locatable , leasable , or salable ) , as the processes vary by mineral category .

four policy areas related to mining on federal lands that have been raised in legislation in the 116 th congress are presented and discussed below .

after a brief presentation of the topic , each section presents policy concerns , options , and examples of related current legislation .

unless noted , bills discussed in this section have been introduced in the house or senate and referred to committee , but have not seen further legislative activity .

the blm currently collects mineral production data for leasable and salable minerals on federal lands , but not for locatable minerals .

locatable mineral production information could be useful for some policy considerations ; conversely , the lack of such information could limit policy discussion for those considerations .

concern regarding the collection of these data is not new .

in 2008 the u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) reported , "according to officials with blm and the forest service , they do not have the authority to collect information from mine operators on the amount of hardrock minerals produced on federal land , or the amount remaining. .

the gao also highlighted the limitations of the data collected and reported by the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) by noting , "it is not possible to determine hardrock mineral production on federal lands from the usgs data. .

the doi reports production of some hardrock minerals from federal lands , but notes those values are estimates based on state data .

this lack of locatable mineral production data for federal lands can impact multiple policy areas , including issues discussed in the following sections .

some related policy topics include royalties: potential changes to existing mining laws to extend royalties to all locatable minerals face the challenge that current production and value of these minerals is not collected .

without this information , analysis of such policy changes may be limited .

for example , it may be difficult to estimate increased royalty collection or increased costs to producers .

reclamation bonds: knowledge of production data could assist the blm in determining if the posted reclamation bond continues to be adequate , is excessive , or is inadequate for an ongoing locatable mineral operation on federal lands .

critical minerals: executive order ( e.o. ) .

13817 tasked the doi with coordinating with other executive branch agencies to publish a list of critical minerals .

one criterion used to define a critical mineral is net import reliance , the calculation of which includes domestic production of the critical mineral commodity .

it is unclear how locatable mineral production , which is not required to be reported , is incorporated into the calculation of net import reliance .

congress could address this question of data availability by requiring the collection of mineral production data from federal lands .

for example , congress could authorize and require a government agency to collect mineral production and production value data , among other operations data .

while the blm could be the agency tasked with this data collection due to its role in managing the federal mineral estate , other agencies could also receive consideration .

for example , msha currently collects and publicly provides data on all mining operations ; the usgs tracks and distributes mineral production from sources around the country ; and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) administers or oversees certain permits for most domestic mining operations .

h.r .

2579 , the hardrock leasing and reclamation act of 2019 ( ordered reported by the house committee on natural resources on october 23 , 2019 ) , among other provisions , would establish the requirement that mining operations on federal lands report production volumes and values , and it includes the requirement that these and other data are to be made public .

locatable minerals remain regulated by the general mining law and are not subject to federal royalties , unlike leasable minerals .

although the federal government does not assess royalties on locatable minerals , some states assess royalties ( i.e. , severance taxes ) on some minerals mined on federal lands .

congress might consider establishing a royalty policy for locatable minerals .

as viewed by some , locatable minerals represent public assets , and the public should be compensated if any of these assets are removed for private gain .

royalties on locatable minerals could capture this change in ownership , and the revenue streams could be used to fund national priorities .

others view royalty - free access to locatable minerals as a public benefit , given associated mining employment and mining - related economic activity .

if set too high , mineral royalties could restrict mining activity and force marginal operations to cease .

congress could also recognize additional complexities stemming from the different types of royalties and their associated characteristics .

three common royalties are unit - based royalties , ad valorem royalties , and profit - based royalties .

unit - based royalties are assessed on units of volume or weight and ensure that some revenue is collected in exchange for the removal of the mineral .

ad valorem royalties are assessed on the sale of the mineral and are subject to fluctuations in mineral prices .

profit - based royalties are assessed on operator profits , allowing deductions for certain costs .

further complexities can include whether to assign different royalty rates to different minerals and how to treat minerals that are byproducts of other minerals .

as noted above , congress is currently considering h.r .

2579 , the hardrock leasing and reclamation act of 2019 ( ordered reported by the house committee on natural resources on october 23 , 2019 ) , which , among other provisions , would close federal lands to new mining claims under the general mining law of 1872 and create a hardrock mine reclamation fund .

this bill would establish a federal royalty of 12.5% and a displaced materials reclamation fee of 7 cents per ton of displaced materials for all new hardrock mineral mining operations on federal lands .

these fees and other revenue generated by provisions in the bill would be deposited into a newly created fund , the hardrock minerals reclamation fund .

the reclamation fund would target reclamation of abandoned hardrock mines and other environmental conservation activities on lands and waters affected by past hardrock mining activity , independent of land owner .

the bill would require the collection and public dissemination of data regarding mine production and royalties paid , and regular inspection of all hardrock mines on federal lands .

new mining operations on federal lands require that the federal lands are open for mineral entry .

some federal lands have undergone withdrawal , which generally means those lands are closed to or withdrawn from mining and other activities .

flpma defines withdrawal as withholding an area of federal land from settlement , sale , location , or entry , under some or all of the general land laws , for the purpose of limiting activities under those laws in order to maintain other public values in the area or reserving the area for a particular public purpose or program ; or transferring jurisdiction over an area of federal land , other than "property" ... from one department , bureau or agency to another department , bureau or agency .

as indicated in this definition , a withdrawal does not necessarily close land to mining , and a withdrawal that closes land to mining may not restrict other land uses .

a land withdrawal can occur through legislation , executive order , or agency action , and a withdrawal is usually for a specified period of time .

in the event a withdrawal impacts existing mining claims or leases , the doi and the involved agencies may allow the claims or leases to continue , or they may offer other federal land in exchange for the existing claims or leases .

many federal land withdrawals close the land to mining , including nps lands , which are closed to new mining claims .

the mining industry generally advocates for limited withdrawals from the mineral estate , as access to public lands for mining represents opportunities for ongoing and future operations .

advocates for a specific land withdrawal ( with closure to mineral entry ) generally see the proposed use ( eg , military base , national park , national monument , wilderness area ) as superseding the potential use of the public land by other interests ( eg , for mining ) .

one example of a withdrawal affecting mining on federal lands occurred in 2012 when the secretary of the interior withdrew about one million acres of federal land surrounding the grand canyon national park from new mineral development for 20 years .

the withdrawn area contained active uranium mining operations and about 3,200 mining claims .

h.r .

1373 , among other provisions , would permanently withdraw this area from new mineral entry .

h.r .

1373 passed the house ; a companion bill has been introduced in the senate as s. 3127 .

another example of a withdrawal with closure to mineral entry is for the nevada test and training range ( nttr ) , which is currently comprised of over 2.9 million acres of federal land withdrawn until 2021 .

the department of the air force is requesting that this land withdrawal be renewed and an additional 300,000 acres be withdrawn to expand the area .

the state of nevada commission on mineral resources has produced a map of the existing and proposed expansion areas , including affected active mining claims .

h.r .

5606 and s. 3145 , among other provisions , would expand and renew the withdrawn federal land .

a third example involves a planned mine by twin metals minnesota ( tmm ) in the superior nation forest , near the boundary waters canoe area wilderness .

the superior national forest was withdrawn from mineral entry in 1930 , but it was reopened to mineral entry in 1950 .

tmm holds two leases issued in 1966 ( renewed twice ) ; no mineral production has occurred under these leases .

tmm applied to renew these leases for a third time in 2012 , ahead of their 2016 expiration .

in 2016 , doi found that tmm does not have a non - discretionary right to renewal , and the fs did not consent to renewing the leases ; doi canceled the leases .

in 2017 , the doi found that tmm has a non - discretionary right to renewal , and it renewed the leases .

h.r .

5598 , among other provisions , would withdraw 234,328 acres of federal lands in the superior national forest , which include the lands covered by the tmm leases .

affordable and reliable access to critical minerals , and materials or products containing critical minerals , has been an issue since before the great depression , with the first official list of critical minerals dating to 1921 .

one recent definition of a critical mineral is ( i ) a non - fuel mineral or mineral material essential to the economic and national security of the united states , ( ii ) the supply chain of which is vulnerable to disruption , and ( iii ) that serves an essential function in the manufacturing of a product , the absence of which would have significant consequences for our economy or our national security .

numerous lists of critical minerals and materials exist , and the creation of such lists is inherently subjective , as the definition of "critical" includes notions of access to markets and costs of possible supply interruptions .

potentially adding further confusion , some agencies and studies conflate or do not clarify distinctions between the related terms critical minerals , critical materials , strategic minerals , and strategic materials .

discussions of critical minerals often note that the united states has few known locations of critical minerals that could be economically produced , and the united states does not presently have refining capabilities to process those critical minerals into commodities .

the united states imports critical minerals ( the usgs calculates net import reliance as part of the process to define a critical mineral ) or products containing them , resulting in what is sometimes considered vulnerable dependencies .

the limitations of using net import reliance to define a critical mineral or critical material are not fully defined , as manufactured products can contain critical minerals of domestic or foreign origin that have been previously imported or exported .

some known critical mineral deposits lie on federal lands .

one example is the idaho cobalt operation , which is a cobalt reserve on federal lands .

another example is the twin metals minnesota mining project , which would mine copper , nickel , platinum group metals , and cobalt in the superior national forest .

to provide more information on the likely locations of critical mineral resources , the usgs has begun the earth mapping resources initiative ( earth mri ) .

this program has produced a map and dataset covering numerous focus areas for one group of critical minerals: the rare - earth elements .

many of these focus areas occur in the western region and presumably lie on federal lands .

as the earth mri program continues , it plans to focus on other critical minerals .

policy options to address concerns related to critical minerals typically intend to create or increase access to secure quantities of critical minerals .

expanding mineral production on federal and non - federal lands is one option to create increased access to secure quantities of critical minerals .

other policy options can include non - mining options ; two such options are mentioned below .

one option that could increase access to critical minerals on federal lands includes creating mapping and mineral exploration programs , such as earth mri .

such programs can facilitate and lower the private costs of locating critical mineral reserves .

while general knowledge of the likelihood of a deposit can assist new mineral developments , policies supporting such programs may have limited impacts on production from known critical mineral deposits .

a policy option not focused on increasing domestic mineral production would focus on reducing potential negative effects of supply shocks by stockpiling additional critical minerals at the national defense stockpile .

given the number of critical minerals and the higher number of manufacturing input materials made from critical minerals , the costs and complexity of maintaining substantial supplies could limit the effectiveness of this option .

an additional complication is that "the national defense stockpile is not to be used for economic or budgetary purposes," and much demand for critical minerals stems from private consumption , such as motors and batteries for electric vehicles .

a third option , also not focused on increasing domestic mineral production , would be to secure more access to critical minerals by supporting a domestic supply chain based on critical minerals captured through recycling consumer products .

such support could include funding research to develop technology that would reduce the costs of recycling critical minerals to a competitive level .

other support could include tariffs or quotas on imported critical minerals , thus allowing recycled domestic sources to be more cost competitive .

congress is presently considering bills related to critical minerals and materials , with some containing provisions related to the federal mineral estate .

these include an amendment in the nature of a substitute to s. 2657 was introduced on february 27 , 2020 ( including the new title "american energy innovation act of 2020" ) , and incorporated language from several energy and mineral bills reported by the senate committee on energy and natural resources .

cloture was invoked on march 2 .

this bill includes text from s. 1317 and s. 1052 ( discussed below ) .

s. 1317 , among other provisions , would instruct the usgs to publish information regarding known and unknown domestic critical mineral resources .

the usgs may conduct geological surveys to increase this information .

this bill would also establish a research and development program in the department of energy ( doe ) to increase efficiencies in the critical mineral supply chain , to identify substitutes for critical minerals , and to promote the use of recycling as a source of critical minerals .

this research also includes producing forecasts related to critical minerals for a 10-year period , including expected demand , market conditions , and possible substitutes for critical minerals .

this bill would repeal the national critical materials act of 1984 and authorize $50 million per year for 10 years to fund its activities .

this bill also includes identical language to s. 1052 ( discussed below ) .

h.r .

4410 , among other provisions , would establish a federal cooperative and a federal corporation related to rare - earth minerals and thorium ; both federal charters would be privately funded and operated .

the cooperative would process domestic and international sources of rare - earth minerals and materials into products for sale .

the corporation would accept all radioactive material ( eg , thorium ) produced by the cooperative , sell any valuable materials , and could conduct research on new uses of such materials .

s. 1052 , among other provisions , would direct the doe to authorize an ongoing program to develop technologies for the extraction of rare - earth elements ( ree ) from coal and coal byproducts .

the bill would authorize $23 million per year for eight years to fund this program .

according the committee report accompanying this bill , "congress appropriated funding in 2014 for [the national energy technology lab] to develop extraction technologies for rees from coal byproducts .

s. 1052 formally authorizes the program. .

h.r .

2531 , among other provisions , would treat mineral exploration and mining projects related to critical minerals as high - priority infrastructure projects , as defined by e.o .

13807 , and would attempt to reduce the time to issue permits to 30 months by allowing the lead agency to determine that nepa requirements have been met or do not apply to the project .

h.r .

3405 , among other provisions , would instruct the secretary of the interior to remove uranium from the list of critical minerals , as prepared by the usgs pursuant to e.o .

13817 .

a previous version of this bill , introduced on june 21 , 2019 , finds that the united states has reserves of uranium , and that 52% of uranium is imported from stable trading partners .

h.r .

3567 , among other provisions , would direct the under secretary of defense for acquisition and sustainment , in consultation with others , to establish guidance for the acquisition of items containing rare - earth materials and the supply chain of rare - earth materials from countries that are not u.s. adversaries .

the bill would also direct the national defense stockpile manager to dispose of an additional three million pounds of tungsten and to use available funds to acquire approximately $37 million of critical materials over five years ; tantalum would be added to the list of critical materials .

s. 3356 , among other provisions , would require the doe to award grants to encourage battery recycling research , development , and demonstration projects .

separately , grants would be awarded to state and local governments and battery retailers to enhance battery recycling collection programs .

the bill would authorize $10 million for one year for the existing lithium - ion battery recycling prize competition at the doe , and would authorize to be appropriated $30 million per year for five years .

