the national security space launch ( nssl ) program aims to acquire launch services and ensure continued access to space for critical national security missions .

the u.s. air force implemented the original program in 1995—evolved expendable launch vehicle ( eelv ) —and awarded four companies contracts to design a cost - effective launch vehicle system .

the dod acquisition strategy was to select one company and ensure that nss launches were affordable and reliable .

the eelv effort was prompted by significant increases in launch costs , procurement concerns , and the lack of competition among u.s. companies .

a major challenge and long - standing undercurrent of concern over u.s. reliance on a russian rocket engine ( rd - 180 ) , used on one of the primary national security rockets for critical national security space launches , was exacerbated by the russian backlash over the 2014 u.s. sanctions against its actions in ukraine .

moreover , significant overall nssl program cost increases and unresolved questions over individual launch costs , along with legal challenges to the air force contract awards by space launch companies , prompted legislative action .

in the john s. mccain national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fy2019 , congress renamed the eelv to the nssl program to reflect a wider mission that would consider both reusable and expendable launch vehicles .

the origins of the nssl program date back to 1995 , after years of concerns within the air force and space launch community over increasing cost and decreasing confidence in the continued reliability of national access to space .

the purpose of eelv was to provide the united states affordable , reliable , and assured access to space with two families of space launch vehicles .

initially only two companies were in competition: boeing produced the delta iv launch vehicle , and lockheed martin developed the atlas v. overall , the program provided critical space lift capability to support dod and intelligence community satellites , together known as national security space ( nss ) missions .

the eelv program evolved modestly in response to changing circumstances , and the air force approved an eelv acquisition strategy in november 2011 , further revising it in 2013 .

that strategy was designed to ( 1 ) sustain two major independent rocket - powered launch vehicle families to reduce the chance of launch interruptions and to ensure reliable access to space ; ( 2 ) license and stockpile the russian - made rd - 180 heavy - lift rocket engine , a critical component of the atlas v ; ( 3 ) pursue a block - buy commitment to a number of launches through the end of the decade to reduce launch costs ; and ( 4 ) increase competition to reduce overall launch costs .

the air force and others viewed the overall eelv acquisition strategy as having successfully reduced launch costs while demonstrating highly reliable access to space for dod and the intelligence community .

others in congress and elsewhere , however , argued that the program remained far too costly and was not as competitive as it should be .

the nssl program is managed by the launch enterprise systems directorate of the space and missile systems center , los angeles air force base ( el segundo , ca ) .

the nssl program consists of four launch vehicles: atlas v and delta iv heavy ( both provided by united launch alliance [ula] of denver , co ) and falcon 9 and falcon heavy ( both provided by space exploration technologies corporation [spacex] of hawthorne , ca ) .

nss launches support the air force , navy , and national reconnaissance office ( nro ) .

more specifically , the atlas v has launched commercial , civil , and nss satellites into orbit , including commercial and military communications satellites , lunar and other planetary orbiters and probes , earth observation , military research , and weather satellites , missile warning and nro reconnaissance satellites , a tracking and data relay satellite , and the x - 37b space plane ( a military orbital test vehicle ) .

the delta iv has launched commercial and military communications and weather satellites , and missile warning and nro satellites .

the atlas v and delta iv heavy launch vehicles are produced by ula , which was formed in 2006 as a joint venture of the boeing company ( of chicago , il ) and lockheed martin ( of bethesda , md ) .

in addition to the launch vehicles themselves , the nssl program consists of an extensive array of support capabilities and infrastructure to permit safe operations of u.s. launch ranges .

ula operates five space launch complexes , two at cape canaveral air force station , fl ( space launch complex - 37 and space launch complex - 41 ) , and three at vandenberg air force base , ca ( space launch complex - 2 , space launch complex - 3f , and space launch complex - 6 ) .

a large number of key suppliers for ula are spread throughout 46 states .

dod certified spacex to compete for nss launches in 2015 .

the falcon 9 flew its first nssl mission on december 23 , 2018 , which delivered the global positioning system ( gps ) iii to orbit .

spacex developed a more capable launch capability in the falcon heavy , which dod certified in june 2018 and later awarded nss missions under phase 1a of the nssl program .

spacex maintains three launch sites , one at cape canaveral air force station , fl ( space launch complex 40 ) ; one at kennedy space center ( launch complex 39a ) ; and one at vandenberg air force base , ca ( space launch complex 4e ) .

on october 10 , 2018 , the air force awarded three launch service agreement ( lsa ) other transaction authority ( ota ) agreements to space launch companies .

the lsa ota agreements are "public - private partnerships [that] leverage industry's commercial launch solutions to ensure those systems meet nss requirements. .

they also "facilitate development of three nssl launch system prototypes and maturing those launch systems prior to selecting two nss launch service providers for launch service procurements beginning in fy2020. .

the air force released request for proposals ( rfp ) in may 2019 for phase 2 of the nssl program , with plans to award two separate launch service procurement ( lsp ) contracts in the summer of 2020 .

the selected companies will be responsible for launching national security satellites through 2027 .

however , the air force acquisition strategy of down - selecting no more than two launch providers may mitigate short - term risk but could have second - and third - order effects for resiliency in the future .

congress may consider whether the strategy's cost - benefit analysis warrants further research .

should no more than two launch providers be chosen for lsp contracts in phase 2 , the companies not selected would lose the lsa funds received from the air force and could potentially be faced with ( 1 ) the choice of abandoning nssl development to focus on competing in the commercial launch sector or ( 2 ) investing vast company reserves to continue development on its own .

furthermore , dod investment in only two launch providers could mean fewer options for an increasingly diverse range of national space security missions and possibly limit competition , once again , in the launch market .

several interrelated factors created uncertainty over the air force's ability to continue with the three - phased eelv acquisition strategy .

these included ongoing concerns over program and launch costs , u.s. national security vulnerability from dependence on a russian component in the eelv program ( the rd - 180 main engine ) , legal challenges to the acquisition strategy , and legislation that could change the eelv program .

although there are important differences in how to achieve it , widespread support appears to exist across the space community and within congress for the nss requirement for robust competition and assured access to space .

the recurring challenge since the start of the nssl program has been how best to pursue this requirement while driving down costs through competition and ensuring launch reliability and performance .

the air force decision of down - selecting no more than two launch providers and award two separate launch service procurement ( lsp ) contracts in the summer of 2020 is not without potential implications and could have second - and third - order effects .

congress may consider the following: directing the air force to provide a report on the cost - benefit analysis of selecting more than two launch providers .

drafting legislative in the ndaa for fy2021 authorizing additional funds that allows the air force to diversify its launch provider options by continuing to provide development funds through lsa awards to launch companies not selected for lsp contracts in phase 2 .

directing the air force to provide a report on the cost saving and associated risk using both reusable and expendable launch vehicles for future solicitations .

lastly , efforts to transition away from the rd - 180 to a domestic u.s. alternative engine or launch vehicle are not without technical , program , or schedule risks .

even with a smooth , on - schedule transition away from the rd - 180 to an alternative engine or launch vehicle , the performance and reliability record achieved with the rd - 180 to date would likely not be replicated until well beyond 2030 because the rd - 180 has approximately 81 consecutive successful civil , commercial , and nss launches since 2000 .

