when the receipts collected by the federal government are not sufficient to cover outlays , it is necessary for the treasury to finance the shortfall through the sale of various types of debt instruments to the public and federal agencies .

federal borrowing is subject to a statutory limit on public debt ( referred to as the debt limit or debt ceiling ) .

when the federal government operates with a budget deficit , or otherwise increases the level of debt necessary ( such as to allow federal trust funds to hold surpluses ) , the response has been for the public debt limit to be increased to meet that need .

the frequency of congressional action to raise the debt limit has ranged in the past from several times in one year to once in several years .

in recent years , congress has chosen to suspend the debt limit for a set amount of time instead of raising the debt limit by a fixed dollar amount .

when a suspension period ends , the debt limit is reestablished at a dollar level that accommodates the level of federal debt issued during the suspension period .

legislation to raise the public debt limit falls under the jurisdiction of the house ways and means committee and the senate finance committee .

in some cases , congress has combined other legislative provisions with changes in the debt limit .

for example , the senate amended a house - passed bill raising the debt limit to add the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 .

the house added debt limit provisions ( as well as other matters ) to an unrelated senate - passed measure to create the budget control act of 2011 .

in addition , debt limit provisions may be included in reconciliation legislation ( described in a separate section of this report ) .

in the 96 th congress ( 1979-1980 ) , the house amended its rules to provide for the automatic engrossment of a measure increasing the debt limit upon final adoption of a budget resolution .

the rule ( commonly referred to as the gephardt rule after representative richard gephardt of missouri ) was intended to facilitate quick action on debt limit increases by deeming such a measure as passed by the house by the same vote as the final adoption of the budget resolution , thereby avoiding the need for a separate vote on the debt limit .

the engrossed measure would then be transmitted to the senate for further action .

the rule was repealed in the 107 th congress , reinstated in the 108 th congress , repealed again in the 112 th congress , and reinstated in modified form in the 116 th congress .

as currently provided in house rule xxviii , the rule provides for a measure to automatically be engrossed and deemed to have been passed by the house by the same vote as the adoption by the house of the concurrent resolution on the budget if the resolution sets forth a level of the public debt that is different from the existing statutory limit .

rather than a specific level of debt , however , this measure would suspend the debt limit through the end of the budget year for the concurrent resolution on the budget ( but not through the period covered by any outyears beyond the budget year ) .

as with the earlier version of the rule , the engrossed measure would then be transmitted to the senate for further action .

the senate has no special procedures concerning consideration of debt limit legislation .

article i , section 8 , of the constitution gives congress the power to levy "taxes , duties , imposts , and excises. .

section 7 of this article , known as the origination clause , requires that all revenue measures originate in the house of representatives .

legislation concerning taxes and tariffs falls under the jurisdiction of the house ways and means committee and the senate finance committee .

furthermore , house rule xxi , clause 5 , specifically bars the consideration of a tax or tariff measure reported from another committee ( or an amendment containing a tax or tariff provision , including a senate amendment , from being offered to a house measure reported by another committee ) .

neither the origination clause nor house rule xxi , clause 5 , applies to the consideration of legislation concerning receipts or collections , such as user fees , that are levied on a class that benefits from a particular service , program , or activity .

most revenues derive from existing provisions of the tax code or social security law , which continue in effect from year to year unless changed by congress and are generally expected to produce increasing amounts of revenue in future years if the economy expands and incomes rise or the workforce grows .

nevertheless , congress typically makes some changes in the tax laws each year , either to raise or lower revenues or to redistribute the tax burden .

in enacting revenue legislation , congress often includes provisions that establish or alter tax expenditures .

the term tax expenditures is defined in the 1974 cba to include revenue forgone due to deductions , exemptions , credits , and other exceptions to the basic tax structure .

tax expenditures are a means by which the federal government uses the tax code to pursue public policy objectives and can be regarded as alternatives to spending policy actions such as grants or loans .

the joint committee on taxation estimates the revenue effects of legislation changing tax expenditures , and it also publishes five - year projections of these provisions as an annual committee print .

congress may choose to act on revenue legislation pursuant to proposals in the president's budget .

an early step in congressional work on revenue legislation is publication by cbo of its own estimates ( developed in consultation with the joint committee on taxation ) of the revenue impact of the president's budget proposals .

revenue totals agreed to in a budget resolution can be used to establish the framework for subsequent action on revenue measures .

a budget resolution , however , contains only revenue totals and total recommended changes ; it does not allocate these totals among revenue sources , nor does it specify which provisions of the tax code are to be changed .

the house and senate may consider revenue measures under their regular legislative procedures , such as the chambers did for the tax reform act of 1986 .

however , changes in revenue policy may also be made in the context of the reconciliation process ( described in a separate section of this report ) , such as the economic growth and tax relief reconciliation act of 2001 , the jobs and growth tax relief reconciliation act of 2003 , and the tax cuts and jobs act of 2015 .

congressional budgetary procedures distinguish between two types of spending: discretionary spending ( which is controlled through the annual appropriations process ) and direct spending ( also referred to as mandatory spending , for which the level of funding is controlled outside of the annual appropriations process ) .

discretionary and direct spending are both included in the president's budget and the congressional budget resolution , and they both provide statutory authority for agencies to enter into obligations for payments from the treasury .

the two forms of spending , however , are distinct in most other respects in terms of both their formulation and consideration .

there are some notable exceptions to these distinctions , however , so that some procedures associated with direct spending are applied to particular discretionary spending programs and vice versa .

formulation .

the basic unit for appropriations legislation is the spending account .

in modern practice , regular appropriations legislation is drafted as unnumbered paragraphs that provide a lump - sum amount for each appropriations account .

this lump sum provides a definite amount of budget authority that is available to finance activities or programs covered by that account for a certain period of availability for certain purposes consistent with statutory requirements or limitations .

in many cases , appropriations for an agency may be provided in relatively few broad accounts , such as for "salaries and expenses," "operations," or "research. .

direct spending , on the other hand , characteristically provides budget authority in the form of a requirement to make payments to eligible individual recipients according to a formula that establishes eligibility criteria and a program of benefits .

the resulting overall level of outlays would be an aggregation of obligations for these individual benefits .

in some cases ( termed "appropriated entitlements" ) , appropriations legislation may be used to provide the means of financing , but , in practice , the requirements for funding such programs are determined through their authorizing legislation so that the appropriations committees have little or no discretion as to the amounts they provide .

committee j urisdiction .

the appropriations committees have jurisdiction over discretionary spending for federal agencies and programs .

in contrast , legislative committees ( such as the senate committee on health , education , labor and pensions or the house agriculture committee ) , have jurisdiction over direct spending programs ( including those funded in annual appropriations acts ) through their jurisdiction over legislation concerning the structure of direct spending programs and their formulas regarding eligibility criteria and program of benefit payments .

frequency of d ecision m aking .

discretionary spending is provided in regular appropriations bills that are characteristically considered on an annual schedule .

with some exceptions , budget authority provided in these measures is available for obligation only during a single fiscal year .

direct spending programs are typically established in permanent law that continues in effect until such time as it is revised or terminated , although in some cases ( such as the child health insurance program and temporary assistance for needy families ) the program may need periodic reauthorization .

the scheduling for consideration of legislation making such changes is determined by congressional leadership through their agenda - setting authority rather than keyed to the beginning of the fiscal year .

enforcing s pending l evels in the b udget r esolution .

the procedures congress uses to enforce the policies set forth in the annual budget resolution differ somewhat for discretionary and direct spending programs .

for both types of spending , congress relies on allocations made under section 302 of the 1974 cba to ensure that new spending legislation reported by house and senate committees conforms to parameters established in the budget resolution .

although this procedure is effective in limiting consideration of new legislation—both annual appropriations measures and new entitlement legislation—it is not an effective means for controlling direct spending that results from existing laws .

changes to the level of direct spending requires the enactment of new legislation that would change formulas regarding eligibility criteria and program of benefit payments , either through the regular legislative process or some expedited procedure such as reconciliation ( described in a later section of this report ) .

statutory c ontrols .

discretionary spending for fy2012-fy2021 is subject to spending limits set in the budget control act , as revised .

these spending limits are divided into separately enforced amounts for defense and nondefense .

direct spending is not capped , but new direct spending ( or revenue ) legislation is subject to the statutory pay - as - you - go act of 2010 .

this act requires that the net effect of direct spending and revenue legislation enacted for a fiscal year not cause the deficit to rise or the surplus to decrease over specified periods of time .

for any given fiscal year , federal budgeting is often viewed as a cyclical activity that begins with the formulation of the president's annual budget request and concludes with the audit and review of expenditures spreading over a multiyear period .

the main stages are formulation and submission to congress of the president's budget ; congressional consideration of budgetary measures , including the budget resolution , appropriations legislation , and other measures as necessary to establish statutory spending and revenue requirements ; budget execution ; and finally audit and review .

while the basic steps continue from year to year , particular procedures and timing can vary in accordance with the president or congress , as well as various other economic and political considerations .

the budget cycle can be discussed within the context of the calendar year , the congressional session , and the fiscal year .

the calendar year and congressional sessions exist largely side by side .

since the budget and accounting act of 1921 , the president has been required to submit his budget request for the next fiscal year at the beginning of the calendar year .

furthermore , since the ratification of the twentieth amendment to the u.s. constitution in 1933 , congressional sessions have begun on january 3 ( unless a law is enacted setting a different day ) .

together , these two factors mean that the consideration of budgetary matters by congress for the upcoming fiscal year is generally expected to start near the beginning of the calendar year .

since fy1977 , the federal fiscal year has been october 1 through september 30 , as set by the cba .

because appropriations legislation typically provides budget authority to be obligated over the course of a single fiscal year , the focus of congressional action in the budget cycle is the consideration and enactment of new annual appropriations legislation before the expiration of prior enacted appropriations ( although this process often stretches beyond the beginning of the fiscal year ) .

this focus on the upcoming fiscal year ( referred to as the budget year ) is reflected in the president's budget proposal and budget resolution as well .

direct spending or revenue legislation , however , may have effective dates that are different from the beginning of the fiscal year .

in addition , section 300 of the cba establishes a timetable with respect to target dates for certain actions in the congressional budget process .

the budget process , however , is not just about a single fiscal year .

while the focus for congress is legislation pertaining to the upcoming fiscal year , it may also need to address legislation , such as supplemental appropriations for disaster relief , affecting the fiscal year in progress or long - term budget planning .

federal agencies also typically deal with multiple fiscal years at the same time: auditing of completed fiscal years , implementing the budget for the current fiscal year , seeking funds from congress for the upcoming fiscal year , and planning for fiscal years after that .

taken as a whole then , budgetary activities from planning to execution related to the funding for a fiscal year can actually stretch over an extended period of two - and - a - half calendar years ( or longer ) .

the constitution does not assign a formal role to the president in the federal budget process .

it was largely left for agencies to develop and submit their own budget estimates to congress individually .

although some presidents made attempts to coordinate or limit agency budget estimates before they were communicated to congress , such attempts were intermittent and uneven .

this was changed by the budget and accounting act of 1921 , which created a statutory role for the president in federal budgeting by establishing a framework for a consolidated federal budget proposal to be developed by the president and submitted to congress prior to the start of each fiscal year .

by barring agencies from submitting their budget requests directly to congress , and making the president responsible for a consolidated budget request , the act altered the institutional responsibilities of the office .

the president's budget submission reflects the president's policy priorities and offers a set of recommendations regarding federal programs , projects , and activities funded through appropriations acts as well as any proposed changes to revenue and mandatory spending laws .

under current law , the president is required to submit a budget to congress no later than the first monday in february prior to the start of the fiscal year , but preparation typically begins at least nine or 10 months prior to that , approximately 18 months before the start of the fiscal year .

omb coordinates the development of the president's budget by issuing various circulars , memoranda , and other guidance documents to the heads of executive agencies .

in particular , omb circular no .

a - 11 is issued annually .

it is an extensive document that provides agencies with an overview of applicable budgetary laws , policies for the preparation and submission of budgetary estimates , and information on financial management and budget data systems .

circular a - 11 also provides agencies with directions for budget execution and guidance regarding agency interaction with congress and the public .

when agencies begin work on the budget for a forthcoming fiscal year , congress has not yet made final determinations for the next year .

consequently , agencies must begin the process of developing their budget estimates with a great deal of uncertainty about future economic conditions , presidential policies , and congressional actions .

agency requests are typically submitted to omb in late summer or early fall and are reviewed by omb on behalf of the president .

under the government performance and results act , agencies are required to link the formulation of their budgets with government performance through strategic plans , annual performance plans , and annual performance reports .

omb notifies agencies of decisions regarding their budget and performance plans through what is known as the "passback" and are given an opportunity to make appeals to the omb director and , in some cases , to the president .

once omb and the president make final decisions , federal agencies and departments must revise their budget requests and performance plans to conform with these decisions .

the content of the budget submission is partly determined by law , but title 31 authorizes the president to set forth the budget "in such form and detail" as he may determine .

over the years , there has been an increase in the types of information and explanatory material presented in the budget documents .

in most years , the budget is submitted as a multi - volume set consisting of a main document setting forth the president's message to congress and an analysis and justification of his major proposals .

additional supplementary documents typically provide account and program level details ( the "budget appendix" ) , historical information ( "historical tables" ) , and special budgetary analyses ( "analytical perspectives" ) .

the latter volume includes multiyear budget estimates that project spending and revenues where current policies are continued ( called the "current services baseline" ) as well as spending and revenues under the president's proposed policy changes , among other things .

in support of the president's appropriations requests , agencies prepare additional materials , frequently referred to as congressional budget justifications .

these materials provide more detail than is contained in the president's budget documents and are used in support of agency testimony during appropriations subcommittee hearings on the president's budget .

the president is also required to submit a supplemental summary of the budget , referred to as the mid - session review , before july 16 of each year .

the mid - session review is required to include any substantial changes in estimates of expenditures or receipts , as well as any changes or additions to proposals made in the earlier budget submission .

the president may also submit other supplemental requests or revisions to congress at other times during the year .

until the 1970s , congressional consideration of the multiple budgetary measures considered every year lacked any formal coordination .

instead , congress considered these various spending and revenue measures separately , sometimes informally comparing them to proposals in the president's budget .

that was changed by the cba of 1974 .

the cba provides for the adoption of a concurrent resolution on the budget , allowing congress to make decisions about overall fiscal policy and priorities as well as to coordinate and establish guidelines for the consideration of various budget - related measures .

this budget resolution sets aggregate budget policies and functional priorities for the upcoming budget year and for at least four additional fiscal years .

in recent practice , budget resolutions have often covered a 10-year period .

because a concurrent resolution is not a law , the president cannot sign or veto it , and it does not have statutory effect , so no money can be raised or spent pursuant to it .

the main purpose of the budget resolution is to establish the framework within which congress considers separate revenue , spending , and other budget - related legislation .

revenue and spending amounts set in the budget resolution establish the basis for the enforcement of congressional budget policies through points of order .

the budget resolution may also be used to initiate the reconciliation process for conforming existing revenue and direct spending laws to congressional budget policies ( described below ) .

discretionary spending is provided through a characteristically annual process in which congress enacts regular appropriations measures .

as an exercise of their constitutional authority to determine their rules of proceeding , both chambers have adopted rules that facilitate their ability to define and provide for consideration of these measures .

one fundamental aspect of this has been to limit appropriations to purposes authorized by law .

this requirement allows congress to distinguish between legislation that addresses only questions of policy and that which addresses questions of funding and to provide for their separate consideration .

in common usage , the terms used to describe these types of measures are authorizations and appropriations , respectively .

an authorization may generally be described as a statutory provision that defines the authority of the government to act .

it can establish or continue a federal agency , program , policy , project , or activity .

further , it may establish policies and restrictions and deal with organizational and administrative matters .

it may also , explicitly or implicitly , authorize subsequent congressional action to provide appropriations .

by itself , however , an authorization of discretionary spending does not provide funding for government activities .

an appropriation may generally be described as a statutory provision that provides budget authority , thus permitting a federal agency to incur obligations and make payments from the treasury for specified purposes , usually during a specified period of time .

the authorizing and appropriating tasks are largely carried out by a division of labor within the committee system and preserved under house and senate rules .

legislative committees—such as the house committee on armed services and the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation—are responsible for authorizing legislation related to the agencies and programs under their jurisdiction .

most standing committees have authorizing responsibilities .

the appropriations committees of the house and senate have jurisdiction over appropriations measures , including annual appropriations bills , supplemental appropriations bills , and continuing resolutions .

after enactment of a particular appropriation into law , federal agencies must attempt to interpret and apply its terms in order to execute their budgetary responsibilities .

agencies may generally obligate and expend funds subject to any conditions addressed by appropriations statutes guided by three general principles: the purpose ( s ) for which particular funds are appropriated , which may be expressed in statute in more or less detail and , in some cases , with certain restrictions ; the time period during which funds are available for obligation and expenditure—sometimes referred to as the period of availability or duration of appropriations ; and the amount of appropriated funds that may be obligated and expended .

within the contours of these statutory conditions on the availability of funds , agencies may nevertheless exercise some discretion regarding how funds are allocated and the pace at which funds are obligated and spent .

the so - called antideficiency act consists of a series of provisions and revisions incorporated into appropriations laws over the years relating to matters such as prohibited activities , the apportionment system , and budgetary reserves .

these provisions , now codified in two locations in title 31 of the united states code , continue to play a pivotal role in the execution phase of the federal budget process , when the agencies actually spend the funds provided in appropriations laws .

the origins of the antideficiency act date back to 1870 , which provided: that it shall not be lawful for any department of the government to expend in any one fiscal year any sum in excess of appropriations made by congress for that fiscal year , or to involve the government in any contract for the future payment of money in excess of such appropriations .

later modifications , particularly the antideficiency acts of 1905 and 1906 , sought to strengthen the prohibitions of the 1870 law by expanding its provisions , adding restrictions on voluntary services for the government , and imposing criminal penalties for violations .

these laws also established a new administrative process for budget execution , termed "apportionment," which requires that budget authority provided to federal agencies in appropriations acts be allocated in installments , rather than all at once .

by apportioning funds , agencies can prevent operating at a rate that would expend all budget authority before the end of the fiscal year or end the year with substantial amounts unobligated .

four main types of prohibitions are contained in the antideficiency act , as amended: ( 1 ) making expenditures in excess of the appropriation ; ( 2 ) making expenditures in advance of the appropriation ; ( 3 ) accepting voluntary service for the united states , except in cases of emergency ; and ( 4 ) making obligations or expenditures in excess of an apportionment or reapportionment or in excess of the amount permitted by agency regulation .

one significant impact of the antideficiency act has been concern with the potential for a government shutdown as a response to a funding gap .

in 1980 and early 1981 , then - attorney general benjamin civiletti issued opinions in two letters to the president .

the "civiletti letters" have continued to have effect through guidance provided to federal agencies under various omb circulars clarifying the limits of federal government activities upon the occurrence of a funding gap .

the civiletti letters state that , in general , the antideficiency act requires that if congress has enacted no appropriation beyond a specified period , the agency may make no contracts and obligate no further funds for activities associated with the lapsed appropriation except as "authorized by law. .

in addition , because no statute generally permits federal agencies to incur obligations without appropriations for the pay of employees , the antideficiency act does not , in general , authorize agencies to employ the services of their employees upon a lapse in appropriations , though it does permit agencies to fulfill certain legal obligations connected with the orderly termination of agency operations .

the second letter , from january 1981 , discusses the more complex issue of interpretation presented with respect to obligational authorities that are "authorized by law" but not manifested in appropriations acts .

in a few cases , congress has expressly authorized agencies to incur obligations without regard to available appropriations .

more often , it is necessary to inquire under what circumstances statutes that vest particular functions in government agencies imply authority to create obligations for the execution of those functions despite a lack of current appropriations .

it is under this guidance that exceptions may be made for activities involving "the safety of human life or the protection of property. .

as a consequence of these guidelines , when a funding gap occurs , executive agencies begin a shutdown of the affected projects and activities , including the furlough of non - excepted personnel .

the language by which funds are provided to federal agencies may vary in the level of discretion agencies have to determine how to spend the funds that have been provided .

one type of discretion that commonly occurs is with respect to the purposes for which funds are available when appropriations are provided as a lump sum with little or no specificity in the appropriations statute .

even when the purpose of appropriations has been specified in detail , agencies have some flexibility to determine how they will use their available budgetary resources during the fiscal year .

for example , agencies may shift funds from one purpose or object to another through reprogramming and transfers .

reprogramming is the shifting of funds within an appropriation account from one object class to another or from one program activity to another .

generally , agencies may make such shifts without additional statutory authority , but often they must provide some form of notification to the appropriations committees , authorizing committees , or both .

a transfer is the shifting of budget authority from one appropriation account to another .

agencies may transfer budget authority only as specifically authorized by law .

in most cases , transfers involve movement of funds within an agency or department , but they may also involve movement of funds between two or more agencies or departments .

transfer authority may be provided either in authorizing statutes or in appropriations acts .

in addition , statutory provisions that provide transfer authority will require the agency to notify congress .

in general , both transferred and reprogrammed funds are subject to any limitations or conditions that were imposed by the appropriations act that originally made it available .

all original restrictions remain in effect on transferred funds regardless of whether the funds in the receiving appropriations account have different restrictions or characteristics than the funds being transferred .

in other words , limitations and restrictions follow the funds .

additional restrictions may be imposed by statutes to limit transfer or reprogramming authority in certain circumstances or with respect to certain agencies .

such restrictions may be specified in terms of an amount or a percentage .

one example of a statutory restriction would be language that places a cap on the amounts that may be transferred .

such caps may be imposed on either the account from which funds are being transferred or the account receiving the transferred funds .

these restrictions are commonly referred to as "not - to - exceed" limits .

although an appropriation limits the amounts that can be spent , it also establishes the expectation that the available funds will be used to carry out authorized activities .

therefore , when an agency declines to use all or part of an appropriation , it deviates from the intentions of congress .

although presidents have sometimes asserted that they are not obligated to spend appropriated funds , supreme court decisions—especially train v. city of new york ( 420 u.s. 35 [1975] ) and the impoundment control act of 1974 ( ica ) —limit their authority to reduce or withhold agency funding , by action or inaction , that prevents the obligation and expenditure of budget authority .

an impoundment is an action or inaction by the president or a federal agency that delays or withholds the obligation or expenditure of budget authority provided in law .

the ica divides impoundments into two categories and establishes distinct procedures for each: a deferral delays the use of funds ; a rescission is a presidential request that congress rescind ( cancel ) an appropriation or other form of budget authority .

deferral and rescission are exclusive and comprehensive categories .

that is , an impoundment is either a rescission or a deferral—it cannot be both or something else .

as originally enacted , the ica also created a process through which the president could propose a deferral of budget authority ( meaning to delay its availability ) , and either the house or senate could prevent the deferral by adopting a resolution disapproving it .

the process by which a single chamber could prevent the exercise of authority delegated to the executive branch ( known as a "legislative veto" ) was later found unconstitutional , however .

specifically , after the supreme court invalidated an unrelated one - house legislative veto in ins v. chadha , 462 u.s. 919 ( 1983 ) , the court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit applied the reasoning of chadha to invalidate the deferral provisions in the ica .

this decision in city of new haven v. united states ( 809 f.2d 900 [d.c. cir .

1987] ) , also struck down the statutory authority of the president to make deferrals for policy reasons as inseverable from the unconstitutional legislative veto .

after the court decisions , as well as gao administrative interpretations of the issue , congress amended the ica in 1987 to eliminate the one - house disapproval and specify that deferrals be "permissible only: ( 1 ) to provide for contingencies ; ( 2 ) to achieve savings made possible by or through changes in requirements for greater efficiency of operations ; or ( 3 ) as specifically provided by law. .

in addition , deferrals could not be proposed for any period extending beyond the end of the fiscal year for which the proposal was reported .

prior to the enactment of the ica , when the president withheld appropriated funds from obligation , there was no explicit statutory limit on the length of time that funds could be withheld .

under the ica , however , whenever the president seeks to withhold funds from obligation , he must submit a special rescission message to congress .

the funds can be withheld only for the 45-day period specified in the act after the receipt of the special presidential message .

the special presidential message to congress must specify the amount to be rescinded , the accounts and programs involved , the estimated fiscal and program effects , and the reasons for the rescission .

multiple rescissions can be grouped in a single message .

after the message has been received , congress can choose to consider and pass a rescission bill that includes all , part , or none of the amount proposed by the president .

the funds reserved pursuant to a rescission request must be released after the 45-day period unless congress has completed action on a bill to rescind the budget authority .

gao is granted responsibilities to oversee and enforce executive branch compliance with the act .

the ica also created legislative procedures for the house and senate to facilitate congressional review of presidential rescission requests .

these procedures can effectively place a time limit on committee consideration and restrict floor debate in both chambers .

the procedures discourage a filibuster in the senate and eliminate the need for three - fifths support in the senate to reach a final vote on the bill .

these expedited procedures are available only during the 45-day period during which funds are withheld .

the president can also propose cancellations of budget authority in ways other than the method described in the ica for requesting rescissions .

funds requested for cancellation , however , may not be withheld from obligation pending congressional action .

although the trump administration has submitted rescission requests to congress , during the two prior presidential administrations , the president chose not to send rescission proposals pursuant to the ica .

both president barack obama and president george w. bush proposed cancellations of budget authority , but they chose not to do so by submitting a special message under the terms prescribed by the ica .

conversely , congress can , and often does , initiate the rescission of funds on its own and may choose to consider legislation rescinding funds using the regular legislative process .

rescissions are regularly included in appropriations bills , for example .

sequestration was the principal means used to enforce statutory budget enforcement policies in place from 1985 through 2002 , and it is the principal means used to enforce the requirements of the statutory paygo act and the statutory limits on discretionary spending under the bca .

in addition , sequestration is used to achieve a portion of the spending reductions required when deficit reduction legislation tied to the joint committee on deficit reduction was not enacted as provided by the bca .

sequestration involves the issuance of a presidential order that permanently cancels non - exempt budgetary resources ( except for revolving funds , special funds , trust funds , and certain offsetting collections ) for the purpose of achieving a required amount of outlay savings to reduce the deficit .

once sequestration is triggered , spending reductions are made automatically .

a sequestration order by the president is triggered by a report from the omb director determining that a breach has occurred .

to enforce the statutory discretionary spending caps , omb first provides a preview report at the beginning of the calendar year , including calculations of any necessary adjustments to the existing limits for the upcoming fiscal year .

once discretionary spending is enacted , omb evaluates that spending relative to the spending limits and determines whether sequestration is required .

omb is required to issue the final report within 15 calendar days after the congressional session adjourns sine die .

for discretionary spending that becomes law after the session ends ( eg , the enactment of a supplemental appropriations measure ) , the omb evaluation and any sequester order to enforce the limits would occur 15 days after enactment .

for enforcement of the statutory paygo act , omb records the budgetary effects of revenue and direct spending provisions enacted into law , including both costs and savings , on two paygo scorecards covering rolling five - year and 10-year periods ( i.e. , in each new session , the periods covered by the scorecards roll forward one fiscal year ) .

omb must issue an annual paygo report not later than 14 days ( excluding weekends and holidays ) after congress adjourns to end a session .

once omb finalizes the two paygo scorecards , it determines whether a violation of the paygo requirement has occurred ( i.e. , if a debit has been recorded for the budget year on either scorecard ) .

if a breach occurs , the president issues a sequestration order that implements largely across - the - board cuts in nonexempt direct spending programs sufficient to remedy the violation .

spending for many programs is exempt from sequestration , and reductions in certain programs are limited by statutory provisions .

appendix a. glossary of budget process terms 302 .

the section of the congressional budget act of 1974 that pertains to the distribution to house and senate committees of new budget authority , entitlement authority , and outlays agreed to in a budget resolution .

the allocation is usually included in the joint explanatory statement that accompanies the conference report on a budget resolution .

section 302 ( a ) requires the allocation of the total spending in the budget resolution among the committees having jurisdiction over either direct or discretionary spending .

when a budget resolution has not been adopted , the house and senate ( separately or jointly ) may use some other means to establish committee allocations .

section 302 ( b ) further requires the appropriations committee in each chamber to subdivide this total allocation among their subcommittees .

section 302 ( f ) establishes a point of order against the consideration of a bill , amendment thereto , or conference thereon that would breach the appropriate 302 ( a ) ( or 302 ( b ) ) amount for the committee ( or subcommittee ) .

apportionment .

the action by which federal agencies , working with the office of management and budget , establish a plan for budget authority made available by spending laws to be obligated over the course of a fiscal year consistent with all legal requirements .

apportionment is required under the antideficiency act in order to prevent the premature exhaustion of funds , and for certain kinds of budget authority , to achieve the most effective and economical use of those funds .

appropriation .

legislation that provides budget authority to allow federal agencies to incur obligations and to make payments out of the treasury for specified purposes , usually during a specified period of time .

discretionary appropriations measures are under the jurisdiction of the house and senate committees on appropriations .

authorization .

a statutory provision that establishes or continues a federal agency , activity , or program .

it may also establish policies and restrictions and deal with organizational and administrative matters .

authorizations may implicitly or explicitly authorize congressional action to provide appropriations for an agency , activity , or program .

an explicit authorization of appropriations may apply to a single fiscal year , several fiscal years , or an indefinite period of time , and it may be for a specific level of funding or an indefinite amount .

an authorization of appropriations does not provide budget authority , however , which must be provided in subsequent appropriations legislation .

furthermore , under house and senate rules , an authorization is construed as a ceiling on the amounts that may be appropriated but not a minimum .

baseline .

a projection of the levels of federal spending , revenues , and the resulting budgetary surpluses or deficits for the upcoming and subsequent fiscal years , taking into account laws enacted to date but not assuming any new policies .

it provides a benchmark for measuring the budgetary effects of proposed changes in federal revenues or spending , assuming certain economic conditions .

baseline projections are prepared by the congressional budget office .

budget a uthority .

authority provided by federal law to enter into financial obligations that will result in immediate or future outlays involving federal government funds .

the main forms of budget authority are appropriations , entitlement authority , borrowing authority , and contract authority .

it also includes authority to obligate and expend the proceeds of offsetting receipts and collections .

congress may make budget authority available for one year , several years , or an indefinite period , and it may specify definite or indefinite amounts .

budget r esolution .

a concurrent resolution , provided under the congressional budget act , that allows congress to make decisions about overall fiscal policy and priorities , as well as coordinate and establish guidelines for the consideration of various budget related measures .

because a concurrent resolution is not a law , it cannot be signed or vetoed by the president .

it therefore does not have statutory effect , so no money can be raised or spent pursuant to it .

revenue and spending amounts set in the budget resolution , however , establish the basis for the enforcement of congressional budget policies through points of order .

continuing r esolution ( cr ) .

when annual appropriations acts are not enacted by the beginning of the fiscal year ( october 1 ) , one or more continuing appropriations acts may be enacted to provide temporary continued funding for covered programs and activities until action on regular appropriations acts is completed .

such funding is provided for a specified period of time , which may be extended through the enactment of subsequent crs .

rather than providing a specific amount of funding , crs typically allow agencies to operate at a specified rate .

a continuing appropriations act is commonly referred to as a continuing resolution or cr because historically it has been in the form of a joint resolution rather than a bill , but there is no procedural requirement as to its form .

in some cases , crs have provided appropriations for an entire fiscal year .

deeming r esolution .

an informal term that refers to a resolution or bill passed by one or both houses of congress that provides an alternate means to establish the basis for budgetary enforcement actions in the absence of a budget resolution .

direct s pending .

direct spending is defined in the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 , as amended , as consisting of entitlement authority ( including appropriated entitlements ) , the supplemental nutrition assistance program , and any other budget authority ( and resulting outlays ) provided in laws other than appropriations acts .

the term direct spending is often used interchangeably with the terms mandatory or entitlement spending .

examples include social security , medicare , medicaid , unemployment insurance , and military and federal civilian pensions .

discretionary s pending .

the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 , as amended , defines discretionary spending as budget authority provided in annual appropriation acts and the outlays derived from that authority .

discretionary spending encompasses appropriations not mandated by existing law and therefore made available in appropriation acts in such amounts as congress chooses .

discretionary spending for fy2012-fy2021 is limited by statutory spending limits enacted in the budget control act of 2011 , as revised .

fiscal y ear .

the fiscal year for the federal government begins on october 1 and ends on september 30 .

the fiscal year is designated by the calendar year in which it ends: for example , fy2020 began on october 1 , 2019 , and ends on september 30 , 2020 .

functional c ategory .

the president's budget and the congressional budget resolution classify federal budgetary activities ( including budget authority , outlays , tax expenditures , and credit authority ) into functional categories that represent major purposes or national needs being addressed ( such as national defense , health , or general science , space , and technology ) .

a functional category may be divided into two or more subfunctions , depending upon its scope or complexity .

as a whole , functional categories provide a broad statement of budget priorities and facilitate an understanding of trends in related programs regardless of the agency administering them or type of financial transaction involved .

the amounts in particular functional categories in the budget resolution are used as informational guidelines and are not enforced by points of order in the congressional budget process .

obligation .

a commitment that creates a legal liability of the government to pay for goods and services and results in outlays either immediately or in the future .

an agency incurs an obligation , for example , when it places an order , signs a contract , or awards a grant .

when a payment is made , it liquidates the obligation .

appropriation laws usually make funds available for obligation for one or more fiscal years , but outlays may actually occur at some later time so that an agency's outlays in a particular year can come from obligations entered into in previous years as well as from its current appropriation .

offsetting r eceipts / c ollections .

funds collected from the public primarily as a result of business - like activities ( such as user fees or royalties paid to the government ) that are levied on a class directly availing itself of , or directly subject to , a governmental service , program , or activity rather than on the general public .

such receipts and collections are recorded as negative amounts of spending rather than as revenues .

in most cases , offsetting receipts require an explicit appropriation , while offsetting collections may be obligated without further legislative action .

outlays .

the actual amount of payments from the treasury that result from obligations entered into by executing provisions in appropriations and direct spending legislation that provides budget authority .

outlays consist of payments , usually by check , by electronic fund transfer or cash to liquidate obligations incurred in prior fiscal years as well as in the current fiscal year .

pay - as - you - go ( paygo ) .

a budgetary enforcement mechanism originally set forth in the budget enforcement act of 1990 .

it generally requires that any projected increase in the deficit due to changes in direct spending or revenues resulting from legislation must be offset by an equivalent amount of direct spending cuts or revenue increases to eliminate the net increase over either a six - year period covering the current fiscal year plus the ensuing five fiscal years or over an 11-year period covering the current fiscal year plus the ensuing 10 fiscal years .

the statutory paygo mechanism currently in place was established under the statutory pay - as - you - go act of 2010 .

in the event that the net impact of changes to direct spending and revenue laws over the course of a session of congress is projected to increase the deficit in either of these time periods , the president is required to issue a sequester order to eliminate it .

in addition , there are currently paygo procedures in the house and senate enforced by points of order on the floor to prevent the consideration of legislation that does not meet the requirement .

reconciliation .

an expedited procedure , provided under section 310 of the congressional budget act , for changing existing revenue or direct spending laws to implement budgetary policies established in a budget resolution .

reconciliation must begin with language in a budget resolution instructing specific committees to report legislation adjusting revenues or spending within their respective jurisdictions by specified amounts , usually by a specified deadline .

the budget act provides for expedited consideration of reconciliation bills in the senate by limiting debate to 20 hours and limiting the content of amendments .

reprogramming .

shifting funds within an appropriation account from one object class to another or from one program activity to another .

generally , agencies may make such shifts without additional statutory authority , but often they must provide some form of notification to the appropriations committees , authorizing committees , or both .

rescission .

a provision of law that repeals previously enacted budget authority .

under the impoundment control act of 1974 , the president may send a message to congress requesting one or more rescissions and the reasons for doing so .

if the president makes such a request , he may withhold the funds from obligation , but if congress does not pass legislation approving the rescission within 45 days of continuous session after receiving the message , the funds must be made available for obligation .

congress may rescind all , part , or none of an amount proposed by the president and may also initiate rescission of funds not requested in a presidential message .

revenues .

funds collected from the public primarily as a result of the federal government's exercise of its sovereign powers .

they include individual and corporate income taxes , excise taxes , customs duties , estate and gift taxes , fees and fines , payroll taxes for social insurance programs , and miscellaneous receipts .

scorekeeping .

the process of both estimating the budgetary effects of pending legislation and comparing those effects to a baseline .

the congressional budget office prepares estimates of the budgetary effects of legislation , including both spending and revenue effects .

the budget committees in the house and senate act as official scorekeepers by providing the presiding officers in their respective chambers with the estimates needed to make decisions about points of order enforcing budgetary parameters .

the budget committees also make periodic summary scorekeeping reports that are placed in the congressional record .

sequestration .

a procedure in which the president is required to issue an order canceling budgetary resources—that is , money available for obligation or spending—to enforce a statutory budget requirement .

sequestered funds are no longer available for obligation or expenditure .

the statutory paygo requirement and the statutory limits on discretionary spending are enforced by sequestration .

in addition , the automatic spending reductions required by the budget control act of 2011 are partially achieved through sequestration .

transfer .

shifting budget authority between two appropriation accounts .

agencies may transfer budget authority only as specifically authorized by law .

appendix b .

congressional budget process action .

