the department of veterans affairs ( va ) caregiver support program was born from a new challenge facing veterans returning from recent conflicts .

the conflicts in afghanistan and iraq ( operation enduring freedom , operation iraqi freedom , and subsequent operations , hereinafter referred to as oef / oif ) led to a growing number of seriously disabled veterans , many of whom require extended care for the remainder of their lives .

some of those seriously injured while serving in these conflicts survived with injuries that would have been fatal in previous conflicts .

in the vietnam era , five out of every eight seriously injured servicemembers survived .

in oef / oif , seven out of eight seriously injured servicemembers survived .

seriously injured servicemembers returning from oef / oif conflicts often sustained polytraumatic injuries requiring medically complex care , intensive rehabilitation , and extended or long - term care .

such injuries can include physical injuries ( eg , traumatic brain injuries , amputations , serious burns , spinal cord injuries , and blindness ) , as well as mental health issues ( eg , posttraumatic stress disorder [ptsd] , anxiety , and depression ) .

these types of injuries often have lasting implications for the department of defense ( dod ) and va health care and disability systems .

researchers found that family members and close friends to veterans often shouldered much of the burden in the rehabilitation of returning veterans .

family members and friends relocated for extended periods of time while veterans received treatment in hospital settings .

moreover , family and friends often left jobs to act as caregivers for veterans .

in recognition of this significant challenge to families , congress enacted the caregivers and veterans omnibus health services act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-163 ) , which required va to establish specific supports for caregivers of veterans .

the veterans health administration ( vha ) , within va , offers caregiver support through two programs established by the act: a program of general caregiver support services ( general caregivers program ) ; and a program of comprehensive assistance for family caregivers ( family caregivers program ) .

the general caregivers program offers a basic level of support , such as education and training , to caregivers of veterans of all eras enrolled in va health care .

the family caregivers program offers comprehensive supports , such as health care benefits and a monthly stipend , to caregivers of veterans who were seriously injured in the line of duty on or after september 11 , 2001 .

va refers to these two programs collectively as the caregiver support program .

the caregiver support program is distinct from other va programs in that the beneficiary is a nonveteran with some relationship to a living veteran .

va services and benefits are typically provided only to veterans .

 ( va does provide some services and benefits to families of deceased veterans , with a few exceptions. ) .

generally , caregiver services and benefits are available to caregivers only while the veteran receiving care is living .

after many years of advocacy from veterans organizations , among others , the va maintaining internal systems and strengthening integrated outside networks act of 2018 ( va mission act ; p.l .

115-182 , as amended ) was enacted .

it required va to expand eligibility for supports under the family caregivers program to caregivers of veterans of all eras .

expansion is being implemented in two phases , as required by the va mission act .

veterans who were seriously injured in the line of duty before may 7 , 1975 , are to become eligible first .

two years later , veterans who served and were injured in the line of duty between may 7 , 1975 , and september 11 , 2001 , are to become eligible for the program .

this expansion , which has yet to go into effect , is expected to generate a large increase in enrollment and may lead to changes to the underlying structure of the family caregivers program due to a large increase in the number of eligible individuals .

unlike the population currently eligible for the program , this newly eligible population is older and may have different disabling conditions that require personal care assistance , characteristics that may present a challenge to determining eligibility based on an injury in the line of duty .

 ( see the text box "proposed rule published on march 6 , 2020" for information on a proposed rule to implement requirements under the va mission act. ) .

title i of the caregivers and veterans omnibus health services act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-163 ) includes programs and services to provide support to caregivers of veterans .

specifically , the act amends title 38 , chapter 17 , subchapter ii of the united states code ( u.s.c. ) .

by establishing two programs to assist family caregivers .

the first is a program of comprehensive assistance for family caregivers , for caregivers of eligible veterans who incurred a serious injury in the line of duty while actively serving in the military on or after september 11 , 2001 ( referred to as the as the family caregivers program in this report ) .

the second is a program of general caregiver support services , for caregivers of covered veterans of all eras enrolled in the va health care system ( referred to as the general caregivers program in this report ) .

va refers to the two programs together as the caregiver support program .

the appendix provides a legislative history of the caregiver support program .

title i of the act also amends title 38 of the u.s.c .

to provide the following services: ( 1 ) medical care to certain primary family caregivers ; ( 2 ) counseling and mental health services to certain family caregivers and other caregivers ; and ( 3 ) lodging and subsistence for attendants who travel with veterans for medical treatment , regardless of whether they require an attendant for such travel .

the va mission act required va to add additional services to the family caregivers program , to implement a new information technology ( it ) system to support the family caregivers program , and to expand eligibility for the program to caregivers of veterans of all eras .

title 1 of the va mission act expands eligibility for the family caregiver program to pre - 9 / 11 veterans in two phases .

this expanded eligibility depends on certification of a new information technology ( it ) system to administer the program: phase 1 .

veterans who have a serious injury incurred or aggravated in the line of duty in the active military , naval , or air service on or before may 7 , 1975 .

phase 2 .

two years after certification , the program is to expand to cover veterans of all eras .

expanding eligibility for the caregiver support program raises two potential issues: ( 1 ) delays in implementation of an it system to fully support the system and ( 2 ) increased costs associated with eligibility expansion under the act .

as program eligibility expands , these issues may be of interest to policymakers .

in addition to these two issues , the program may change in other significant ways when va modifies the regulations necessary to implement the eligibility expansion .

va published a proposed rule to implement the changes required under the va mission act on march 6 , 2020 .

the public comment period for the proposed rule ends on may 5 , 2020 .

furthermore , rulemaking to add the expansion populations must be finalized , at the very least , prior to expansion becoming effective .

the act required va to implement a new it system to fully support the family caregiver program by october 1 , 2018—nearly four months after the legislation was enacted .

the it system must be able to ( 1 ) retrieve the data needed to assess and monitor program and workload trends , ( 2 ) manage data for program participation that exceeds va estimates , and ( 3 ) integrate the system with other vha it systems .

the act required va to certify that the system had been implemented no later than october 1 , 2019 .

the first phase of eligibility expansion is to become effective when the it system is certified .

however , va has not yet certified an it system .

prior to enactment of the va mission act , the it system used to support the family caregivers program , the caregiver application tracker ( cat ) , was deemed inadequate .

specifically , limitations with cat did not grant the caregiver support program office ready access to the workload data needed to monitor the effects of the program on va medical center resources .

va attempted to add functionality to cat in a project called cat rescue .

however , cat rescue was terminated in april 2018 after va reported defects during system testing .

when the va mission act was enacted , va was in the midst of replacing cat with a new it system , called the caregivers tool ( caret ) .

this project began in september 2015 .

however , va identified deficiencies in caret during acceptance testing and terminated the project in february 2019 .

in march 2019 , va began a third effort to acquire a replacement system , which is based on an existing commercial product .

the new system is referred to as the caregiver record management application ( carma ) .

va is deploying carma in three phases .

the first phase replaced cat with carma and was completed in october 2019 .

the second phase automated stipend processing within carma and was completed in january 2020 .

the third phase is expected to be completed in summer 2020 .

in this third phase , va is updating other legacy systems , enabling online application submission , and enhancing reporting functionality ( eg , business analytics tools ) .

va has indicated that it expects to certify the system at the completion of phase 3 and the first eligibility expansion will occur at that time .

figure 4 illustrates a timeline of va initiatives designed to replace the current it system that supports the program and requirements of the va mission act .

the family caregivers program currently serves approximately 20,000 post - 9 / 11 veterans and their caregivers .

when the first phase of expansion begins , to pre - 9 / 11 veterans injured in the line of duty before may 7 , 1975 , va projects that approximately 83,000 additional veterans and their caregivers will become eligible for the program .

the number of eligible veterans and caregivers would potentially continue to grow when eligibility expands to all pre - 9 / 11 veterans .

the largest cost driver in the family caregivers program is the monthly stipend to family caregivers .

in fy2019 , stipend payments totaled approximately $347 million , or 79% of total program expenditures .

with expansion of the magnitude projected by va , the number of caregivers receiving monthly stipends will increase .

va estimates that expenditures for the stipend will total $870 million in fy2021 and nearly $1.2 billion in fy2022 .

as the program expands , other program components may require additional resources to meet the demand resulting from the increased numbers of eligible veterans and caregivers .

for instance , as it is currently structured , the program requires ongoing monitoring in a veteran and caregiver's home .

in general , a va clinical team that includes at least two individuals must visit each home on at least an annual basis .

to continue to meet this requirement , va will likely need to increase staffing levels to conduct similar program monitoring and oversight .

va requested nearly $1.2 billion in fy2021 ( the first full year implementation of phase 1 of the eligibility expansion ) , a 276% increase from fy2019 ( the last full year in which eligibility was available only to post - 9 / 11 veterans ) .

the fy2022 advance appropriation request is $1.5 billion , which represents only a partial year of implementation of phase 2 of the eligibility expansion .

program evolution as military operations in afghanistan and iraq progressed , the provision of services and supports to family caregivers of veterans seriously injured in these conflicts moved to the forefront .

family caregiver issues became a focus of the president's commission on care for america's returning wounded warriors , established by president g.w .

bush on march 8 , 2007 .

tasked with providing a comprehensive review of the care provided to injured servicemembers returning from the recent conflicts in afghanistan and iraq , the commission issued several recommendations to the president , congress , dod , and va in a final report .

among these recommendations were several dod and va recommendations to strengthen family support programs , including providing "families of servicemembers who require long - term personal care with appropriate training and counseling to support them in their new caregiving roles. .

va advisory committee on oef / oif veterans and families in april 2007 , va established an independent advisory committee to assess the situation of oef / oif veterans and families .

the committee was tasked with examining existing va benefits and services and the need for new benefits and services tailored to oef / oif veterans .

committee membership included representation from veterans , family members , and caregivers , as well as veteran service organizations and other advocates and specialists .

in 2008 , the committee issued an interim report with preliminary observations and recommendations that centered around several themes , including family and caregivers .

the advisory committee's recommendations , among others , were to increase support to families and caregivers .

specifically , the committee's recommendations and findings consisted of three priorities for caregivers: ( 1 ) mental health counseling services for those caregiving for severely injured veterans , particularly over a prolonged time period ; ( 2 ) financial counseling and fiscal support while caring for severely disabled veterans , as well as training programs ; and ( 3 ) enhanced efforts regarding information and education about available va benefits and services .

va caregiver advisory board in june 2008 , va established an interdisciplinary caregiver advisory board to develop a caregiver assistance program .

the board's chartered activities include identifying core caregiver needs , developing initial recommendations for va caregiver support services , and overseeing eight caregiver assistance pilot programs .

the pilot programs were conceptualized in december 2007 to examine ways to improve education and to provide training and resources for caregivers assisting veterans .

most of the programs focus on supporting caregivers of veterans with specific conditions , such as dementia and traumatic brain injury .

these pilot programs were conducted through the end of fy2009 .

caregivers and veterans omnibus health services act of 2010 leading up to enactment of the caregivers and veterans omnibus health services act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-163 ) , the 111 th congress engaged in considerable debate and deliberation about various legislative proposals to assist family caregivers of veterans .

the following provides a legislative history of significant proposals to address assistance to family caregivers of veterans and , more specifically , veterans injured in the conflicts in afghanistan and iraq .

this history begins with legislation first enacted in the 109 th congress to address greater services and support to family caregivers and ends with passage of the caregivers and veterans omnibus health services act of 2010 in the 111 th congress .

the initial congressional response to providing assistance to family caregivers of veterans from recent conflicts in iraq and afghanistan dates back to the 109 th congress .

on may 4 , 2006 , s. 2753 was introduced by senator daniel akaka .

the bill would have required a va program to improve the provision of caregiver assistance services for veterans .

although the bill did not necessarily focus on caregiving assistance to veterans serving in recent conflicts , but rather all veterans , in his introductory speech senator akaka stated: with more veterans returning from combat with severely debilitating injuries , young spouses and parents have been forced to take on an unexpected role as caregivers .

many have interrupted their own careers to dedicate time and attention to the care and rehabilitation of loved ones .

these caregivers do not plan for this to happen and are not prepared mentally or financially for their new role .

therefore , we must protect , educate , and lend a helping hand to the caregivers who take on the responsibility and costly burden of caring for veterans , both young and old .

this legislation serves to provide comprehensive assistance to these caregivers .

provisions from s. 2753 were included as section 214 of the veterans benefits , healthcare , and information technology act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-461 ) and enacted on december 22 , 2006 .

p.l .

109-461 authorized va to conduct a two - year pilot program to improve assistance provided to caregivers , particularly in home - based settings , and authorized $5 million to be appropriated for each of fy2007 and fy2008 .

the 110 th congress extended authorization of the caregiver assistance pilot programs through the end of fy2009 under section 809 of the veterans' mental health and other care improvements act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-387 ) .

assistance to family caregivers received further legislative attention in the 111 th congress , with legislative proposals introduced to specifically target caregivers of veterans injured while serving in oef / oif .

in the senate , senator akaka introduced the family caregiver program act of 2009 ( s. 801 ) on april 2 , 2009 .

in his introductory remarks , senator akaka stated: some veterans returning from the recent wars in iraq and afghanistan , as well as previous conflicts , suffer from disabilities that prevent them from being fully independent .

this is a sad fact of war .

the legislation i am introducing today is designed to provide for several improvements in health care for veterans by supporting the family members who care for them .

the challenges faced by family caregivers are well known to us .

we have been working on this issue for nearly two years … i think we are now beyond the scope of that original pilot program and i believe that a full - fledged permanent program is needed in va that would have a national program for the caregivers of seriously injured veterans to provide them with education , grants , counseling , and other support services .

an amended version of s. 801 was reported by senator akaka on september 29 , 2009 ( s.rept .

111-80 ) .

the amended version would have , among other things , authorized va to waive the cost of emergency care for caregivers of veterans ; created a comprehensive program to provide assistance to the caregivers of severely injured veterans ; authorized va to pay for the caregivers' lodging and subsistence , as well as the expenses of travel for the period consisting of travel to and from a treatment facility and the duration of a treatment episode at that facility ; and required va to collaborate with dod to conduct a national survey of family caregivers .

the house also introduced legislation that would specifically provide assistance to caregivers of oef / oif veterans .

on july 9 , 2009 , representative michael h. michaud introduced the caregiver assistance and resource enhancement act ( h.r .

3155 ) .

on july 15 , 2009 , h.r .

3155 as amended , was ordered reported out of the house veterans' affairs committee ( h.rept .

111-224 ) .

the bill was then passed by the house on july 27 , 2009 .

as passed by the house , h.r .

3155 would have required va to provide support services ( including champva medical care and stipends ) to the eligible caregivers of oef and oif veterans .

to be eligible , veterans would need to meet three conditions: ( 1 ) have a severe service - connected disability or illness ; ( 2 ) be in need of caregiver services , such that without such services , the veteran would require hospitalization , nursing home care , or other residential institutional care ; and ( 3 ) be unable to carry out the activities of daily living ( including instrumental activities of daily living ) .

a "hold" was placed on s. 801 that prevented the senate from considering this measure .

subsequently , on october 28 , 2009 , senator akaka introduced a separate bill , the caregivers and veterans omnibus health services act of 2010 ( s. 1963 ) , which included provisions from s. 801 , among other provisions .

s. 1963 was passed by the senate on november 11 , 2009 .

the family caregiver provisions in the senate - passed bill would have waived charges for humanitarian care to attendants of covered veterans under certain circumstances ; provided family caregiver assistance including training , respite care , mental health services , and stipends ; and provided lodging and subsistence for family caregivers .

it would have also required va , in coordination with dod , to design and conduct a survey on caregivers and family caregivers .

on april 22 , 2010 , an amended version of s. 1963 was passed by congress .

the final version reflected a compromise agreement between the house and the senate and included provisions derived from a number of bills , including the earlier senate - passed s. 1963 and house - passed h.r .

3155 .

on may 5 , 2010 , president obama signed into law p.l .

111-163 , the caregivers and veterans omnibus health services act of 2010 .

title i of the act provides programs and services to provide support to caregivers of veterans .

following enactment of the 2010 legislation that established the caregiver support program , there were a number of legislative attempts to expand eligibility for the program of comprehensive assistance for family caregivers to veterans of all eras .

this effort ultimately culminated with the enactment of the va maintaining internal systems and strengthening integrated outside networks act of 2018 ( va mission act ; p.l .

115-182 , as amended ) .

