section 6 of the occupational safety and health act of 1970 ( osh act ) grants the occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) of the department of labor ( dol ) the authority to promulgate , modify , or revoke occupational safety and health standards that apply to private sector employers , the united states postal service , and the federal government as an employer .

in addition , section 5 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the osh act , commonly referred to as the general duty clause , requires that all employers under osha's jurisdiction provide workplaces free of "recognized hazards that are causing or are likely to cause death or serious physical harm" to their employees .

osha has the authority to enforce employer compliance with its standards and with the general duty clause through the issuance of abatement orders , citations , and civil monetary penalties .

the osh act does not cover state or local government agencies or units .

thus , certain entities that may be affected by coronavirus disease 2019 ( covid - 19 ) , such as state and local government hospitals , local fire departments and emergency medical services , state prisons and county jails , and public schools , are not covered by the osh act or subject to osha regulation or enforcement .

on march 5 , 2020 , representative scott , chairman of the house committee on education and labor , and representative adams , chair of the subcommittee on workforce protections , sent a letter to secretary of labor eugene scalia calling on osha to promulgate an ets to address covid - 19 exposure among healthcare workers .

this letter followed a january 2020 letter requesting that osha reopen its rulemaking on the infectious disease standard and begin to formulate for possible future promulgation an ets to address covid - 19 exposure .

senator patty murray , ranking member of the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions and a group of democratic senators sent a similar letter to the secretary of labor calling for an osha ets .

in addition , in march 2020 , david michaels , who served as the assistant secretary of labor for occupational safety and health during the obama administration , wrote an op - ed in the atlantic calling on osha to promulgate a covid - 19 ets .

on march 6 , 2020 , the afl - cio and 22 other unions petitioned osha for an ets on covid - 19 that would cover all workers with potential exposures .

national nurses united submitted a similar petition requesting that osha promulgate an ets based largely on the cal / osha atd standard .

on may 4 , 2020 , the center for food safety and food chain workers alliance submitted a petition requesting that osha promulgate an ets to protect meat and poultry processing workers from covid - 19 exposure in the workplace .

on may 18 , 2020 , the afl - cio petitioned the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit for a writ of mandamus to compel osha to promulgate a covid - 19 ets .

on march 9 , 2020 , representative scott introduced h.r .

6139 , the covid - 19 health care worker protection act of 2020 .

this bill would require osha to promulgate a covid - 19 ets within one month of enactment .

the ets would be required to cover healthcare workers and any workers in sectors determined by the cdc or osha to be at an elevated risk of covid - 19 exposure .

the ets would be required to include an exposure control plan provision and be , at a minimum , based on cdc's 2007 guidance and any updates to this guidance .

the ets would also be required to provide no less protection than any state standard on novel pathogens , thus requiring osha to include the elements of the cal / osha atd standard in this ets .

title ii of the bill would provide that hospitals and skilled nursing facilities that receive medicare funding and that are owned by state or local government units and not subject to state plans would be required to comply with the ets .

the provisions of h.r .

6139 were included as division c of h.r .

6201 , the families first coronavirus response act , as introduced in the house .

the american hospital association ( aha ) issued an alert to its members expressing its opposition to the osha ets provisions in the bill .

specifically , the aha opposed the requirement that the ets be based on the cdc's 2007 guidance .

the aha stated that unlike severe acute respiratory syndrome ( sars ) , which was transmitted through the air , covid - 19 transmission is through droplets and surface contacts .

thus , the requirement of the 2007 cdc guidance that n95 respirators , rather than surgical masks , be used for patient contact is not necessary to protect healthcare workers from covid - 19 , and the use of surgical masks is consistent with world health organization guidance .

the aha also claimed that shortages of available respirators could reduce the capacity of hospitals to treat covid - 19 patients , due to a lack of respirators for staff .

the osha ets provisions were not included in the version of the legislation that was passed by the house and the senate and signed into law as p.l .

116-127 .

division d of h.r .

6379 , the take responsibility for workers and families act , as introduced in the house on march 23 , 2020 , includes the requirement that osha promulgate an ets on covid - 19 within seven days of enactment and a permanent covid - 19 standard within 24 months of enactment to cover healthcare workers , firefighters and emergency response workers , and workers in other occupations that cdc or osha determines to have an elevated risk of covid - 19 exposure .

division d of h.r .

6379 would amend the osh act , for the purposes of the ets only , such that state and local government employers in states without state plans would be covered by the ets .

the provisions of division d of h.r .

6379 were also included in s. 3584 , the covid–19 workers first protection act of 2020 , as introduced in the senate .

this legislation would specifically provide that the ets would remain in force until the permanent standard is promulgated and explicitly exempts the ets from the regulatory flexibility act , paperwork reduction act , and executive order 12866 .

osha would be granted enforcement discretion in cases in which it is not feasible for an employer to fully comply with the ets ( such as a case in which ppe is unavailable ) if the employer is exercising due diligence to comply and implementing alternative means to protect employees .

like the provisions in h.r .

6139 and the version of h.r .

6201 introduced in the house , this ets and permanent standard would be required to include an exposure control plan and provide no less protection than any state standard on novel pathogens , thus requiring osha to include the elements of the cal / osha atd standard in this ets and permanent standard .

although the ets provisions in h.r .

6139 and h.r .

6201 required that the ets be based on the 2007 cdc guidance , specific reference to the 2007 guidance is not included in this legislation .

rather , the ets and permanent standard would have to incorporate , as appropriate , "guidelines issued by the centers for disease control and prevention , and the national institute for occupational safety and health , which are designed to prevent the transmission of infectious agents in healthcare settings" and scientific research on novel pathogens .

states with occupational safety and health plans would be required to adopt the ets , or their own etss at least as effective as the ets , within 14 days of the legislation's enactment .

h.r .

6559 , the covid - 19 every worker protection act of 2020 , was introduced in the house by representative scott on april 21 , 2020 .

this legislation includes the ets and permanent standard provisions of division d of h.r .

6379 and s. 3584 and would require that these standards cover healthcare workers , emergency medical responders , and "other employees at occupational risk" of covid - 19 exposure .

this legislation also adds two provisions that clarify the requirements for employers to record work - related covid - 19 infections and strengthen the protections against retaliation and discrimination offered to whistleblowers .

sections 8 ( c ) and 24 ( a ) of the osh act require employers to maintain records of occupational injuries and illnesses in accordance with osha regulations .

osha's reporting and recordkeeping regulations require that employers with 10 or more employees must keep records of work - related injuries and illnesses that result in lost work time for employees or that require medical care beyond first aid .

employers must also report to osha , within 8 hours , any workplace fatality , and within 24 hours , any injury or illness that results in in - patient hospitalization , amputation , or loss of an eye .

employers in certain industries determined by osha to have lower occupational safety and health hazards are listed in the regulations as being exempt from the recordkeeping requirements but not the requirement to report serious injuries , illnesses , and deaths to osha .

offices of physicians , dentists , other health practitioners , and outpatient medical clinics are included in the industries that are exempt from the recordkeeping requirements .

osha regulations require the employer to determine if an employee's injury or illness is related to his or her work and thus subject to the recordkeeping requirements .

the regulations provide a presumption that an injury or illness that occurs in the workplace is work - related and recordable , unless one of the exemptions provided in the regulations applies .

one of the listed exemptions is as follows: the illness is the common cold or flu ( note: contagious diseases such as tuberculosis , brucellosis , hepatitis a , or plague are considered work - related if the employee is infected at work ) .

because of the nature of covid - 19 transmission , which can occur in the community as well as the workplace , it can be difficult to determine the exact source of any person's covid - 19 transmission .

this may make it difficult for employers to determine if an employee's covid - 19 is subject to the recordkeeping requirements .

on april 10 , 2020 , osha issued enforcement guidance on how cases of covid - 19 should be treated under the recordkeeping requirements .

this guidance states that covid - 19 cases are recordable if they are work - related .

under this guidance , employers in the following industry groups must fully comply with the recordkeeping regulations , including the requirement to determine if covid - 19 cases are work - related: healthcare ; emergency response , including firefighting , emergency medical services , and law enforcement ; and correctional institutions .

for all other employers , however , osha will only require employers to determine if covid - 19 cases are work - related and subject to the recordkeeping requirements if the following two conditions are met: 1 .

there is objective evidence that a covid - 19 case may be work - related .

this could include , for example , a number of cases developing among workers who work closely together without an alternative explanation ; and 2 .

the evidence of work - relatedness was reasonably available to the employer .

for purposes of this guidance , examples of reasonably available evidence include information given to the employer by employees , as well as information that an employer learns regarding its employees' health and safety in the ordinary course of managing its business and employees .

h.r .

6559 would require that the ets and permanent standard established pursuant to the legislation include the requirement for the recording and reporting of all covid - 19 cases in accordance with osha regulations in place at the time of enactment .

by referencing the regulations in place rather than the guidance , this provision would serve to supersede osha's guidance and apply the requirement to determine the work - relatedness of covid - 19 cases to all employers covered by the recordkeeping regulations .

section 11 ( c ) of the osh act prohibits any person from retaliating or discriminating against any employee who exercises certain rights provided by the osh act .

commonly referred to as the whistleblower protection provision , this provision protects any employee who takes any of the following actions: files a complaint with osha related to a violation of the osh act ; causes an osha proceeding , such as an investigation , to be instituted ; testifies or is about to testify in any osha proceeding ; and exercises on his or her own behalf , or on behalf of others , any other rights afforded by the osh act .

other rights afforded by the osh act that are covered by the whistleblower protection provision include the right to inform the employer about unsafe work conditions ; the right to access material safety data sheets or other information required to be made available by the employer ; and the right to report a work - related injury , illness , or death to osha .

in limited cases , the employee has the right to refuse to work if conditions reasonably present a risk of serious injury or death and there is not sufficient time to eliminate the danger through other means .

h.r .

6559 would require that the ets and permanent standard promulgated pursuant to the legislation expand the protections for whistleblowers .

the following additional activities taken by employees would grant them protection from retaliation and discrimination from employers and agents of employers: reporting to the employer ; a local , state , or federal agency ; or the media ; or on a social media platform ; the following: a violation of the ets or permanent standard promulgated pursuant to the legislation ; a violation of the infectious disease control plan required by the ets or permanent standard ; or a good - faith concern about an infectious disease hazard in the workplace ; seeking assistance from the employer or a local , state , or federal agency with such a report ; and using personally supplied ppe with a higher level of protection than offered by the employer .

the provisions of h.r .

6559 , including the provisions relating to recordkeeping and whistleblower protections , were included as title iii of division l of h.r .

6800 , the health and economic recovery omnibus emergency solutions act ( heroes act ) .

h.r .

6800 was passed by the house on may 1 5 , 2020 .

