t he stagnation of real hourly wages at the lower end of the income distribution , where workers tend to be less educated , has entered into the policy debate over many issues , including trade , immigration , and institutional factors such as the minimum wage .

this lack of wage growth has also contributed to an increase in overall income inequality .

the first section reviews changes in the distribution of hourly wages ( as well as considering the effects of fringe benefits ) and overall income .

following that review , the report reviews the evidence on the main factors that might have contributed to this lack of wage growth , including technological advancement , trade , the minimum wage , unions , the large firm wage premium , immigration , and reduced labor mobility .

the final section of the report explores policy options that might be considered by congress .

over the 1979-2018 period , real wages at the 10 th percentile of the wage distribution grew by only 1.6% , whereas wages at the 50 th percentile grew by 6.1% and wages at the 90 th percentile grew by 37.6% .

as shown in table 1 , these patterns varied by sex , race , and ethnicity .

from 1979 to 2016 , examined by quintiles of wage earners , wages fell by 1.0% for the bottom 20% but rose by 27.4% for the top quintile .

wages rose for the lower - middle quintile by 0.8% , but rose by 3.4% in the middle quintile and by 11.5% in the upper - middle quintile .

the wage differentials between the 10 th and the 50 th percentile remained relatively constant after 1990 until the recession in 2009 , indicating a stabilization of inequality in the bottom half of the wage distribution ; this change was primarily for male workers .

for female workers , a more modest growth in the differential in the bottom half occurred , largely in the early 1980s , with little change thereafter .

the differential in the upper half ( between the 90 th and the 50 th percentile ) increased at a more modest pace during the entire period .

wages are associated with educational achievement .

college graduates are 15% of the bottom quintile and almost 80% of the top quintile .

the highest wages on average are earned by those with advanced degrees , and the lowest by those with less than a high school diploma .

in 2016 , for workers over 25 , those with less than a high school diploma had median weekly earnings of $504 .

median weekly earnings were $1,156 for those with a bachelor's degree , $1,380 for a master's degree , $1,745 for a professional degree , and $1,664 for a doctoral degree .

the wage premium for a college degree ( the ratio of average wages for those with a college degree compared to those with a high school diploma ) rose from 134% in 1979 to 168% in 2016 ; the premium for an advanced degree rose from 154% to 213% over that same period .

the wage premium for a college degree rose steeply until about 2000 then continued to rise slightly after 2000 .

over the 1979-2016 period , the share of workers with a college degree also increased ( from 23% to 40% ) .

this increase in the skill premium suggests that the demand for skilled workers rose relative to the supply over this time frame .

using the cpi , real wages of men with a high school diploma or less declined significantly between 1979 and 1999 , while women with a high school diploma experienced small , but generally positive , growth during that period .

in addition to the wage differential growth , labor compensation as a share of income has been falling since 2001 , from 64.3% in the first quarter of 2001 to 58% in the fourth quarter of 2015 .

labor compensation includes fringe benefits and proprietor's labor income as well as wages .

during that same period , employee wages fell from 46.8% to 42.8% of gross domestic income ( gdi ) .

while the fringe benefits ( supplements ) share remained constant as a share of gdi , these benefits rose as a share of employee compensation .

in contrast with the increased wage inequality and the increased college wage premium , where effects largely occurred by 2000 , the fall in the labor share of income occurred primarily after 2000 .

because wages account for a smaller share of the income of higher - income individuals , both the increased wage inequality and the decreased labor income share have led to increased income inequality .

from 1979 to 2017 , the income share of the bottom quintile fell from 5.3% to 3.5% , whereas the share of the top quintile rose from 41.9% to 50.1% .

income shares also fell for the lower - middle quintile ( from 11.7% to 9.0% ) and the middle quintile ( from 17.2% to 14.7% ) , and ( slightly ) for the upper - middle quintile ( from 23.8% to 22.7% ) .

note that labor compensation differs from wages , as it also includes benefits that typically account for about 30% of compensation .

this difference also raises the question of whether the wage differentials documented for the period from the end of the 1970s to the mid - 1990s were offset or accentuated by changes in nonwage compensation .

available evidence , however , indicates that labor compensation differentials increased more than wage differentials .

some of the decline in the labor compensation share may be due to the growth of entrepreneurial income at the top of the income distribution , which in turn may partly reflect shifting to pass - through business ( where wages are not paid to entrepreneurs ) from the standard corporate form , due to tax incentives .

thus , this shift may be , in part , a change in the characterization of income rather than a real shift .

one study has estimated a national distribution of income and how it has changed over time accounting for all national income , including the fringe benefits of workers and those not in the labor force .

this study compares the growth in income over two 34-year periods: from 1946 to 1980 and from 1980 to 2014 .

for the postwar period through 1980 , the overall income growth rate and the overall pretax income annual growth rate were 2% , with pretax income of the bottom 50% of adults growing at approximately the 2% growth rate , whereas the top 10% grew at 1.7% .

for the period from 1980 through 2014 , the overall annual growth rate was lower , at 1.4% , but the annual growth rate of the bottom 50% rounded to zero , whereas the top 10% grew at 2.4% .

the study's statistics show that the share of income of the bottom 50% declined from about 20% in 1979 to about 12% today .

this study differs from other studies of income distribution that focus on family units ; rather , it looks at incomes for all adults separately to focus on individuals .

although this study uses a different approach , it shows a similar pattern to other measures .

to sum up these trends , lower - income workers experienced a decline in wages relative to the median that mostly occurred in the 1980s , the median wage earners experienced a decline with respect to the top wage earners throughout the period ( with both effects causing a rise in the college wage premium from the 1980s to about 2000 ) , and since 2000 , the labor share of income has declined .

all of these trends resulted in a stagnation of income among less - skilled workers relative to the overall population .

this section discusses the factors potentially contributing to the lack of wage growth at the bottom of the wage distribution: technology , globalization , wage - setting institutions ( the minimum wage , the decline in unions , and the decline in the large firm wage premium ) , immigration , and reduced labor mobility .

it also considers the decline in the labor income share that contributed to inequality .

while some specific changes in policy may be suggested by the review of the causes of wage stagnation , it is not clear that simply reversing the causes would outweigh the benefits society accrues more broadly through technological advance and trade .

this section discusses some policy options for those left behind by economic growth that might be considered if there is a desire to increase lower - and middle - income individuals' incomes or reduce inequality .

numerous targeted tools exist that the federal government could use to intervene to affect the income distribution .

these policies include direct taxes and transfers that increase after - tax earnings ; other policies that might increase pretax wages , such as wage subsidies and the minimum wage ; and a variety of policies that might potentially provide more equality , such as education and training programs and relocation assistance .

this discussion is intended to provide a review of a broad sweep of proposals .

an in - depth analysis of each proposal is beyond the scope of this report .

many of these proposals would involve a cost in lost revenues from transfers , tax subsidies , and incentives , or from additional spending , which should be weighed against alternative uses of resources .

many of the regulatory changes discussed—relating , for example , to unions or to practices affecting labor mobility—are controversial and involve a trade - off between benefits to labor income and efficiency costs of intervening in a market economy .

wages at the bottom and , to a lesser extent , the middle of the wage distribution have grown slowly relative to those at the high end over the past 40 years , and this slow wage growth , along with a decline in the labor share of income , has contributed to a growing inequality of income .

the evidence on the causes of wage stagnation for lower - wage workers points to technological advancement as the most direct primary cause .

globalization appeared to have smaller effects than technological advancement , although it increased overall income inequality by increasing incomes at the top .

the decline in wage - setting institutions had relatively small effects and some of these effects can be traced to an indirect effect of technological change that affected unions and the large firm wage premium .

immigration changes appeared to have little or no effect .

a decline in labor mobility appeared to make a small contribution .

a variety of policy options have different promises and drawbacks .

perhaps the most successful policies , at least based on experience , are transfer programs , including the earned income credit , which is targeted to low - income wage earners .

these programs involve potentially large costs and may require raising taxes on higher - income individuals .

there is only limited evidence of the effects of a universal basic income and it would be costly if not phased out .

past evidence on a phased - out program found some negative effects on work effort .

experience with the minimum wage , at least at prior levels , has indicated an ability to transfer income with relatively small effects on unemployment , although the effectiveness of increases in the federal minimum wage is limited by widespread state adoption of higher minimum wage rates .

some policies , such as employer wage subsidies , worker training and employment programs , and geographic incentives , have had a mixed or relatively poor track record .

other proposals have been largely untried ( such as a federal job guarantee and wage insurance ) ; a job guarantee could cost several hundred billion dollars a year , according to estimates , and present some potentially problematic effects on the private economy , as well as difficulties in administering the program .

some of the more limited proposals may be successful but have small effects .

policies to benefit lower - income individuals through tax cuts to stimulate economic growth have not appeared to be particularly successful at addressing slow wage growth for low - wage workers .

