coal mining and production in the united states during in the 20 th century contributed to the nation meeting its energy requirements and left a legacy of unreclaimed lands .

prior to the enactment of the surface mining control and reclamation act in 1977 ( smcra ; p.l .

95-87 ) , no federal law had authorized reclamation requirements for coal mining operators to restore lands and waters affected by mining practices .

title iv of smcra established the abandoned mine lands ( aml ) program to address the public health , safety , and environmental hazards at these legacy abandoned coal mining sites .

the objective of reclamation under title iv of smcra is to restore lands or waters adversely affected by past coal mining to a condition that would mitigate potential hazards to public health , safety , and the environment .

the actions necessary to attain these objectives may vary from site to site depending on the nature of the hazards and the technical or engineering feasibility of reclamation alternatives to mitigate the hazards .

the severity of the hazard would also determine the prioritization of funding for reclamation .

examples of reclamation activities include removing or stabilizing coal mining waste piles , re - contouring and re - vegetating affected lands , mitigating the potential for subsidence , filling voids or sealing tunnels , and treating acid mine drainage .

the costs to complete reclamation at a particular site would depend on the scope and nature of actions necessary to mitigate the potential hazards and any technical or engineering challenges to implement the selected actions .

the abandoned mine reclamation fund , established under section 401 of smcra , provides funding to eligible states and tribes for the reclamation of surface mining impacts associated with historical mining of coal .

title iv of smcra applies only to sites that were abandoned or left unreclaimed prior to the enactment of smcra on august 3 , 1977 , and for which there is no continuing reclamation responsibility under other federal or state law .

smcra also established the office of surface mining reclamation and enforcement ( osmre ) in the department of the interior .

osmre is the federal office responsible for administering smcra in coordination with eligible states and tribes .

the balance of the abandoned mine reclamation fund is provided by fees collected on coal mining operators in coal producing states .

the fee rates in current law are based on a per - ton fee for the volume of coal produced at a mine annually or the percentage value of the coal produced at a mine , whichever is less each year as determined by the secretary of the interior .

smcra authorizes annual grants to eligible states and tribes for the reclamation of abandoned coal mining sites .

smcra also authorizes two sources of federal financial assistance to three united mine workers of america ( umwa ) coal mineworker health benefits plans and the umwa pension plan .

these federal payments augment employer contributions to these plans .

interest transfers from the abandoned mine reclamation fund have supported the umwa health benefit plans since fy1996 , supplemented by payments from the general fund of the u.s. treasury since fy2008 .

as amended in the 116 th congress , smcra authorizes additional general fund payments to support the umwa pension plan .

the coal reclamation fee collection authorization is set to expire at the end of fy2021 absent the enactment of legislation extending the sunset date .

if the authority to collect reclamation fees is not reauthorized , smcra directs the remaining balance of the fund to be distributed among states and tribes receiving grants from the abandoned mine reclamation fund based on the fy2022 grant amounts .

the fy2022 grant amounts would depend on the fees collected in fy2021 , and payments from the fund would begin in fy2023 , continuing annually until the balance has been expended .

given that scenario , reclamation grants to eligible states would continue for some years .

this report discusses funding for eligible states and tribes , reclamation priorities , annual receipts and appropriations , reauthorization issues , and other related bills that would authorize the use of the existing balance of the fund .

this report does not discuss issues associated with title v of smcra , which authorized the regulation of coal mining sites operating after the law's enactment .

smcra requires coal mining operators regulated under title v to be responsible for providing financial assurance for completing site reclamation .

coal mining sites regulated under smcra after august 3 , 1977 , are ineligible for grants from the abandoned mine reclamation fund .

if financial assurances are inadequate to meet reclamation needs , the availability of federal funding to pay reclamation costs would be subject to the enactment of legislation .

section 401 of smcra established the abandoned mine reclamation fund as a trust fund within the u.s. treasury .

as enacted in 1977 , smcra originally did not authorize the abandoned mine reclamation fund as an interest - bearing trust fund .

the abandoned mine reclamation act of 1990 amended smcra for various purposes and authorized the investment of the unexpended balance of the abandoned mine reclamation fund in u.s. treasury securities .

the portion of the balance available for investment in u.s. treasury securities is the amount that the secretary of the interior determines is not needed to meet current withdrawals .

interest began accruing on the invested balance in fy1992 .

states and tribes report site specific information to osmre about the reclamation of eligible aml projects .

osmre hosts the abandoned mine land inventory system ( amlis ) database that presents information on total eligible mine reclamation costs by state and tribe , which may be categorized by unfunded , funded , and completed costs .

the costs to complete reclamation at a particular site would depend on the scope and nature of actions necessary to mitigate the potential hazards and any technical or engineering challenges to implement the selected actions .

osmre tracks aml reclamation project costs under three separate categories to identify the costs of completed projects and to estimate funding needs for future projects: 1 .

"unfunded costs" are based on estimates by states and tribes to implement projects for which funding is not available or has not been approved by osmre .

2 .

"funded costs" are based on estimates by states and tribes to implement projects for which funding is available and for which osmre has approved the funds .

3 .

"completed costs" are the actual costs of projects upon completion that states or tribes report to osmre .

according to amlis , the total unfunded costs for uncertified and certified states and tribes was approximately $12.4 billion as of january 21 , 2020 .

of that total amount , the total unfunded cost estimates for uncertified states were approximately $12 billion , representing roughly 97% of the remaining unfunded reclamation needs .

unfunded reclamation cost estimates depend on the number of unreclaimed sites and on the severity of the reclamation problems as defined by the "priority" level , per section 403 , for each unclaimed site in the state ( table 1 ) .

uncertified states reported priority 2 costs as approximately $7.5 billion , or approximately 62% of the total uncertified unfunded reclamation costs .

the remaining 38% of the unfunded costs for uncertified states are associated with priority 1 and priority 3 issues .

uncertified states reported priority 1 issues as the smallest portion of unfunded cost estimates , but these sites generally represent the most severe hazards and most urgent priorities .

uncertified states reported the total unfunded reclamation cost for priority 1 sites as roughly $1.8 billion .

two states , pennsylvania and west virginia , reported combined unfunded reclamation costs as $8.4 billion , representing approximately 66% of the total unfunded reclamation costs reported for all uncertified states .

pennsylvania reported the highest unfunded reclamation costs of any state , as reclamation cost estimates exceed $5 billion .

osmre periodically updates funding estimates for sites in the amlis inventory .

thus , the number of priority sites in each funding category may change periodically .

future funding requirements may change as unforeseen contamination and remediation may be discovered or arise .

recent congressional hearing testimony by a pennsylvania state official describes the challenges state programs face when attempting to catalog aml issues: identifying and categorizing aml sites was among the first objectives for the aml program at its outset , and many of the cost estimates contained in the federal eamlis inventory were developed when the sites were initially inventoried in the early to mid - 1980s .

with time , the scale and depth of the aml problem has become better understood .

however , it is in the nature of aml's that previously unknown sites will continue to manifest ( particularly those associated with abandoned underground mines ) and that known sites will continue to degrade , both of which increase the number of sites and the total cost to complete remaining aml reclamation work .

with advancements in technology , the collection of more complete maps and mining records , and increased awareness and identification of these sites by local residents , many additional aml hazards have been and will continue to be identified and added to the aml inventory .

annual reclamation grants to states and tribes are based on the statutory formula described previously , and these grants are not based on reclamation needs .

for example , several uncertified states reported similar unfunded reclamation costs: indiana , illinois , oklahoma , and missouri .

the fy2020 grants received by those states , however , varied between $2.82 million and $11.7 million .

comparing fy2020 grants to the total unfunded reclamation costs suggests that some states or tribes may require annual grants for additional years or decades to completely fund reclamation needs .

for example , kansas reported $810 million in unfunded reclamation costs while receiving the minimum program make up fund amount of $2.82 million in fy2020 .

states and tribes may identify additional reclamation needs post - certification ( table 2 ) .

a wyoming state official described the ongoing reclamation challenges that the state continues to manage under their aml program .

according to his written testimony , he described the state's awareness of aml issues as improved since the state achieved certification in 1984: wyoming became a certified state under title iv on may 25 , 1984 .

wyoming became certified on the basis of the best available information at the time .

early work to develop the inventory was essentially done through "boots on the ground. .

as our understanding of historic mining in the state has improved our aml inventory has continued to grow .

eligible umwa members ( including family members ) receive post - retirement health and pension benefits from one of three multiemployer health benefit plans and one multiemployer pension plan .

these plans include the combined benefit fund , the 1992 benefit plan , the 1993 benefit plan , and the 1974 umwa pension plan .

these plans are funded by premiums paid by employer contributions and two sources of federal financial assistance authorized under smcra .

section 402 ( h ) authorizes transfers of interest from the abandoned mine reclamation fund to the umwa health plans on an annual basis if the annual contributions from employers are not sufficient to cover liabilities for benefit coverage each year .

section 402 ( i ) also authorizes supplemental payments from the general fund of the u.s. treasury on an annual basis if the interest that accrues on the balance of the abandoned mine reclamation fund is not sufficient to ensure benefit coverage each year .

general fund payments to the umwa plans and to certified states and tribes combined are subject to a statutory cap of $750 million per year .

each of these sources is authorized in smcra as permanent appropriations that result in direct federal spending ( i.e. , mandatory spending not subject to discretionary spending controlled through annual appropriations acts ) .

figure 2 shows the transfers of monies from the abandoned mine reclamation fund and the general fund to eligible states and tribes for aml reclamation projects and other uses and to the umwa plans .

appropriations from the abandoned mine reclamation fund include uncertified state shares , historic coal funds , minimum program make up funds , interest transfers to umwa health benefit plans , and osmre administrative program funding ( figure 3 and figure a - 1 ) .

annual grants to uncertified states from the abandoned mine reclamation fund are permanent appropriations except for the osmre program funding , which congress provides to osmre through annual appropriations .

total appropriations from the abandoned mine reclamation fund from fy2008 to fy2020 have totaled approximately $3.1 billion ( table 3 ) .

permanent appropriations from the general fund of the u.s. treasury include in lieu state share payments to certified states and tribes and umwa supplemental payments .

the general fund also provided prior balance payments to certified states and tribes and uncertified states in several installments from fy2008 through fy2014 , with a retroactive payment to the state of wyoming in fy2016 ( see the discussion of "prior balance payments" earlier in this report ) .

from fy2008 to fy2020 , general fund payments authorized in title iv of smcra totaled approximately $6.0 billion ( table 3 ) .

appropriations vary from year to year based on statutory requirements ( such as the phase - in reductions and payments ) , the amount of coal fees collected in a given year ( which determine the amount available for state and tribal payments ) , and the amount of supplement payments required for umwa health benefit plans ( figure 4 ) .

the bipartisan american miners act of 2019 authorized annual payments from the general fund to the umwa pension plan retroactively back to fy2017 and subsequent fiscal years , among other provisions .

the fy2020 payment of $1.6 billion to the umwa pension plan included cumulative payments from fy2017 through fy2020 .

the amount available for each of these fiscal years was subject to the $750 million annual cap and was based on the remainder within the cap after the certified state and tribal payments and the supplemental payments for the umwa health benefit plans .

the $1.6 billion payment to the umwa pension plan in fy2020 was the largest annual general fund payment authorized under title iv of smcra ( figure 4 ) .

for fy2021 and subsequent fiscal years , general fund payments to certified states and tribes and the umwa health and pension benefit plans will remain subject to the $750 million annual cap .

certified state and tribal payments would cease after fy2022 in current law absent the reauthorization of coal reclamation fees upon which these payments are based .

since fy2008 , supplemental payments to umwa health benefit plans from the general fund have contributed a greater amount than have interest transfers from the abandoned mine reclamation fund ( table 3 ) .

absent reauthorization of the coal reclamation fees , as the balance from the abandoned mine reclamation fund is paid down after fy2023 , the interest payments would continue to have a relatively smaller contribution to umwa health plans .

thus , the supplemental payments from the general fund for the umwa health plans would continue to contribute a larger share of contributions to the plans as the amount of interest payments decrease .

from fy2008 to fy2020 , umwa health and pension plans received approximately $3.91 billion of the total $6.04 billion in general fund payments authorized in title iv of smcra ( table 3 ) .

that amount was nearly twice the total amount of grants paid to uncertified states from the abandoned mine reclamation fund ( approximately $2.03 billion from the aggregate of the uncertified state shares , historic coal funds , and minimum program make up funds for fy2008 to fy2020 ) for the reclamation of abandoned coal mining sites during that same time period .

whereas funding for reclamation grants is dependent on coal reclamation fee collections , most of the umwa plan funding is tied to the $750 million annual cap on general fund payments , which are not financed with these fees .

omb estimates that coal reclamation fee receipts would continue to decline through fy2021 , after which time the fee collection authority expires in current law .

the budget control act of 2011 provides a measure to control federal spending by placing a percent reduction on permanent appropriations to remain within prescribed caps .

the percent reduction may vary each year depending on how much of a reduction is needed to remain within the cap .

sequestration reductions apply to permanent appropriations from general fund and abandoned mine reclamation fund permanent appropriations as of fy2013 .

congress has also appropriated monies from the general fund for the abandoned mine land reclamation economic development pilot program .

these appropriations have been authorized in annual appropriations and are not authorized in title iv of smcra .

congress previously reauthorized the fee under the surface mining control and reclamation act amendments of 2006 , and that authorization is set to expire at the end of fy2021 .

some members of congress have introduced legislation in the 116 th congress that would reauthorize the coal reclamation fee and authorize funds from the existing balance of the abandoned mine reclamation fund for economic and community development .

various issues are discussed in the following sections .

given that the balance of the abandoned mine reclamation fund is less than 20% of the estimated unfunded reclamation needs , congress may consider whether and how to fund the remaining coal reclamation needs .

abandoned coal mining sites that remain unreclaimed are expected to continue to pose hazards to public health , safety , and the environment .

if the coal reclamation fees are not reauthorized beyond fy2021 , section 401 of smcra directs the unappropriated balance of the abandoned mine reclamation fund to be distributed among eligible states over a series of fiscal years beginning in fy2023 based on what the state received in fy2022 as its share of fee collections from the prior year .

those payments would continue in that same amount each fiscal year thereafter until the balance of the fund is expended .

in fy2020 , osmre reported that the unappropriated balance of the abandoned mine reclamation fund was approximately $2.2 billion .

reclamation grants to eligible states therefore would likely continue for some years , even if coal reclamation fees were not reauthorized after fy2021 .

if the fee collection is not reauthorized , the fees collected in fy2022 will dictate the annual rate of grants to eligible states starting in fy2023 until the unappropriated balance is expended .

those amounts are based on coal production or the value of the coal produced in fy2022 , whichever is less .

if the coal reclamation fees are not reauthorized , one potential option for congress would be to appropriate from the general fund to meet remaining needs after the balance of the abandoned mine reclamation fund is expended .

congress was faced with a similar issue in the debate over the reauthorization of superfund excise taxes for the superfund trust fund under cercla ( p.l .

96-510 ) .

from the enactment of cercla in 1980 through fy1995 , the balance of the superfund trust fund was provided by revenues from the collection of a superfund excise tax on petroleum , chemical feedstocks , corporate income , transfers from the general fund , and other receipts .

the authority to collect those superfund excise taxes expired in fy1995 , leaving revenues from the general fund as the primary source of money to the superfund trust fund .

the abandoned mine land reclamation fee extension act ( s. 1193 ) , introduced in the 116 th congress , would amend section 402 ( b ) of smcra , extending the fee collection authorization date until september 30 , 2036 .

as introduced , s. 1193 would authorize osmre to collect coal reclamation fees under section 402 , and osmre would begin fixed payments from the unappropriated balance on the abandoned mine reclamation fund to uncertified states beginning in fy2023 based upon their fy2022 grants , according to section 401 ( f ) ( 2 ) ( b ) .

the surface mining control and reclamation act amendments of 2019 ( h.r .

4248 ) would amend section 402 ( b ) of smcra and section 401 ( f ) of smcra .

this bill would extend the fee collection authorization date until september 30 , 2036 , and grants to eligible states and tribes would continue to be paid out annually according to the statutory formula until after fy2037 .

the bill would also increase the minimum payments to uncertified states from $3 million to $5 million and authorize compensation to uncertified states from the abandoned mine reclamation fund for the total amount reduced by sequestration between fy2013 and fy2018 .

in fy2020 , 11 uncertified states together received approximately $21.9 million in minimum program make up funds , and 3 other uncertified states received less than $5 million .

raising the cap would increase payments to uncertified states receiving less than the current $3 million cap and may change the number of uncertified states eligible for minimum program make up funds .

the extent to which more uncertified states become eligible would depend on future coal production in that state , coal production in certified states contributing to historic payments , and the value of coal generated .

in the event the congress enacts legislation reauthorizing the coal reclamation fee , the adequacy of those receipts to pay for the remaining unfunded reclamation costs would depend on domestic coal production , the duration of fee extension , and the emergence of additional reclamation needs .

given that the unfunded reclamation costs may be updated or subject to change based on the discovery or the occurrence of new health and safety or environmental issues , predicting the duration to reauthorize the fees to fund the remaining unfunded reclamation costs is challenging .

additionally , eligible states and tribes continuously update unfunded costs estimates as new problems are discovered or arise .

other legislation introduced in the 116 th congress would use a portion of the unappropriated balance of the abandoned mine reclamation fund to provide funding for aml reclamation projects that promote economic and community development , as well as the purposes and priorities of reclamation described in section 403 of smcra .

however , some have argued expending funding for aml projects to prioritize economic and community development deviates from the original congressional intent of prioritizing the reclamation of lands and waters impacted by historic coal mining sites to address health and safety issues .

congress authorized the abandoned mine land reclamation economic development pilot program ( aml pilot program ) in the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 to determine the feasibility of reclaiming abandoned coal mining sites to facilitate economic and community development .

congress provides funding for the aml pilot program through annual appropriations from the general fund of the u.s. treasury , not from the abandoned mine reclamation fund financed with coal reclamation fees .

from fy2016 to fy2020 , congress has appropriated a total $540 million from the general fund to the aml pilot program .

for states and tribes that receive discretionary appropriations for the aml pilot program , those funds are in addition to the permanent appropriations as reclamation grants to eligible states and tribes from the abandoned mine reclamation fund .

annual appropriations have limited the use of aml pilot program grants to fund reclamation projects only in appalachian counties of eligible states in areas where the project would have the potential to facilitate economic or community development .

smcra authorizes the broader use of grants from the abandoned mine reclamation fund to fund reclamation projects in any counties within an eligible state .

in the 116 th congress , house and senate versions of the revitalizing the economy of coal communities by leveraging local activities and investing more act of 2019 ( reclaim act ) have been introduced ( h.r .

2156 and s. 1232 ) .

those bills would authorize $1 billion over five years from the existing unappropriated balance of the abandoned mine reclamation fund for the reclamation of abandoned coal mining sites as a means to facilitate economic and community development in states and tribes with eligible reclamation programs under title iv of smcra .

the reclaim act would distribute $195 million annually to uncertified states based on historic payments and averaged state share grants .

house and senate versions of the reclaim act differ by the allocation of these funds to uncertified states .

for uncertified states to obligate reclaim monies on aml projects , the state would be required to demonstrate that those projects satisfy the reclamation priorities described in section 403 and would contribute to future economic or community development .

both introduced versions of the reclaim act would provide $5 million annually to certified states and tribes .

certified states and tribes would submit an application for funds , and osmre would determine the distribution of those funds based on the demonstration of needs .

neither introduced version of the reclaim act would reauthorize the collection of the coal reclamation fees .

reclaim grants to eligible states and tribes would be in addition to the annual grants paid to states and tribes .

if the reclaim act were enacted and the fee collection authority were not reauthorized , the unappropriated balance of the abandoned mine reclamation fund would be paid out sooner compared to a scenario where neither reclaim nor fee reauthorization legislation were enacted .

both house and senate versions of the reclaim act would increase the minimum program make up funds to uncertified states from the abandoned mine reclamation fund from $3 million to $5 million annually .

