in the past , congress has regularly acted to extend expired or expiring temporary tax provisions .

collectively , these temporary tax provisions are often referred to as "tax extenders. .

there are 33 temporary tax provisions scheduled to expire at the end of 2020 .

this report discusses six provisions related to the individual income tax: ( 1 ) the tax exclusion for canceled mortgage debt , ( 2 ) mortgage insurance premium deductibility , ( 3 ) the above - the - line deduction for qualified tuition and related expenses , ( 4 ) the credit for health insurance costs of eligible individuals , ( 5 ) the medical expense deduction adjusted gross income ( agi ) floor of 7.5% , and ( 6 ) the exclusion for income of certain state and local tax rebates and reimbursement for volunteer firefighters and emergency medical responders .

these six provisions were extended through 2020 in the further consolidated appropriations act , 2020 ( p.l .

116-94 ) .

the first three provisions had expired at the end of 2017 and have been included in recent tax extenders legislation .

two provisions are housing related .

the provision allowing homeowners to deduct mortgage insurance premiums was first enacted in 2006 ( effective for 2007 ) .

the provision allowing qualified canceled mortgage debt income associated with a primary residence to be excluded from income was first enacted in 2007 .

both provisions were temporary when first enacted , but in recent years have been extended as part of tax extenders legislation .

the above - the - line deduction for qualified tuition and related expenses was first added as a temporary provision in the economic growth and tax relief reconciliation act of 2001 ( egtrra ; p.l .

107-16 ) , and has regularly been extended since .

the further consolidated appropriations act , 2020 , also extended through 2020 individual provisions that expired in 2019 and 2018 .

the credit for health insurance costs of eligible individuals ( also known as the health coverage tax credit [hctc] ) was scheduled to expire after 2019 , whereas the medical expense deduction adjusted gross income ( agi ) floor of 7.5% had expired at the end of 2018 .

the act also reinstated for one year , and expanded , a provision allowing for the exclusion from income of certain state and local tax rebates and reimbursement for volunteer firefighters and emergency medical responders that had expired in 2010 .

the three provisions that expired in 2018 , 2019 , or 2010 were not in the previous tax extenders legislation .

the health coverage tax credit , which applied to recipients of trade adjustment assistance , among others , was last extended through 2019 by the trade preferences extension act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-27 ) .

the 7.5% floor for itemized deductions for medical expenses was provided through 2018 by the 2017 tax revision ( p.l .

115-97 , commonly known as the tax cuts and jobs act ) .

the exclusion of reimbursements for volunteer firefighters and emergency medical respondents was originally enacted in the mortgage forgiveness debt relief act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-142 ) .

in recent years , congress has chosen to extend most , if not all , recently expired or expiring provisions as part of tax extenders legislation .

the most recent tax extenders package is in the taxpayer certainty and disaster tax relief act of 2019 , division q of the further consolidated appropriations act , 2020 ( p.l .

116-94 ) .

the temporary reinstatement of the exclusion for volunteer firefighters and emergency medical responders was in a different part of the act , division o , the setting every community up for retirement enhancement ( "secure" ) act of 2019 .

the estimated cost of the extensions of temporary individual tax provisions enacted in the further consolidated appropriations act , 2020 ( p.l .

116-94 ) is provided in table 1 .

as described above , the first three provisions had expired at the end of 2017 .

thus , they were extended for three years ( with two years of the three - year extension being retroactive ) .

the 7.5% medical expense deduction floor had expired at the end of 2018 , meaning that one year of the two - year extension was retroactive .

the health care tax credit was scheduled to expire at the end of 2019 , and was extended for one year .

the provision for volunteer firefighters and emergency medical responders is scheduled to be effective for one year ( 2020 ) .

historically , when all or part of a taxpayer's mortgage debt has been forgiven , the amount canceled has been included in the taxpayer's gross income .

this income is typically referred to as canceled mortgage debt income .

canceled ( or forgiven ) mortgage debt is common with a short sale , in which a homeowner agrees to sell a house and transfer the proceeds to the lender in exchange for the lender relieving the homeowner from repaying any debt in excess of the sale proceeds .

for example , in a short sale , a homeowner with a $300,000 mortgage may be able to sell the house for $250,000 .

the lender would receive the $250,000 from the home sale and forgive the remaining $50,000 in mortgage debt .

lenders report the canceled debt to the internal revenue service ( irs ) using form 1099-c. a copy of the 1099-c is also sent to the borrower , who in general must include the amount listed in his or her gross income in the year of discharge .

to understand why forgiven debt has historically been taxable , it may be helpful to explain why it is viewed as income from an economic perspective .

income is a measure of the increase in an individual's purchasing power over a designated period of time .

when individuals experience a reduction in their debts , their purchasing power has increased ( because they no longer have to make payments ) .

effectively , their disposable income has increased .

from an economic standpoint , it is irrelevant whether a person's debt was reduced via a direct transfer of money to the borrower ( eg , wage income ) that was then used to pay down the debt , or whether it was reduced because the lender forgave a portion of the outstanding balance .

both have the same effect , and thus both are subject to taxation .

the mortgage forgiveness debt relief act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-142 ) , signed into law on december 20 , 2007 , temporarily excluded qualified canceled mortgage debt income that is associated with a primary residence from taxation .

thus , the act allowed taxpayers who did not qualify for one of several existing exceptions to exclude canceled mortgage debt from gross income .

the provision was originally effective for debt discharged before january 1 , 2010 .

since then , the provision has regularly been extended as part of the tax extenders .

the exclusion was most recently extended through december 31 , 2020 , in the taxpayer certainty and disaster tax relief act of 2019 , enacted as division q of the further consolidated appropriations act , 2020 ( p.l .

116-94 ) .

the rationales for extending the exclusion are to minimize hardship for households in distress and lessen the risk that nontax homeowner retention efforts are thwarted by tax policy .

the exclusion's supporters may also argue that extending the exclusion would continue to assist the recoveries of the housing market and overall economy .

the exclusion's opponents may argue that extending the provision would make debt forgiveness more attractive for homeowners , which could encourage homeowners to be less responsible about fulfilling debt obligations .

some may also view the exclusion as unfair because its benefits depend on whether a homeowner is able to negotiate a debt cancelation , the taxpayer's income tax bracket , and whether the taxpayer retains ownership of the house following the debt cancellation .

traditionally , homeowners who itemize their tax deductions have been able to deduct the interest paid on their mortgages , as well as any property taxes they pay .

beginning in 2007 , homeowners could also deduct qualifying mortgage insurance premiums as a result of the tax relief and health care act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-432 ) .

specifically , homeowners could effectively treat qualifying mortgage insurance premiums as mortgage interest , thus making the premiums deductible if the homeowner itemized , and if the homeowner's adjusted gross income was below a certain threshold ( $55,000 for single , and $110,000 for married filing jointly ) .

originally , the deduction was only to be available for 2007 , but it was extended several times .

the deduction was extended through december 31 , 2020 , in the taxpayer certainty and disaster tax relief act of 2019 , enacted as division q of the further consolidated appropriations act , 2020 ( p.l .

116-94 ) .

taxpayers of all ages may be less likely to claim the mortgage insurance premium deduction compared to prior periods because other provisions of the 2017 tax revision , including a higher standard deduction ( in part as a trade - off for elimination of personal exemptions ) and a cap on the deduction of state and local taxes , reduced the expected number of itemizers ( projected to fall from about one - third of individual income tax returns to 11% ) .

a justification for allowing the deduction of mortgage insurance premiums is that it helps to promote homeownership and , relatedly , the recovery of the housing market following the december 2007-june 2009 great recession .

homeownership is often argued to bestow certain benefits to society , such as higher property values , lower crime , and higher civic participation .

homeownership may also promote a more even distribution of income and wealth , as well as establish greater individual financial security .

furthermore , homeownership may have a positive effect on living conditions , which can lead to a healthier population .

with regard to the first justification , it is not clear that the deduction for mortgage insurance premiums affects the homeownership rate .

economists have identified the high transaction costs associated with a home purchase—mostly resulting from the down payment requirement , but also from closing costs—as the primary barrier to homeownership .

the ability to deduct insurance premiums does not lower this barrier—most lenders will require mortgage insurance if the borrower's down payment is less than 20% regardless of whether the premiums are deductible .

the deduction may allow buyers to borrow more , however , because they can deduct the higher associated premiums and therefore afford a higher housing payment .

concerning the second justification , it is also not clear that the deduction for mortgage insurance premiums is still needed to assist in the housing market's recovery .

based on the s&p corelogic case - shiller u.s. national composite index , home prices have generally increased since the bottom of the market following the great recession .

in addition , the available housing inventory is now slightly below its historical level .

both of these indicators suggest that the market is stronger than when the provision was enacted .

economists have noted that owner - occupied housing is already heavily subsidized via tax and nontax programs .

to the degree that owner - occupied housing is oversubsidized , it could be argued that extending the deduction for mortgage insurance premiums would lead to a greater misallocation of resources that are directed toward the housing industry .

this provision allows taxpayers to deduct up to $4,000 of qualified tuition and related expenses for postsecondary education ( both undergraduate and graduate ) from their gross income .

expenses that qualify for this deduction include tuition payments and any fees required for enrollment at an eligible education institution .

other expenses , including room and board expenses , are generally not qualifying expenses for this deduction .

the deduction is "above - the - line," that is , it is not restricted to itemizers .

individuals who could be claimed as dependents , married persons filing separately , and nonresident aliens who do not elect to be treated as resident aliens do not qualify for the deduction , in part to avoid multiple claims on a single set of expenses .

the amount that can be claimed for the deduction is generally reduced by any tax - free assistance , if that assistance can be used to pay for expenses that qualify for the deduction .

tax - free assistance includes tax - free grants and scholarships ( including pell grants ) , employer - provided educational assistance , and veterans' educational assistance .

the maximum deduction taxpayers can claim depends on their income level .

taxpayers can deduct up to $4,000 if their income is $65,000 or less ( $130,000 or less if married filing jointly ) ; or $2,000 if their income is between $65,000 and $80,000 ( $130,000 and $160,000 if married filing jointly ) .

taxpayers with income above $80,000 ( $160,000 for married joint filers ) are ineligible for the deduction .

these income limits are not adjusted for inflation .

the above - the - line deduction for qualified tuition and related expenses was enacted temporarily by the economic growth and tax relief reconciliation act of 2001 ( p.l .

107-16 ) .

it has been extended a number of times .

most recently , the deduction was extended through december 31 , 2020 , in the taxpayer certainty and disaster tax relief act of 2019 , enacted as division q of the further consolidated appropriations act , 2020 ( p.l .

116-94 ) .

one criticism of education tax benefits is that the taxpayer is faced with a confusing choice of deductions and credits and tax - favored education savings plans , and that these benefits should be consolidated .

some tax reform proposals have consolidated these benefits into a single education credit .

taxpayers may claim the tuition and fees deduction instead of education tax credits for the same student .

these credits include permanent tax credits: the american opportunity tax credit ( aotc ) and lifetime learning credit .

the aotc is directed at undergraduate education and is limited to the first four years of postsecondary education .

the lifetime learning credit ( 20% of up to $10,000 ) is not limited in years of coverage .

these credits are generally more advantageous than the deduction , except for higher - income taxpayers , in part because the credits are phased out at lower levels of income than the deduction .

for example , for single taxpayers , the lifetime learning credit begins phasing out at $59,000 for 2020 .

the deduction benefits taxpayers according to their marginal tax rate .

students usually have relatively low incomes , but they may be part of families in higher tax brackets .

the maximum amount of deductible expenses limits the tax benefit's impact on individuals attending schools with comparatively high tuitions and fees .

because the income limits are not adjusted for inflation , the deduction might be available to fewer taxpayers over time if extended in its current form .

the distribution of the deduction in table 2 indicates that some of the benefit is concentrated in the income range where the lifetime learning credit has phased out , but also that significant deductions are claimed at lower income levels .

because the lifetime learning credit is preferable to the deduction at lower income levels , it seems likely that confusion about the education benefits may have caused taxpayers not to choose the optimal education benefit .

the credit for health insurance costs of eligible individuals , commonly known as the health coverage tax credit ( hctc ) , reduces the cost of qualified health insurance for eligible individuals .

to be eligible to claim the hctc , taxpayers must be ( 1 ) an eligible trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) recipient ; ( 2 ) an eligible alternative taa recipient or reemployment taa recipient ; or ( 3 ) an eligible pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) pension recipient .

additionally , an individual is not eligible for the hctc if they have access to "other specified coverage," which includes coverage for which an employer ( or former employer ) incurs 50% of the cost as well as medicare , medicaid , the children's health insurance programs , and other federal and military health or medical benefit plans .

under this provision , eligible taxpayers are allowed a refundable tax credit for 72.5% of the premiums they pay for qualified health insurance for themselves and their family members .

eligible taxpayers with qualified health insurance may claim the tax credit ( 1 ) when tax returns are filed or ( 2 ) as advance payments , on a monthly basis , throughout the year .

this latter option helps taxpayers pay for health plan premiums as they become due .

the credit is not available for months beginning on or after january 1 , 2021 .

the hctc was originally authorized by the trade act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-210 ) .

the credit has been extended and modified several times .

extensions or modifications have been made in trade adjustment assistance legislation as well as tax extenders legislation .

the trade preferences extension act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-27 ) extended the hctc through december 31 , 2019 , and also made changes to address the interaction between the hctc and the premium tax credit established under the patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) .

the credit was extended through december 31 , 2020 , in the taxpayer certainty and disaster tax relief act of 2019 , enacted as division q of the further consolidated appropriations act , 2020 ( p.l .

116-94 ) .

individuals are allowed to deduct unreimbursed medical expenses above a specific income threshold if they itemize their deductions .

prior to 2013 , these deductions were allowed only for amounts in excess of 7.5% of income .

expenses reimbursed by an employer or insurance company are not eligible for deduction .

the patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) increased the floor for individuals claiming the itemized deduction for medical expenses from 7.5% to 10% of adjusted gross income ( agi ) .

the higher floor went into effect for taxpayers under age 65 beginning for the 2013 tax year .

individuals 65 or older , however , were still able to claim the deduction under the lower , 7.5% floor for tax years 2013 through 2016 .

the 2017 tax revision ( p.l .

115-97 ) temporarily allowed all taxpayers ( not just those aged 65 or older ) to claim the deduction subject to the 7.5% floor for the 2017-2018 tax years .

the taxpayer certainty and disaster tax relief act of 2019 , enacted as division q of the further consolidated appropriations act , 2020 ( p.l .

116-94 ) , extends the 7.5% floor for all taxpayers through 2020 .

after 2020 , under current law , the floor is scheduled to increase to 10% of agi for all taxpayers .

a complicated set of rules governs the expenses eligible for the deduction .

generally speaking , these expenses include amounts paid by the taxpayer on behalf of himself or herself , his or her spouse , and eligible dependents for the following purposes: ( 1 ) health insurance premiums ( including employee payments for employer - sponsored health plans , medicare part b premiums , and other self - paid premiums ) ; ( 2 ) diagnosis , treatment , mitigation , or prevention of disease , or for the purpose of affecting any structure or function of the body , including dental care ; ( 3 ) prescription drugs and insulin ( but not over - the - counter medicines ) ; ( 4 ) transportation primarily for and essential to medical care ; and ( 5 ) lodging away from home primarily for and essential to medical care , up to $50 per night for each individual .

the current lower floor is for all taxpayers , and future extensions , if any , could make the lower floor general , or limit it to taxpayers 65 and over .

based on a 2011 special study of deductions by age , 58% of dollars deducted were by those 65 and over , who made up 39% of taxpayers claiming the deduction .

taxpayers of all ages may be less likely to claim the medical expense deduction compared to prior periods because , as mentioned previously , other provisions of the 2017 tax revision , including a higher standard deduction ( in part as a trade - off for elimination of personal exemptions ) and a cap on the deduction of state and local taxes , reduced the expected number of itemizers ( projected to fall from about one - third of taxpayers to 11% ) .

these provisions are slated to expire after 2025 , but are in place for the next few years .

the likelihood of itemizing generally increases with income .

however , the agi floor for the medical expenses deduction reduces the likelihood that very high - income individuals would claim the deduction .

for all taxpayers , medical expenses alone might not make it worthwhile to itemize unless they can also claim other itemized deductions ( eg , home mortgage interest or state and local taxes ) .

the mortgage forgiveness debt relief act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-142 ) provided an exclusion from gross income of certain benefits for members of qualified voluntary emergency response organizations .

these payments include the forgiveness or rebate of state and local income and property taxes or payments by states or their political subdivisions to reimburse for expenses .

the exclusion was limited to $30 a month .

the provision disallowed any itemized deductions for the state and local taxes otherwise excluded .

this provision was enacted after a 2002 irs decision that a reduction in property taxes for volunteers who are emergency responders was includible in gross income .

the provision was temporary , effective from the date of enactment ( december 20 , 2007 ) through 2010 .

the provision was allowed to expire as scheduled .

the secure act of 2019 , enacted as division o of the further consolidated appropriations act , 2020 ( p.l .

116-94 ) , reinstated the provision for 2020 and increased the amount to $50 a month .

the reinstated provision is likely to have a wider scope than it previously did because of the reduction in the number of itemizers due to provisions of the 2017 tax act ( p.l .

115-97 ) , which is expected to reduce the share of itemizers , previously about one - third of taxpayers , to an estimated 11% .

