since the 1960s , congress has passed measures to authorize and fund international family planning related activities that give partici pants access to a broad range of contraceptive methods and services .

such assistance is intended to support broader u.s. international development priorities , as stated in section 104 of the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as amended ( p.l .

87-195 ) : the congress recognizes that poor health conditions and uncontrolled population growth can vitiate otherwise successful development efforts .

large families in developing countries are the result of complex social and economic factors which change relatively slowly among the poor majority least affected by economic progress , as well as the result of a lack of effective birth control .

therefore , effective family planning depends upon economic and social change as well as the delivery of services and is often a matter of political and religious sensitivity .

while every country has the right to determine its own policies with respect to population growth , voluntary population planning programs can make a substantial contribution to economic development , higher living standards , and improved health and nutrition .

section 104 goes on to authorize u.s. assistance to address the impact of population growth on development through family planning activities: in order to increase the opportunities and motivation for family planning and to reduce the rate of population growth , the president is authorized to furnish assistance , on such terms and conditions as he may determine , for voluntary population planning .

in addition to the provision of family planning information and services , including also information and services which relate to and support natural family planning methods , and the conduct of directly relevant demographic research , population planning programs shall emphasize motivation for small families .

according to the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , the primary federal agency charged with administering development assistance , family planning refers to "services , policies , information , attitudes , practices , and commodities , including contraceptives , that give women , men , couples , and adolescents the ability to avoid unintended pregnancy and choose whether and / or when to have a child. .

over time , family planning programs evolved beyond a strict focus on contraception to provide information and services on a wide range of issues that adversely affect sexual and reproductive health ( eg , female genital mutilation and cutting ( fgm / c ) , obstetric fistula , and gender based violence ( gbv ) ) .

this broader scope is reflected in the common categorization of these activities as reproductive health / family planning ( rh / fp ) assistance .

reproductive health refers to "all matters relating to the reproductive processes , functions , and system at all stages of life. .

the united states is the largest country donor to international fp / rh programs , providing $575 million dollars annually in recent years .

although u.s. funding for fp / rh activities has been consistent for years , the programs remain a subject of intense congressional debate .

while the law explicitly prohibits the use of funds to provide abortion or involuntary sterilization , some members of congress continue to express concern that fp / rh may indirectly support such activities as a result of funding fungibility .

other concerns relate to the cultural appropriateness of family planning activities and the relationship between fp / rh and broader global health and development assistance .

this report focuses on the scope and intended impact of u.s. bilateral international family planning programs administered by usaid .

it does not comprehensively address related legislative restrictions ( although a table listing such restrictions is provided in the appendix ) , or discuss aid channeled through multilateral organizations , such as the u.n. population fund ( unfpa ) .

usaid's fp / rh programs are administered through the office of population and reproductive health ( prh ) within the agency's global health bureau .

prh is responsible for setting technical and programmatic direction , providing technical leadership , and supporting field programming .

usaid distributes fp / rh commodities ( such as contraceptives ) and related services primarily through contracts and grant agreements with nongovernmental organizations .

the agency's technical and administrative staff oversee and monitor the work of implementing partners .

usaid fp / rh programming is organized around six priorities: 1 .

supporting healthy timing and spacing of pregnancy .

2 .

advancing community - based delivery of fp / rh services , such as deploying front - line community health workers to disseminate commodities and information , and to arrange referrals .

3 .

ensuring adequate supplies of contraceptives .

4 .

providing non - coerced access to surgical sterilization and long - acting reversible contraceptives ( larcs ) , such as intrauterine devices and contraceptive implants .

5 .

integrating fp / rh and hiv / aids programs to ensure that hiv - positive men and women have access to family planning information and services , for disease prevention and to prevent mother - to - child transmission of the virus .

6 .

integrating fp / rh and maternal and child health ( mch ) programs , specifically during the postpartum period , when there is considerable demand from new mothers for contraception to ensure pregnancy spacing .

in addition to these priorities , usaid fp / rh programs may also focus on related policy areas , such as efforts to end child marriage , female genital mutilation and cutting , and gender - based violence ; and related health goals , including the prevention of fistula .

bilateral fp / rh assistance is funded through a variety of accounts in annual department of state , foreign operations , and related programs ( sfops ) appropriations measures .

the global health programs ( ghp ) account is the funding channel for more than 90% of bilateral fp / rh aid while smaller amounts of bilateral fp / rh assistance are generally made available through other accounts .

department of state economic support fund ( esf ) monies are provided to select countries considered by the state department to be politically and strategically important .

in recent years , pakistan , afghanistan , and jordan have received esf funds for fp / rh activities .

in fy2017 , for example , afghanistan , which is a usaid fp / rh priority country , received $20 million in bilateral family planning assistance , all of which was provided through the esf .

over the past decade , enacted funding levels for bilateral international fp / rh aid have remained fairly consistent ( figure 2 ) .

although congressionally enacted funding has been constant since 2011 , the absence of foreign assistance authorization legislation in recent decades has made annual consideration of foreign aid appropriations the primary venue for debating international family planning and reproductive health policy .

controversies that are frequently debated as part of the appropriations process include codification of the mexico city policy / protecting life in global health assistance ( mcp / plglha ) , which is currently imposed through executive order ( see "selected issues for congress" ) ; the effect that withholding u.s. dollars as a result of such restrictions could have on access to voluntary family planning and other health services in developing countries ; and whether or not designating funding for contraceptive provision and family planning is the best approach to allocating global health funds .

members of congress hold varied perspectives on these issues .

some members have supported expanding access to fp / rh services , while others aim to increase restrictions on such services or reduce funding levels .

in addition to these perennial concerns , debate in the 116 th congress regarding fp / rh programs has addressed issues such as the role of faith - based contractors in usaid fp / rh programs , bias and discrimination against potential aid recipients , and language around sexual and reproductive health .

in recent years , controversy has also arisen over how fp / rh services are described in government documents , though it remains unclear whether language changes have had any impact on actual service provision .

when considering u.s. support for international family planning and reproductive health efforts , the 116 th congress may focus on three key areas: restrictions under the mcp / plgha , funding levels in appropriations bills , and program reforms proposed in pending legislation .

the mexico city policy requires foreign nongovernmental organizations receiving usaid family planning assistance to certify that they will not perform or actively promote abortion as a method of family planning , even if such activities are conducted with non - u.s. funds .

since first applied in the reagan administration in 1984 , the policy has been repeatedly lifted and reinstated through executive order .

the policy was maintained by president george h.w .

bush and rescinded by president clinton in 1993 .

it was then reinstated by president george w. bush in 2001 , who expanded the policy in 2003 .

president obama rescinded the policy upon taking office in january 2009 .

the trump administration reinstated the policy , expanded it to include all u.s. global health assistance , and renamed it protecting life in global health assistance ( plgha ) .

the trump administration uses the two policy names interchangeably , though the mexico city policy until now only applied to international family planning and reproductive health programs .

when discussing the policy under the trump administration , this report uses mcp / plgha .

mcp / plgha has never been enacted through legislation , and advocates have long encouraged congress to codify the policy , making it harder for future administrations to revoke .

simultaneously , detractors of the policy have called for enactment of legislation that would prevent the current practice of administrations imposing the policy through executive order .

some international fp / rh program advocates suggest there are issues and confusion regarding compliance with the expansion of mcp to include all global health assistance .

they assert that the policy has rendered programs cumbersome and ineffective due to administrative and operational burdens associated with ensuring compliance , which divert resources from the health workforce , health information systems , and service delivery .

some field reports indicate that individual providers may not be aware of the restrictions because mcp / plgha is "embedded" in funding agreements , similar to "fine print," which can create barriers to care during a provider - patient interaction .

advocates of the expanded policy argue that it closes loopholes in the prior policy and does not cause an undue burden , asserting that the government must focus on compliance .

in february 2018 , the state department released the findings of a six - month review of mcp / plgha .

the state department acknowledged the confusion the policy created , stated that the policy's impact on program effectiveness was minimal , and committed to conduct another review at the end of 2018 .

as of february 2020 , the state department had not announced plans for a second review .

congress could choose to mandate completion of the second review through legislation or examine the situation through oversight activities .

in recent years , congressional debates regarding international fp / rh assistance have centered on where and how such funding should be spent .

for fy2020 , congress appropriated $575 million to international family planning programs .

some advocates have argued that global fp / rh funding levels would need to be doubled in order to make family planning and reproductive services accessible to all women who currently want and lack access to them .

proponents say that consistently flat funding is equivalent to fp / rh spending cuts , and this undermines u.s. global development goals on maternal and child health .

advocates note that the u.s. government would need to invest $1.5 billion to meet its appropriate share of the burden for foreign assistance for fp / rh funding , and other donor countries cannot fill the gap .

opponents of the aid have questioned the extent of international demand for family planning services and have suggested that international family planning resources could be better used on other development activities .

further , opponents argue that international family planning services are controversial in some countries due to religious and moral beliefs , which , in their views , raises questions about whether increased donor funding would lead to increased use of contraceptives and reproductive health care services or to better maternal health outcomes .

some observers also question whether the programs have been efficient and cost - effective , given the scale of u.s. spending on bilateral family planning programs , compared to other types of u.s. assistance .

while data appears to show positive program impact in some countries , the attribution of results specifically to u.s. programming can be debated given the many factors that influence contraceptive use , including social and economic change and the activities of other international donors .

in this context , congress may consider whether funding levels for bilateral international family planning assistance align with need and potential impact , as well as with u.s. strategic goals and foreign policy objectives .

currently , though some u.s. international fp / rh and mch programs may be integrated ( eg , both types of health services are provided together ) , most are not , due in part to separate line item funding in the annual department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations measures , separate funding entails separate program administration .

proponents of further program integration want to combine fp / rh and mch services ; they note that integration of these services has been shown to increase women's use of contraception , improve maternal health outcomes , and build health systems capacity .

integration of these funding streams may also provide more flexibility to implementing agencies to prioritize funding across a broader range of programs .

on the other hand , eliminating funding directives specific to fp / rh and mch may also reduce congressional control over how funds are used .

furthermore , opponents note that respect for local cultural norms must be considered ; in some contexts , service integration could be detrimental to mch activities if they are associated with less socially acceptable family planning programs .

aid - recipient countries may also resist integration of these programs when separate government health units administer international fp / rh and mch services and may fear losing prioritization and resources .

others have also raised concerns that embedding fp / rh programs in mch services would limit usaid programs to address adolescent sexual and reproductive health , and prevent cefm , gbv , and obstetric fistula - that are distinct from family planning .

congress may consider whether formally integrating fp / rh and mch funding streams would be beneficial to program efficacy , or if existing appropriations and implementation mechanisms best further the stated objectives of u.s. international fp / rh and mch programs .

in addition to appropriations legislation , a few proposals specific to international fp / rh are pending in the 116 th congress: h.r .

661 , the protecting life in global health assistance act of 2019 , which would amend the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( 22 u.s.c .

2351 ) .

this legislation was introduced to codify the trump administration's expansion of the mexico city policy to include all global health assistance .

it would "prohibit u.s. assistance to foreign nonprofits , nongovernmental organizations , or quasi - autonomous organizations that promote or perform abortions , except in cases of rape or incest or where the mother's life is endangered. .

h.r .

1581 , the reproductive rights are human rights act of 2019 , and s. 707 , the corresponding senate bill , would amend the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( 22 u.s.c .

2351 ) to "include in its annual reports on human rights in countries receiving u.s. development and security assistance a discussion of the status of reproductive rights in each country , including whether a country has adopted and enforced policies to: ( 1 ) promote access to contraception and accurate family planning information , ( 2 ) provide services to ensure safe and healthy pregnancy and childbirth , ( 3 ) expand or restrict access to safe abortion services , ( 4 ) prevent maternal deaths , and ( 5 ) prevent and treat sexually transmitted diseases. .

the bills would also require the reports to include data on maternal deaths and discrimination and violence against women and girls in health care settings , including the government's response to these actions .

appendix a .

restrictions on u.s. funding for voluntary fp / rh programs appendix b. usaid fp / rh priority countries: keyâ statistics , 201 .

