this report identifies selected current major trade issues for u.s. agriculture that may be of interest in the second session of the 116 th congress .

it provides background on individual trade issues and attempts to bring perspective on the significance of each for u.s. agricultural trade .

each trade issue summary concludes with an assessment of its status .

the report begins by examining a series of overarching issues .

these include u.s. agricultural trade and its importance to the sector ; a brief description of the trade policy being pursued by the trump administration in 2020 and its ramifications for u.s. agricultural exports ; an update on the administration's 2019 trade policy actions ; a discussion of the ongoing and proposed new trade negotiations planned for 2020 ; and an update on world trade organization ( wto ) agricultural issues related to the united states—including the administration's 2020 plans to engage in reforming the institution .

the report then reviews a number of ongoing trade policy concerns to u.s. agriculture , including non - tariff measures , and trade barriers and disputes involving specialty crops , livestock , and dairy issues .

the format for these trade issues is similar , consisting of background and perspective on the issue at hand and an assessment of their current status .

u.s. agricultural exports have long been a bright spot in the u.s. balance of trade , with exports exceeding imports in every year since 1960 .

in recent years , the value of farm exports has remained below the record level of $152 billion reached in fy2014 .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) reports u.s. agricultural exports in fy2019 of $136 billion ( see figure 1 ) .

the fy2019 export total represents an $8 billion decline from fy2018 .

the decline in the value of farm exports since fy2014 initially reflected lower market prices for bulk commodities , such as soybeans and corn .

agricultural prices and u.s. exports of certain commodities , such as soybeans , were further affected by retaliatory tariffs imposed on u.s. agricultural imports by china and some other countries since 2018 in response to the trump administration's imposition of tariffs on certain imports from china and on u.s. imports of steel and aluminum from selected countries .

in fy2019 , u.s. agricultural imports were $131 billion , up $3 billion from fy2018 , resulting in an agricultural trade surplus of $5 billion .

this is below the surplus of $16 billion in fy2018 and below the record high in nominal dollars of $43 billion in fy2014 .

agricultural exports are important both to farmers and to the u.s. economy .

during the calendar years 2017 and 2018 , the value of u.s. agricultural exports accounted for 8% and 9% of total u.s. exports , respectively .

usda's economic research service ( ers ) estimates that in 2017 u.s. agricultural exports generated about 1,161,000 full - time civilian jobs , including 795,000 jobs outside the farm sector .

exports account for around 20% of total farm production by value and are a major outlet for many farm commodities , absorbing over three - fourths of u.s. output of cotton and about half of total u.s. production of wheat and soybeans .

although feed crops and wheat account for most exports by volume , the high value product ( hvps ) category—which includes live animals , meat , dairy products , fruits and vegetables , nuts , fats , hides , manufactured feeds , sugar products , processed fruits and vegetables , and other processed food products—accounted for 68% of the value of agricultural exports in fy2019 .

all states export agricultural commodities , but a minority of states account for a majority of farm export sales .

in calendar year 2018 , the 10 leading agricultural exporting states based on value—california , iowa , illinois , minnesota , texas , nebraska , kansas , indiana , north dakota , and missouri—accounted for 58% of the total value of u.s. agricultural exports that year .

in december 2018 , congress reauthorized major agricultural export promotion programs through fy2023 with the 2018 farm bill ( p.l .

115-334 ) .

title iii of the farm bill includes provisions covering export credit guarantee programs , export market development programs , and international science and technical exchange programs designed to develop agricultural export markets in emerging economies .

among other provisions , the 2018 farm bill permits funding to operate two u.s. agricultural export promotion programs in cuba—the market access program and the foreign market development cooperator program .

in establishing policy for u.s. participation in international trade , the trump administration has emphasized reducing u.s. bilateral trade deficits ; focusing on renegotiating existing trade agreements that it viewed as being "unfair ; " initiating new bilateral agreements ; and responding to the trade practices of u.s. trading partners that it viewed as unfair , in violation of international trading commitments , or threatening to u.s. industry .

under various provisions of law , the administration imposed punitive tariffs on u.s. imports of steel and aluminum from certain countries and on u.s. imports of selected products from china .

these countries in turn , responded with retaliatory tariffs on u.s. exports , particularly agricultural products .

during the second session of the 116 th congress , the trump administration's agenda may focus on the following priorities .

since early 2018 , canada , china , the eu , india , mexico , and turkey targeted u.s. food and agricultural products with retaliatory tariffs in response to tariffs imposed by the united states on imports of steel and aluminum and certain imports from china .

to facilitate ratification of usmca , the united states removed tariffs on steel and aluminum imports from canada and mexico and these countries removed their retaliatory tariffs on u. s. agricultural imports in may 2019 .

the retaliatory tariffs made imports of u.s. agricultural products relatively more expensive compared to similar products from competitor nations .

initially , the announcements of retaliatory tariffs led to an increase in u.s. agricultural exports as importing countries built stocks in anticipation of the tariffs .

u.s. agricultural exports increased slightly in 2018 .

in 2019 , however , u.s. agricultural exports declined about 2% , due to lower global demand for affected u.s. agricultural products and downward pressure on prices of some commodities .

in the short run , retaliatory tariffs contributed to price declines for certain u.s. agricultural commodities and to a reduction in exports , particularly for soybeans .

declining prices and export sales , combined with rising input and farm machinery costs , contributed to a 16% decrease in u.s. net farm income in 2018 , which prompted usda to provide trade aid payments to the farm sector in 2018 and 2019 .

during 2018 and 2019 , the secretary of agriculture used his authority under the commodity credit corporation charter act to initiate two ad hoc trade assistance programs in response to foreign trade retaliation targeting u.s. agricultural products .

the trade aid packages were part of the administration's effort to provide short - term assistance to farmers for the temporary loss of important international markets .

on july 24 , 2018 , usda announced the first "trade aid" package , which targeted production of selected agricultural commodities in 2018 and was valued at up to $12 billion .

on may 23 , 2019 , usda announced a second package , which targeted production of an expanded list of commodities and was valued at up to an additional $16 billion .

thus , the two years of combined trade assistance were valued at up to $28 billion .

both trade aid packages included ( 1 ) a market facilitation program ( mfp ) of direct payments to producers of commodities most affected by the trade retaliation , ( 2 ) a food purchase and distribution program ( fpdp ) designed to partially offset lost export sales of affected commodities , and ( 3 ) an agricultural trade promotion ( atp ) program to expand foreign markets .

the largest part of the aid is two years of mfp payments initially valued at a combined $24.5 billion ( up to $10 billion in 2018 and $14.5 billion in 2019 ) .

status: as of february 10 , 2020 , usda estimates that it has spent $8.6 billion under the 2018 mfp and $14.2 billion under the 2019 mfp .

payments of this magnitude could attract international attention about whether they are consistent with wto rules and u.s. commitments on domestic support , as some wto member countries are questioning whether this additional aid violates u.s. spending limits under the wto .

the trade aid packages raise other potential questions as well .

for instance , if the u.s. - china phase one trade agreement does not produce the commodity purchases promised by china , or if commodity prices remain relatively low , should another trade aid package , or some alternative compensatory measure , be provided in 2020 , and possibly beyond ? .

if mfp payments are provided in the future , should usda revise its payment formulation to provide a broader distribution of payments across the u.s. agricultural sector ? .

the world trade organization is an international organization that administers the rules and agreements negotiated among its 164 members to eliminate trade barriers and govern trade .

it also serves as an important forum for resolving trade disputes through its committee structures and its dispute settlement body , which approves reports issued by panels of legal experts and a separate appellate body .

the united states was a major force behind the establishment of the wto in 1995 .

under the wto's agreement on agriculture ( aoa ) , agreed in 1995 , national agricultural policies—including domestic farm support , agricultural export subsidies , and restrictive import controls—were placed under a multilaterally agreed - upon set of disciplines for the first time .

wto members agreed to reform their domestic agricultural support policies , increase access to imports , and reduce export subsidies .

the disciplines on these three "pillars" of agricultural policy involved freezing ( or "binding" ) protective measures and subsidies at base period levels , then instituting annual reductions from the bound levels .

article 15 of the aoa granted developing and least - developed countries special rights or extra leniency—termed "special and differential treatment"—in the implementation of their policy commitments .

specifically , they had longer periods over which to reduce subsidies and to improve market access .

they were also allowed to retain certain subsidies that were prohibited for other countries .

during the aoa's early years , article 13 , known as the peace clause or "due restraint" clause , provided additional impetus for reform .

the peace clause provided temporary protection for market - distorting domestic support and export subsidy measures from challenges under other wto provisions , as long as these measures complied with certain requirements .

however , such subsidies would be open to challenge after the peace clause expired around january 2004 .

the aoa was envisioned as a first step in the process of global market liberalization in the agricultural sector .

the impending expiration of the peace clause coupled with article 20's directive to continue the reform process led wto members to launch the doha round of negotiations in 2001 .

but , the doha round failed to reach consensus on formulas to reduce tariffs and agricultural subsidies , due in part to disagreements among developing countries that wished to retain their special and differential treatment under the aoa and wealthier countries that wanted to limit such preferences .

the doha round has been at an impasse since 2009 .

the wto's effectiveness as a negotiating body for broad - based trade liberalization and its role in resolving trade disputes therefore have come under intensified scrutiny in recent years .

the wto has struggled to address newer issues , such as digital trade and regulations affecting services .

in addition , the appellate body is effectively non - functional due to the united states' decision to block the nomination of members , which prevents it from having a quorum needed to resolve disputes .

status: ustr has stated that wto institutional reform is a priority in 2020 .

some mof congress have voiced their agreement .

the wto's chair for agricultural negotiations may circulate a negotiating framework for the june 2020 meeting of wto trade ministers in kazakhstan that includes rules designed to increase sustainable agricultural production .

the meeting may also consider a proposal by a group representing 19 countries , known as the cairns group , to "cap and reduce by at least half the current sum of global agricultural trade - and production - distorting domestic support entitlements by 2030. .

the united states has gone from being a net exporter of fresh and processed fruits and vegetables in the early 1970s to being a net importer of fruits and vegetables today .

although u.s. fruit and vegetable exports totaled $9.2 billion in 2018 , u.s. imports of fruits and vegetables were $24.8 billion , resulting in a gap between imports and exports of $15.6 billion ( excludes nuts ) .

several factors have contributed to this trade imbalance including a relatively open import regime and lower average tariffs in the united states , increased competition from low - cost or government - subsidized producing countries , and non - tariff trade barriers to u.s. exports in some countries .

additionally , other market factors , such as exchange rate fluctuations and structural changes in the u.s. food industry , as well as increased u.s. overseas investment and diversification in market sourcing by u.s. companies , have contributed to the trade imbalance .

increased domestic and year - round demand for fruits and vegetables as well as opportunities for counter - seasonal supplies through imports have also contributed to this trade situation .

despite u.s. efforts to address some of these issues as part of recent fta discussion , a number of these issues are unresolved .

other u.s. concerns include import competition regarding seasonal produce from mexico , long - standing suspensions agreements between the u.s. and mexico involving fresh tomatoes , and regulatory requirements regarding retail wine sales in canada .

in 2019 , exports of u.s. livestock and poultry products totaled $24.1 billion , and imports totaled $14.2 billion .

foreign demand for u.s. animals and products supports prices of domestic livestock and poultry producers , while imports supplement u.s. consumer demand for a variety of livestock and poultry products .

recent trade agreements with canada and mexico , china , and japan will facilitate increased livestock and poultry product exports to these four markets , which accounted for 65% of the value of total u.s. exports of these products in 2019 .

the u.s. - japan agreement lowers tariffs for u.s. beef and pork products , and adjusts beef and pork safeguards .

these measures offer u.s. livestock producers benefits that competing exporters have enjoyed under the tpp - 11 , the successor to trans - pacific partnership agreement—from which the trump administration withdrew the united states before its ratification .

under u.s. - china phase one trade agreement , china agreed to abide by international standards and guidelines for trade , while expanding market access for more meat products that the usda food safety and inspection service regulates should ease the process for u.s. meat and poultry exporters .

the united states exported $6.0 billion in dairy products in 2019 , and imported $3.1 billion worth of products .

reform of dairy pricing and establishing specific dairy product trqs in canada is expected to expand access in that market for u.s. dairy producers .

the usjta lowers tariffs for u.s. dairy products and expands some dairy product trqs .

like u.s. livestock producers , dairy producers gain benefits that competing exporters have enjoyed under the tpp - 11 .

under the u.s. - china phase one trade agreement , china is to streamline the regulatory process to facilitate trade in u.s. dairy and infant formula .

in december 2014 , doc signed suspension agreements with the government of mexico and mexican sugar producers and exporters that prevented the imposition of cvd and ad on u.s. imports of mexican sugar .

this was a consequence of u.s. government determinations that mexican sugar was being subsidized by the government of mexico and was being sold into the u.s. market at less than fair value .

the suspension agreements limit mexico's sugar exports to the united states to the residual of u.s. needs for domestic human use in a given marketing year after subtracting u.s. production and imports from other countries .

the agreements establish minimum reference prices for mexican sugar that are above u.s. sugar program loan levels for domestically produced sugar .

another provision limits the share of mexican sugar that can enter the united states as refined sugar .

after the suspension agreements took effect , a number of stakeholders in the u.s. sugar market asserted that the suspension agreements had not worked as intended and had not entirely eliminated the injury caused by the subsidization and dumping of mexican sugar .

one widely held criticism was that cane refiners who were dependent on imports of raw cane from mexico had received an inadequate share of sugar from mexico .

another criticism leveled at the agreements was that mexican exporters were not always adhering to limits on the share of mexican sugar imports that are refined sugar as compared with raw sugar , nor to the specified minimum reference prices .

in november 2016 , the american sugar coalition—representing sugar cane and sugar beet producers and sugar processors , refiners , and workers—called on doc to withdraw from the agreements , an action that could have caused ad and cvd duties to be imposed on mexican sugar .

imperial sugar company , a u.s. cane refiner , also advocated for withdrawal .

the sweetener users association , which represents sugar - using businesses , recommended renegotiating the agreements to address their shortcomings and warned that terminating them would virtually eliminate mexican sugar from the u.s. market .

in november 2016 , doc issued results of a preliminary administrative review , in which it concluded that the agreements may not have entirely redressed the injury , and that certain import transactions may not have adhered to the terms in the agreements .

in june 2017 , the united states and mexico agreed to amendments to the suspension agreements .

under the amendments , effective october 1 , 2017 , the price of imported mexican raw sugar was increased from $0.2225 per pound to $0.23 per pound .

the price of imported refined sugar was increased from $0.26 per pound to $0.28 per pound .

the maximum share of refined sugar imports was limited to 30% , with raw sugar imports constituting at least 70% of the total , compared with 53% and 47% , respectively , under the 2014 agreement .

the agreement also requires that imported raw sugar be loaded in bulk and be free flowing—that is , not packaged .

any raw sugar imports that are packaged would be counted toward the refined sugar allotment .

in addition , if usda determines that the united states requires additional sugar imports to meet its needs , mexico would be awarded the first opportunity to fill the need .

status: in october 2019 , the u.s. court of international trade ( uscit ) voided the 2017 suspension agreements because doc failed to follow recordkeeping requirements during the negotiations over the agreement .

csc sugar llc , a sugar trader and refiner of liquid sugar sued because the agreement changed the purity definition of refined sugar , harming its business , and it was unable to provide comment on the changes .

as a result of the uscit ruling , the 2014 suspension agreement provisions went back into force .

on january 15 , 2020 , the doc and mexico agreed to new terms for the suspension agreement , specifically limiting imports from mexico to 1,004,726 short tons from october 2019 through september 2020 , with the share of refined sugar limited to 30% of import volume .

csc sugar llc again filed suit in the uscit to block the new agreements between the united states and mexico .

