in general , the rules of the world trade organization ( wto ) , of which the united states is a member , require each member to apply tariffs and duties equally to all other members .

this principle , known as unconditional most - favored - nation ( mfn ) treatment , has been central to the rules - based global trading system since 1947 and part of u.s. law and foreign policy since 1922 .

the wto agreements allow exceptions to this treatment in certain circumstances , including to remedy unfair trade practices and to help domestic industries adjust to sudden surges of fairly traded goods .

the three most frequently applied u.s. trade remedy laws permit the imposition of antidumping duties , countervailing duties , and safeguards .

these laws are enforced through administrative investigations and actions of two u.s. government agencies: the international trade administration of the department of commerce ( ita ) and the u.s. international trade commission ( usitc ) .

the most commonly used of these remedies are antidumping ( ad ) laws .

ad laws provide relief to domestic industries that have been , or are threatened with , material injury caused by imports sold in the u.s. market at prices that are shown to be less than fair value .

the relief provided is an additional import duty , calculated by the ita and placed on the dumped imports .

antidumping orders are the most frequently used and the most controversial trade remedy .

some argue that antidumping measures constitute "the first and best line of defense for the u.s. economy against companies and countries that resort to predatory and mercantilist tactics to make trade gains. .

most empirical research , however , has found such predatory pricing is rare .

furthermore , most academic analysts are highly critical of u.s .

ad law and practice .

economic analysts in particular note that ad policy is trade distorting .

for example , ad duties deflect trade , by causing exporters to seek out markets where their goods are not subject to ad duties .

as one pair of economists noted , the suspension agreement on fresh tomatoes from mexico caused mexico to make more tomato paste to ship to the united states and to ship more fresh tomatoes to canada , which in turn shipped more fresh tomatoes to the united states .

many scholars also conclude that ad duties depress consumer activity by raising costs for consumers and propping up unproductive businesses .

according to one survey , ad policies globally affect somewhere between 3% and 8% of a country's total imports , making them one of the most costly commercial policies .

there is also a general consensus that ad duties , when analyzed economically without consideration of their political benefits for encouraging trade liberalization , depress overall trade .

congress has generally been supportive of ad duties , and reform efforts have been limited despite the generally negative view of the practice held by many economists .

phillip swagel , the now - director of the congressional budget office and former assistant secretary of the treasury for economic policy , recently referred to antidumping as the "third rail of trade policy," arguing that "few politicians of either party [are] willing to point out its broadly negative impact. .

while many argue that ad laws are economically inefficient if evaluated on their face , some of those critics have conceded "that even if ad is the largest and most frequently used contingent trade remedy ( and the most costly single commercial policy ) , ad may nevertheless be a desirable policy as it serves an important role in promoting overall trade liberalization by acting as a pressure release valve. .

as congress considers its overall goals with respect to trade policy , it might weigh dumping's economic costs against its potential role in supporting trade liberalization .

congress could , for example , encourage ( in committee hearings ) or direct ( through legislation ) commerce to change the de minimis thresholds for finding that dumping has taken place or that the dumped goods have caused an injury .

such changes could reduce or encourage the use of the policy .

during the negotiations over the establishment of the wto , the united states persistently advocated for the establishment of robust dispute settlement provisions and congress required the president to ensure that dispute resolution provisions were included in the final agreement .

as a result , the agreements establishing the wto included the dispute settlement understanding ( dsu ) , which provides for an enforceable means by which members can resolve disputes over wto commitments and obligations .

in recent years , however , several administrations have been critical of the wto's dispute settlement system in general and with the role of the appellate body ( ab ) in particular .

in december , the ab ceased to function as the united states continued to block the appointment of new ab members to replace those whose terms had expired .

u.s .

ad policies have been at the center of that dispute and congress might consider reevaluating those policies or renegotiating the agreement underlying the wto dsu and ada if it wishes to maintain a functional dispute settlement system at the wto .

the united states has generally been successful in dsu proceedings with the exception of one area—trade remedies .

indeed , trade remedy cases in general make up the largest portion of the wto's dispute settlement docket , with ad being the most frequently disputed policy .

time and time again dispute settlement ( ds ) panels and the ab have found u.s .

ad policy to conflict with its international commitments .

the united states is not alone .

other wto members have also been unsuccessful in defending challenges to their implementation of the ada .

the ad policy that has been at the center of many ( although not all ) of these disputes is a calculation method referred to as "zeroing. .

in general , when calculating the dumping margin to determine whether the imposition of antidumping measures on exporters of a product is justified , the ita will usually average together numerous comparisons between sales in the united states ( the export prices ) and sales in the home market ( the normal value ) .

the ita will aggregate hundreds or even thousands of individual transactions together in this process .

the amount by which the normal value exceeds the export price of a given product is the dumping margin .

however , if the export price exceeds the normal value ( that is , if the price in the united states is greater than the domestic price ) and thus produces a negative result , the united states , in certain circumstances , will adjust the negative values to zero .

as an economist at the department of justice put it , "the use of 'zeroing' will almost always increase the level of any antidumping duty , and will sometimes create a duty where none would have been imposed , had the methodology not been used. .

consider the following simplified example: the average home market price and export price for a product for the entire month were both $100 .

as such , the dumping margin and weighted average dumping margin when averaged without zeroing were both zero because the transaction on september 7 , for example , was offset by the transaction on september 25 .

however , when zeroing is applied , the september 25 transaction is set to zero .

when this is applied across all values , the aggregate dumping margin is $55 leading to a weighted average dumping margin of 7.85% .

one pair of economists determined in 2010 that if the united states were to stop zeroing , "then perhaps as much as half of all u.s .

ad measures would be removed and the duties in the other cases would fall significantly. .

the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) asserts that this method allows the united states to "focus on those transactions in which dumping occurs. .

under the relevant wto agreements , the ustr argues , "members may calculate a margin of dumping on a transaction - by - transaction basis , and , thus , collect duties only on dumped imports , while collecting no duties on non - dumped imports .

there is no requirement to offset dumped transactions with transactions in which dumping did not occur. .

the u.s. trade representative has asserted that this is a common - sense method of calculating the extent of dumping that is injuring a domestic industry" and that the elimination of zeroing "artificially reduces the margin of dumping," opponents of zeroing argue that its effect is to artificially increase dumping margins and increase the likelihood that ad measures will be imposed .

specific concerns include that "zeroing makes it extremely difficult for a firm to avoid dumping" because the reasons for price variation , such as seasonality , exchange rates , and variations in shipping costs , are not taken into account .

as a result , products subject to greater price variation will be more frequently subject to ad duties .

as the united states is the only country to actively zero , it seems unlikely that zeroing is strictly necessary to ensure that ad policy is effective at preventing dumping .

one economist estimated in 2008 that "zeroing could add perhaps 3-4 % to the typical u.s. antidumping duty with a cost to the u.s. of around $150 million per year when all existing u.s. antidumping orders were determined by zeroing. .

since 1995 , more than 30 panel and appellate body ( ab ) decisions have found the use of zeroing in specific ad investigations to be inconsistent with the ada ; the ab has held more than a dozen times that zeroing in one form or another cannot be used .

in all but two cases involving zeroing , the united states has been the respondent .

in two early cases , the eu was the respondent , but it changed its practices after the ab found its implementation of the practice to be inconsistent with the terms of the ada .

the united states has been a respondent in more than 150 disputes before the wto .

fifty - six of those involved the ada and many of those cases involved zeroing .

in all the finalized cases , the united states lost or settled .

indeed , crs analysis has found that nearly half of all cases where the wto found a u.s. practice to not be in compliance with wto obligations involved dumping .

much of the u.s. criticism levied at the wto's ab over the past decade , some have argued , has been primarily the result of cases involving u.s. implementation of the ada .

in a recent report listing u.s. concerns about the ab , the ustr identified six areas of "appellate body errors in interpreting wto agreements" that it argues have "raised substantive concerns and undermine the wto. .

five of the six concerned trade remedies , including dumping .

indeed , "dump" was the most common trade - related verb in the report .

with respect to zeroing , the ustr argues , "the appellate body's invention of a prohibition on the use of "zeroing" to determine dumping margins has diminished the ability of wto members to address dumped imports that cause or threaten injury to a domestic industry. .

the wto ab's approach to trade remedies in general , and antidumping in particular , have been central in ustr's critique of the ab and thus has likely played a significant role in its decision to block appointments to the ab .

however , wto dsb debates are not over .

the ustr has approvingly cited a recent dsb decision that upheld the use of zeroing in certain limited circumstances .

as congress considers the future u.s. relationship with the wto and the multilateral rules - based trading order , it might address the role that antidumping has played in straining that relationship .

for example , trade promotion authority ( tpa ) expires in 2021 .

should congress decide to reauthorize tpa , it may choose to direct the president to seek revisions to the wto's dsu of the ada to address some of these issues .

alternatively , congress could encourage or direct commerce to address some of the wto members' and appellate body's concerns .

for example , the eu and canada once employed zeroing in antidumping investigations , but no longer do so .

