r ecently , the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) announced that it would only accept mailed freedom of information act ( foia ) requests and not those submitted electronically due to the covid - 19 pandemic .

conversely , the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) has adopted a contrasting policy , saying that cdc would not be able to respond to mailed foia requests and that requests should be placed electronically .

these examples of differing policies , among others examples not mentioned , when combined with agencies' adoption of additional telework flexibilities , raise questions about how agencies will be responding to foia requests in the near future .

this report provides an overview of the foia request process and actual and potential foia request processing changes within federal government agencies as a result of covid - 19 .

foia does not require requests for agency information to be submitted in a particular format , only that the request reasonably describes the records sought and complies with agency regulations .

most agencies accept requests via mail , email , web form , or fax .

the statute also requires the affirmative disclosure of certain categories of agency information , such as "substantive rules of general applicability," "rules of procedure," and , since 2016 , records requested three or more times .

while the text of foia does not specifically dictate the method in which the public must request information from an agency , foia does prescribe how an agency is to respond to the request .

from an administrative perspective , foia directs the amount of time an agency has to respond to a request , defines whether and how an agency may recoup costs for providing services in response to a request , and provides nine instances where an agency may exempt information from public disclosure .

after an agency receives a request , the agency is to inform the requester of its receipt .

generally , an agency is to respond to a correctly routed , simple request within 20 days with a determination of the scope of the documents the agency will produce and any exemptions it will apply to withhold records or information .

complex or incorrectly routed requests may be subject to additional days of processing , per the statute ( 5 u.s.c .

â§552 ( a ) ( 6 ) ) .

also , agencies managing backlog s of foia requests do not always process requests within the statutory period .

when completed , a written response may provide the information requested or some of the information requested with redactions per one of foia's nine exemptions , inform the requester that the agency does not have responsive records , or deny a request entirely due to one of the nine exemptions .

requesters may administratively appeal an agency's adverse decision .

government information requests through foia may be impacted by covid - 19 in two ways: ( 1 ) certain types of information related to the outbreak may be eligible for expedited consideration ; and ( 2 ) processes for locating information may change due to employees working remotely or on administrative leave .

while challenges in locating responsive information may occur at any agency , responses to requests for information during the covid - 19 outbreak have varied .

crs performed a search of federal department websites and their components .

as of march 26 , 2020 , crs identified statements by 13 agencies regarding covid - 19's impact on foia request processing .

table 1 presents these recent statements regarding the impact of covid - 19 or simply changes in agencies' abilities to process foia requests , provides code of federal regulations ( c.f.r. ) .

citations to each agency's policy regarding expedited foia requests , and notes whether the agency has made additional allowances for expediting requests .

the table should be considered a snapshot in time , as agencies may update or change their statements .

of the 13 agencies identified , 8 altered the transmission method by which a foia request should be submitted .

some statements also discuss current operating status , and mention anticipated delays due to covid - 19 .

six of the identified agencies have additional allowances for expediting requests: u.s. air force , department of housing and urban development , department of labor , department of veterans affairs , national archives and records administration , and office of government information services .

of the six agencies that established additional allowances for expediting requests , five permit expediting cases where due process rights would be impacted , four permit expediting cases where there exist possible questions affecting public confidence in the federal government's integrity , one permits expediting due to humanitarian needs , and one permits expediting at the discretion of the agency's foia officer .

the exact language from the c.f.r .

is provided in table 1 below .

