o ne of the basic rationales underlying the grant of patent rights is that such rights provide an incentive for inventors to innovate .

part of the bargain , however , is that those rights will expire after a defined time period .

this principle appears in the u.s. constitution , which empowers congress "[t]o promote the progress of science and useful arts , by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries. .

congress has also enacted this principle into law: a patent on a new invention will generally expire twenty years after the corresponding patent application was filed .

intellectual property ( ip ) rights , including patent rights , are generally considered to play an essential role in encouraging the research and development ( r&d ) necessary to create new pharmaceutical products .

because these periods of exclusivity can allow the patent holder , such as a drug manufacturer , to charge higher - than - competitive prices , the patent holder has an incentive to prolong the period of exclusivity , such as by filing for additional patents to cover a product .

in the pharmaceutical context , critics argue that some brand - name drug and biological product manufacturers ( the brands ) use patenting strategies to "game[] the patent system" to maximize profits and forestall competition from generic drug or biosimilar manufacturers ( the generics ) .

others reject this charge , contending that these practices are a legitimate use of the patent system and are necessary to incentivize the billions of dollars in r&d that lead to new , life - saving drugs .

this report discusses four pharmaceutical patenting practices commentators have criticized: "evergreening" : commentators allege that some pharmaceutical companies obtain new patents to cover a product as older patents expire to extend the period of exclusivity without significant benefits for consumers .

"product hopping" : commentators also contend that as patents on a product expire , pharmaceutical companies will attempt to switch the market to a slightly different product covered by a later - expiring patent , "hopping" from one product to the next .

"patent thickets" : commentators further argue that pharmaceutical companies have allegedly surrounded their products with many overlapping patents on a single product .

critics allege that these patent "thickets" may deter potential competitors even if the patents are weak or invalid , due to the time , expense , and uncertainty of challenging a significant number of patents .

"pay - for - delay" settlements : brand and generic pharmaceutical companies will often settle litigation that results when a generic seeks to enter the market to compete with the patented branded product .

certain settlement agreements involve the transfer of value from the brand to the generic in return for the generic delaying its market entry .

such "pay - for - delay" or "reverse payment" settlements are characterized as anticompetitive because they may delay the entry of cheaper generic drugs into the market , thereby allowing the brand to maintain its exclusivity period on a patent that otherwise may have been invalidated , to the benefit of the settling companies but at the expense of consumers .

these practices take place against a backdrop of a broader public policy debate over drug pricing .

the department of health and human services ( hhs ) has found that national spending on pharmaceutical products has risen in recent years and predicted that these expenditures will continue to rise faster than overall healthcare spending .

commentators acknowledge that factors other than ip rights contribute to the price consumers pay for prescription drugs and biological products ( biologics ) , including consumer demand , manufacturing costs , r&d costs , the terms and structure of private health insurance , and the involvement of government insurance programs such as medicaid .

nevertheless , pharmaceutical products are often protected by ip rights .

some studies have shown that ip rights are among the most important factors driving high drug prices .

as these pharmaceutical patenting practices may affect drug prices , they have attracted congressional interest .

several legislative proposals seek to curtail these patenting practices by reducing their effectiveness or outlawing them entirely .

proponents see such legislation as a potential way to lower pharmaceutical prices .

this report explains these allegedly anticompetitive patenting practices and reviews a number of proposals to reform them .

first , this report provides a brief legal background , including the basics of food and drug administration ( fda ) law , patent law , antitrust law , and the interaction between patent rights and fda approval of pharmaceutical products .

this report next overviews the patenting practices that some pharmaceutical companies have allegedly used to extend their effective periods of patent protection .

finally , this report details a number of proposals aimed at reforming or limiting such practices .

patent holders generally seek to use their rights to the fullest extent permitted by law , regardless of their patent's technological field .

from the patent holders' perspective , the practices described below are appropriate uses of the legal rights granted by their patents , which were obtained only after a rigorous examination process that demonstrated compliance with the patentability requirements .

critics , however , view these practices as harmful strategies that exploit the patent system in ways that congress did not intend .

pharmaceutical patenting practices have attracted significant interest from both commentators and congress .

this section of the report reviews several proposals , from both legislation and the academic literature , that seek to reduce or eliminate these patenting practices .

this review is not intended to be comprehensive , nor does it evaluate the merits of these proposals .

instead , the proposals are reviewed as representative examples of the various types of legal changes under consideration .

as discussed above , patenting practices are only one factor that may contribute to consumer prices in the highly complex pharmaceutical market .

thus , the discussed proposals relating to patenting practices are one potential method to reduce drug prices .

numerous legislative proposals intended to reduce drug prices exist , but because these proposals relate only indirectly to pharmaceutical patenting practices , they are outside the scope of this report .

proposals targeting evergreening primarily aim to make it harder for companies to receive later - filed or secondary patents , reduce the impact of later - filed patents , or incentivize challenges to patents .

several commentators have proposed that increasing patent examination resources could reduce the number of arguably weaker later - filed patents .

these commentators contend that patent examiners "often do not have enough time or resources to investigate whether a patent application is truly inventive. .

in these commentators' view , allocating more resources to the pto would potentially prevent low - quality patents from issuing in the first place , thus preventing the need for accused infringers to spend time and resources defending against infringement or attempting to invalidate such patents .

although one commentator notes that "most patents are not economically significant," he also recognizes that the pto "is not well positioned to identify which patents are important and which are worthless. .

some proposals aim to reduce evergreening by making it more difficult for later - filed applications to meet the requirements for patentability .

for example , one commentator has suggested raising the substantive patentability requirements for later - filed or secondary patents .

specifically , the commentator suggests amending the patent statute to require that an application for a patent on a secondary invention "demonstrate through clear and convincing evidence in the written description that such invention has increased efficacy as compared to the original. .

the proposal defines "increased efficacy" as "a proven improvement in the mechanism of action , as disclosed in the patent claims," and "mechanism of action" as "the process by which a drug functions to produce a therapeutic effect , as disclosed in the patent claims. .

in the commentator's view , this would reduce evergreening by requiring that the secondary patent actually improve the manner in which the pharmaceutical product operates , and thus incentivize pharmaceutical companies to create new drugs , "rather than creating minor changes that prolong the time they can profit off monopolies at the expense of patients. .

at least one other country has adopted a similar standard: under indian law a patent may not issue on "a new form of a known substance which does not result in enhancement of the known efficacy of that substance. .

the terminating the extension of rights misappropriated ( term ) act of 2019 is one example of a legislative proposal to curtail patent evergreening by reducing the impact of later - filed patents .

if enacted , it would establish a presumption that , in patent challenges under hatch - waxman or bpcia procedures , the patentee "disclaimed the patent term for each of the listed patents after the date on which the term of the first patent expires. .

in effect , this presumption would mean that later - expiring patents listed in the orange book ( or provided during the bpcia's "patent dance" ) would , as a default , be treated as expiring on the date when the earliest - expiring patent on the drug or biologic expires .

however , the patentee would be able to overcome this presumption by affirmatively demonstrating with a preponderance of the evidence that the later - expiring patents on the drug or biologic claim "patentably distinct inventions. .

because the law of double patenting already requires later - expiring patents to cover patentably distinct inventions to be valid , the term act's legal effect would be to place the burden of proving patent validity on the patentee for certain later - expiring pharmaceutical patents .

under current law , patents are presumed valid in a judicial proceeding unless the challenger proves patent invalidity by clear and convincing evidence .

the term act would also require the pto to determine if changes to patent examination practice may be necessary .

specifically , the act would require the pto to review the agency's patent examination procedures to determine whether the pto is using the best practices to avoid the issuance of duplicative patents relating to the same drug or biologic .

the bill would also require the pto to determine the need for new practices or procedures to ( 1 ) â improve examination of patents relating to the same drug or biological product and ( 2 ) â reduce the issuance of patents that "improperly extend the term of exclusivity. .

finally , the act would require the pto to submit a report to the house committee on the judiciary containing its findings and recommendations .

the reforming evergreening and manipulation that extends drug years act ( remedy ) act , like the term act , seeks to curb evergreening by reducing the benefit of later - filed patents .

under the remedy act , a generic's filing of a paragraph ( iv ) certification in an anda would only trigger hatch - waxman's thirty - month stay if the patent claims a "drug substance"â€”that is , the drug's active ingredient .

the stay would not be available for a patent that claims only a "drug product or method of use for a drug," unless the patent also claims the drug substance itself .

in that case , the bill would allow fda to approve the generic product immediately , without waiting for the litigation to determine the validity of the nondrug substance patents .

this approach is aimed at allowing the generic to enter the market more quickly by limiting the grounds under which a brand can receive a thirty - month stay of fda approval .

the act would also require that patents canceled by the pto be removed from the orange book .

the bill would also clarify that challenging a patent that is later struck from the orange book would not affect the first - generic - filer 180-day exclusivity period .

other anti - evergreening proposals aim to incentivize challenges to pharmaceutical patents after those patents issue .

for example , the second look at drugs patents act of 2019 ( sldpa ) would encourage administrative challenges to patents added to the orange book .

under the sldpa , unlike current law , a brand would be required to notify the pto that it was adding patents to the orange book .

after receiving that notification , the pto would need to publish a notice regarding each patent and request that any eligible person file an ipr challenging that patent .

such patents would be "provisionally" included in the orange book until either the pto confirmed the relevant patents' patentability or until certain time has passed without any challenge to the patents ( 300 days if the patent had issued when fda approved the relevant drug , or fifteen months if the patent issued after approval ) .

if any patent claims are canceled as a result of an ipr , the bill would require the brand to submit a request that the patent be removed from the orange book ( if all claims are canceled ) or that the canceled claims be removed from the orange book .

taken together , the sldpa would provide notice regarding particular patents that generics may want to challenge and would encourage such challenges .

as another method of encouraging patent challenges , one commentator has proposed that congress require the pto to implement an "invalidity challenge reimbursement program" ( icr program ) that would require the pto to reimburse "petition fees , reasonable attorney fees , and related expenses incurred by accused infringers who have prevailed in a post - issuance proceeding" at the pto "by invalidating at least one patent claim. .

the proposal envisions that such a program could be paid for by the pto charging an "icr fee" on each patent in force .

as their costs would be reimbursed if they are successful , the commentator contends that this system would provide greater incentives to encourage an accused infringer to challenge a weak patent .

moreover , the commentator notes that the pto is currently generally unaffected when it issues a low - quality patent .

in the commentator's view , requiring the pto to reimburse successful challenges to patents may create an incentive for the pto to examine applications more carefully before issuing patents .

some bills aim to curtail certain pharmaceutical patenting practices directly .

one such proposal is the affordable prescriptions for patients act of 2019 ( appa ) , which would make product hopping an antitrust violation and would set a limit on the number of certain patents that could be asserted in biologics litigation .

the first portion of the bill addresses product hopping .

it would amend the ftc act to define when product hopping constitutes a violation of the federal antitrust laws .

the bill would allow the ftc to prove a prima facie case of product hopping by showing that a manufacturer had engaged in either a "hard switch" or a "soft switch" during a certain period .

specifically , the manufacturer would have to engage in a switch between when the manufacturer first received notice that an applicant submitted an anda or biosimilar license for a particular product and 180 days after the generic drug or biosimilar product is first marketed .

the appa defines a "hard switch" in two ways .

the first definition would prevent a manufacturer from requesting that fda withdraw approval for a listed product and then marketing a "follow - on product" ( i.e. , a new version of the drug ) .

accordingly , the bill would alter current law , under which a brand manufacturer can freely ask fda to withdraw approval for one of its products , possibly preventing a generic from marketing a competing product due to the lack of a reference product .

the appa's second definition of a hard switch would prevent a manufacturer from marketing or selling a follow - on product after withdrawing , intending to withdraw , discontinuing the manufacture of , or destroying a product to impede competition from a generic .

the bill would therefore change current law , which generally allows manufacturers to take those actions to reduce the supply or desirability of an older product .

commentators have argued that such practices encourage patients to use the new follow - on product , reducing demand for the original product and the opportunity for competition from any potential generic for the original product .

the bill's definition of a soft switch aims to capture other forms of product hopping that impede competition .

under the proposed language , a soft switch occurs when a manufacturer markets or sells a follow - on product and takes actions to impede competition for a generic product or a biosimilar version of the manufacturer's product .

the bill would also allow the manufacturer to rebut a prima facie case of product hopping .

first , a manufacturer would be able to justify its conduct by first establishing that it would have taken the same actions even if a generic had already entered the market .

for a hard switch , the manufacturer must also establish either ( 1 ) the actions that it took related to safety risks to patients of the original product ; or ( 2 ) if it withdrew , intended to withdraw , discontinued the manufacture of , or destroyed a product , that there was a supply disruption that was outside the control of the manufacturer .

for a soft switch , the manufacturer must establish that it had "legitimate pro - competitive reasons , apart from the financial effects of reduced competition , to take the action. .

the appa would also make two changes aimed at reducing the impact of patent thickets for biological products .

first , the bill would broaden the types of patents that a brand biologic manufacturer could assert in premarketing litigation by extending the list of "artificial" acts of infringement under 35 u.s.c .

â§â 271 ( e ) to include patents claiming methods or products used to manufacture a biological product .

second , the appa would limit the number of certain patents that the brand could assert in litigation .

specifically , the brand would be limited to asserting at most twenty patents that ( 1 ) â claim the biologic or method or product used in the manufacture of a biologic , ( 2 ) â were listed during the patent dance , and ( 3 ) â were filed more than four years after approval of the reference product or include a claim to a manufacturing process not used by the brand .

certain later - issued patents ( i.e. , those that issued after the brand provided its initial list to the biosimilar manufacturer during the patent dance ) would be even further limited .

the appa would nonetheless authorize a court to increase how many patents the brand can assert if done so promptly and if such an increase is in the interest of justice or for good cause .

a number of bills , such as the orange book transparency act of 2019 ( obta ) , would change the patent listing requirements for the orange book .

under current law , the brand must include any patent that claims the drug or a method of using the drug .

fda regulations specify that "drug substance ( active ingredient ) patents , drug product ( formulation and composition ) patents , and method - of - use patents" must be listed in the orange book , whereas "[p]rocess patents , patents claiming packaging , patents claiming metabolites , and patents claiming intermediates" shall not be submitted to fda .

the obta would clarify the types of patents that may be listed in the orange book , only allowing listing of patents that ( 1 ) â claim methods of using a drug or ( 2 ) â claim the drug and are a drug substance ( active ingredient ) or drug product ( formulation ) patent .

limiting the types of patents that may be listed would limit the availability of the thirty - month stay of fda approval of a generic because the stay is available only if the brand sues on one of the patents for which the generic made a paragraph ( iv ) certification .

moreover , the obta would require fda to list in the orange book each applicable regulatory exclusivity period for each drug .

finally , the bill would require the government accountability office to submit a report to congress detailing the types of patents included in the orange book , to include data on certain drug patents .

other bills would focus on increasing transparency to combat patent thickets and facilitate generic or biosimilar entry .

the purple book continuity act of 2019 ( pbca ) would require a bla holder to provide to fda , and fda to publish in the purple book , any patents the brand provides to the biosimilar company during the patent dance .

further , the bill would require fda to revise the purple book every thirty days to include ( 1 ) any new biologics that fda licensed during that period and ( 2 ) information on patents that bla holders provided to fda during that period .

the pbca would also require fda to list any exclusivity period that applies to each listed biologic , information that is not always currently included in the purple book .

moreover , the brand must notify fda if any biologic license was withdrawn or suspended for safety reasons , and fda would , in turn , have to remove that product from the purple book for the relevant period .

by including the patents associated with a particular biologic , supporters of this approach argue that biosimilar manufacturers will be better able to evaluate the relevant patents before market entry .

pbca further directs the secretary of hhs to conduct a study regarding the type of information that should be included in the purple book , and transmit the results to congress .

the biologic patent transparency act ( bpta ) similarly would require patent information to be listed in the purple book , and would require the purple book more generally to be published in "a single , easily searchable , list. .

however , the bpta's listing requirement is somewhat broader than the pbca , including any patent that the brand "believes a claim of patent infringement could reasonably be asserted by the holder" ( and not just patents provided during the patent dance ) to be listed in the purple book .

much like the pbca , the bpta would also require fda to update the purple book every thirty days .

the bill would further bar the brand from bringing an action for infringement of a patent that should have been , but was not , included in the purple book .

the preserve access to affordable generics and biosimilars act ( paagba ) seeks to limit the ability of brands to pay generic or biosimilar manufacturers to delay their market entry .

to this end , paagba creates a presumption of illegality for certain patent settlement agreements , moving away from a rule - of - reason analysis .

the proposed legislation would amend the ftc act to specifically authorize the ftc to initiate enforcement proceedings against parties to "any agreement resolving or settling , on a final or interim basis , a patent infringement claim , in connection with the sale of a drug product or biological product. .

such agreements would be presumed to have anticompetitive effects if the brand agrees to provide the generic with "anything of value," including monetary payments or distribution licenses , in exchange for the generic agreeing "to limit or forego research , development , manufacturing , marketing , or sales" of the generic product "for any period of time. .

the presumption would not attach , however , to agreements where the only compensation given to the generic is the right to market the product before relevant patents or exclusivities expire , reasonable litigation expenses , or a covenant not to sue for infringement .

paagba would not make agreements that fit its definitions per se illegal .

the parties to the agreement could overcome the presumption of anticompetitive effect with "clear and convincing evidence" that ( 1 ) the agreement provides compensation "solely for other goods or services" from the generic company or ( 2 ) the agreement's "procompetitive benefits .â .â  .

outweigh the anticompetitive effects. .

in evaluating this evidence , the fact finder cannot presume that entry would only have occurred after the expiration of the patent or statutory exclusivity .

it also cannot presume that allowing entry into the market before the patent or statutory exclusivity period expires is necessarily procompetitive .

if the ftc proves that parties to an agreement violated these provisions , paagba would provide for assessment of a civil monetary penalty against each violating party .

the civil penalty must be "sufficient to deter violations," but no more than three times the value that the respective violating party gained from the agreement .

if the brand did not gain demonstrable value from the agreement , the value the generic received would be used to calculate the penalty .

in calculating the penalty for a particular party , an ftc alj would consider "the nature , circumstances , extent , and gravity of violation" ; the agreement's impact on commerce ; and the culpability , history of violations , ability to pay , ability to continue doing business , and profits or compensation gained by all parties .

any penalties assessed would be in addition to , rather than in lieu of , any penalties imposed by other federal law .

the ftc would also be able to seek injunctions and other equitable relief , including cease - and - desist orders .

in addition , an anda filer that was party to such an agreement would forfeit its 180-day exclusivity awarded for challenging a patent using a paragraph ( iv ) certification .

